G                         Chapter 2
       G
General P
          l an 2 0 30
                      Land Use Element
Chapter 2
LAND USE ELEMENT
2.1 INTRODUCTION
The Land Use Element is often seen as the framework
element for the General Plan as it sets forth the
patterns of development activity and land use that will
support and enhance the character of the City. The
Land Use Element, more than any other element in the
General Plan, will shape the way that the City of
Garden Grove develops and redevelops over the next
20+ years. It will serve as a guide for both public
officials and private citizens in its description of the
type, intensity, and general distribution of uses of land
for housing, business, industry, open space and public
and quasi-public uses.         To the private citizen, it defines
expectations of the type of neighborhood, the location and
type of shopping and service facilities, and the time and
distance traveling to work and other necessary activities. To the
public official, it is a framework for providing public facilities and
services and for directing new development. It is the basis for
short-range and long-range capital improvement programs.
The essential components of the Land Use Element are the
General Plan Land Use Diagram (Exhibit LU-3) and the goals and
policies that guide future development. The Land Use Diagram
is divided into land use designations that define areas of the City
by the type of use, the character of the neighborhood, and the
intent of future growth. While the General Plan Land Use
Diagram may be seen as the most essential component of the
General Plan, it is basically a graphic representation of the goals
and policies expressed by all of the General Plan’s elements.
Users of this document are advised to refer to the goals and
policies, as well as the diagram when evaluating proposed
development and capital improvement projects.
2.2 AUTHORITY FOR ELEMENT
California Government Code Section 65302(a) requires that a
General Plan include:
    “...a Land Use Element which designates the proposed
    general distribution and general location and extent of
    the uses of the land for housing, business, industry, open
    space     including      agriculture,  natural    resources,
    recreation and enjoyment of scenic beauty, education,
    public buildings and grounds, solid and liquid waste
    disposal facilities and other categories of public and
    private uses of land.
                                                                       2-1

        The Land Use Element shall include a statement of the standards of population density
        and building intensity recommended for the various districts and other territory
        covered by the plan.”
The Land Use Element has the broadest scope of any of the State required components of the
General Plan. In addition to the State’s requirements set forth in the Government Code above,
it has also been legally established that while the location of a particular land use may be
expressed in general terms, a property owner must be able to identify the General Plan
designation for his/her parcel from the land use diagram contained in the Land Use Element.
Among the most important implementation mechanisms for the Land Use Element are the
Zoning Ordinance and Specific Plans. The Government Code requires that a City’s Zoning
Ordinance and Map be consistent with the General Plan Land Use Element and Diagram. In
addition, all provisions of specific plans adopted by a city must be consistent with the General
Plan they implement.
2.3 KEY THEMES AND VISION FOR GENERAL PLAN
The City of Garden Grove is a mature and fully built out urbanized city. Most of the land within
the City has been developed (over 99 percent) and redevelopment is occurring throughout the
City. Some of the land is undergoing a transformation from uses established 40 to 50 years ago
into new uses that reflect life today and the changing needs of people within the City. Growth is
seen as a positive economic tool and enhanced shopping, dining, and entertainment options
would improve the quality of life. There is also a community value to preserve the “hometown
feel,” and the core residential character of the community.
LIMITED VACANT LAND
The City conducted a vacant land survey in January 2008, which determined that only 32.01
acres of the City’s total 11,470.53 acres were vacant. Vacant land represents 0.3 percent of the
City’s total acreage. Table 2-1, Vacant Land (2008), provides a breakdown of vacant land by
the 1995 General Plan land use designations.
                                             Table 2-1
                                         Vacant Land (2008)
                                                                         Percent of
              1995 General Plan Land Use Designation     Acreage
                                                                        Vacant Land
            Residential
            Low Density Residential                           2.81           8.77
            Low-Medium Density Residential                    0.49           1.53
            Medium Density Residential                        4.02          12.55
            Community Residential                             0.64           1.99
            Total Residential                                 7.96          24.84
            Commercial
            Light Commercial                                  5.45          17.02
            Mixed Use                                        16.58          51.79
            Office Professional                               1.49           4.65
            Total Commercial                                 23.52          73.46
            Industrial                                        0.53           1.65
            TOTAL                                            32.01         100.00
2-2

NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION
Preservation of residential neighborhoods is one of the most important purposes of the City’s
General Plan. Garden Grove contains diverse residential neighborhoods. Many of the
neighborhoods are attractive and well-maintained, enjoying the benefits of nearby open space
and school sites, and are buffered from the impacts of freeway traffic or extensive industrial or
commercial development. The diverse range of neighborhoods includes areas with the City’s
older homes, newer residential developments, the most prestigious beautifully maintained
communities, and marginally desirable areas where maintenance has been deferred. The City
desires a diverse mix of housing types, along with uniformly high standards of residential property
maintenance to preserve residents’ real estate values and their high quality of life. The stability
of each neighborhood is important, for the well-being of its residents, for its impact on
surrounding areas as well as the image of the City as a whole.
VITAL NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL CENTERS AND CORRIDORS
Neighborhood commercial centers serve an important function in a community. However, older
commercial centers can detract from the community they serve. Older commercial centers in
the City along Katella Avenue, Chapman Avenue, Garden Grove Boulevard, Valley View Street,
Magnolia Street, Euclid Street, and Harbor Boulevard have experienced some areas of deferred
maintenance and signs of property decline have been visible. The focus of the General Plan will
be to revitalize these centers and also the corridors streetscapes.
MIXED USE
A key focus of the General Plan 2030 will be to expand areas that will allow the development of
mixed use. The mixed use areas are described in more detail in the following section entitled
Focus Areas (Potential Areas of Change). “Mixed Use” involves greater use of developments
that blend residential, commercial, industrial, or civic/institutional uses.        By combining
complementary uses, mixed use projects bring energy and vitality to areas during both daytime
and after-work hours. Mixed use areas offer the opportunity for symbiotic developments that
benefit both residents and the businesses operating within them. In addition, mixed use allows
the advantage of flexibility of design to take full advantage of market shifts and land use trends.
The General Plan 2030 will allow both vertical and horizontal mixed use.
FOCUS AREAS (POTENTIAL AREAS OF CHANGE)
All estimates are that growth will continue in Orange County. The Southern California
Association of Governments (SCAG) and Center for Demographic Research (CDR) forecast that
the City of Garden Grove will have an increase in population from approximately 178,000 in 2008
to 192,000 in 2030. The challenge is to identify areas where future growth can best occur to the
benefit of the City and its citizens. The Land Use Element looks at this potential for growth and
determines where new growth or revitalization activities should occur over the next 20+years.
From the onset of updating the General Plan, the community clearly stated preserving their
residential neighborhoods was one of the highest priorities. The General Plan 2030 reflects this
stated community goal. The areas identified for future development build upon the 1995
General Plan goals and policies, and reflect the pattern and trends of recent construction in the
City. There was an effort to define the areas for growth more clearly, to promote greater
revitalization in the community, and to attract the development community to the potential
revitalization opportunities. Most new development was envisioned as mixed use buildings
located along major arterial roadways or adjacent to existing shopping centers. A mixed use
type of project allows greater opportunities for developers through higher density while leaving
                                                                                                2-3

existing residential neighborhoods protected and preserved. These mixed use residential units
are urban in character and would generate a need for more concentrated and varied retail
experiences. The Plan identifies 15 potential areas for future development or new land use
designations; these areas have been identified as “Focus Areas” and are labeled Focus Area A
through Focus Area O. A general description and intent for each of the Focus Areas is provided
below. Exhibit LU-1, Focus Areas, shows the location and intended land uses for each.
Focus Areas B, C, K, And O
Additional development potential is not anticipated for Focus Areas B, C, K, or O. Policy
direction regarding annexation/de-annexation will be provided later in this Element for Focus
Areas B, C, and O. Policy direction regarding revitalizing aging commercial centers will be
provided later in this Element for Focus Area K.
Focus Area A - International West (Harbor Boulevard)
This approximately 235-acre area, generally referred to as The International West Resort Area, is
located in the eastern portion of the City, generally along Harbor Boulevard, between
Chapman Avenue on the north and the Garden Grove Freeway on the south. This area holds
critical importance for the City for revitalization and economic stimulus purposes. Ideally
situated south of Disneyland, this area has opportunities to capitalize and expand tourist-based
and entertainment-related uses. Several full-service hotels and new restaurants have been
constructed; predominately at the intersection of Chapman Avenue and Harbor Boulevard. In
2006, an Economic Impact and Master Plan Document was prepared for the International West
Resort Area. The Master Plan is intended to compliment existing entertainment, hospitality, and
sports venues in the surrounding areas by planning for three entertainment centers that would
be connected by themed dining and retail facilities, entertainment, hotels, theaters, and
parkland. In 2007, the City began working with a developer on a 35-acre site bordered by Buaro
Street on the west and Harbor Boulevard on the south and east. The 35-acres is being referred
to as the “Central Hub” within International West and would include such uses as a water park,
hotels, dining and entertainment, and retail. The International West designation will allow for a
variety of land uses including Mixed-Use Resort, Entertainment/Hotel, and some residential.
For the General Plan 2030, the International West designation will not be applied to an area
south of the Garden Grove Freeway (SR-22) that is generally bounded by Harbor Boulevard on
the east, Newhope Street on the west, and Westminster Boulevard on the south. The designation
will be extended to this approximately 167-acre area at such time as developers are actively
working on large-scale resort center projects.
New development anticipated in Focus Area A under the General Plan 2030 includes 400 new
residential units, and an additional 4,615,000 square feet of commercial uses.
Focus Area D – Stanford Avenue/West Street
This approximately 23-acre area includes the area essentially bounded by Stanford Avenue on
the north, Garden Grove Boulevard on the south, Woodland Lane on the west and West Street
on the east. The intent for this area is to allow mixed use along Garden Grove Boulevard, and to
consider extending Stanford Avenue through the area. With the street extension, the intent
would be to maintain the single-family residential uses north and immediately to the south of
Stanford Avenue. The area between the single-family homes south of Stanford Avenue and the
mixed use along Garden Grove Boulevard would allow higher density residential (low-medium
density) within buildings two- to three-stories in height.
2-4

Focus Area A - International West (Harbor Boulevard)
                                                     2-5
New development anticipated in Focus Area D under the General Plan 2030 includes 50 new
residential units, and an additional 20,000 square feet of commercial/office uses.
Focus Area E1 - Civic Center (Area 1)
The Civic Center should be more than just another shopping center – it should be a place that is
the heart and soul of the community where people can meet in public gathering spaces.
People should be drawn to the Civic Center to become engaged in the community and to
experience the place itself.
This approximately 130-acre area is the “Heart of the City.” It extends to properties on either side
of Euclid Street north from Trask Avenue to just south of Lampson Street. This area includes City
Hall, the neighborhood bounded by 9th Street, Acacia Street, and Garden Grove Boulevard,
Main Street, the Community Meeting Center (CMC), and the Village Green.
The intent for this area is a mixed use designation
that promotes civic, commercial, open space,
and residential uses. The development would be
mid-rise, 5 to 7 stories tall. The mixed use buildings
would have a human scale and front on
pedestrian-friendly streets that would provide a
balance between vehicular and pedestrian
needs. The buildings would be articulated with
first-floor shop fronts and have offices and
residences above. Focus Area E1 includes civic
buildings (City Hall, Police Department, Library),
colleges, and Main Street. The Civic Center shall
provide public gathering spaces (the Public Realm) that will be connected by pedestrian paths
City Planning Staff conducted a Civic Center Design Charrette and developed common design
themes for the focus area on the following topics: 1) The Center of Gravity – Civic Center Park,
2) Circulation, 3) The Existing City Hall Block, 4) The Village Green, and 5) Main Street Area. The
conclusions from the charrette are provided as a starting point for discussion and design
direction for a Civic Center Master Plan.
THE CENTER OF GRAVITY – CIVIC CENTER PARK
Key ideas for this area:
          The Civic Center Park is a focal point in the community and acts as a gathering place
          and identity for the area.
          There are important views looking east from Euclid Street to the Civic Center Park.
          The Civic Center Park can be expanded with more open space for both passive and
          active uses.
          The CMC or a combination of the CMC/Theater Complex should be located in the Civic
          Center Park.
          The existing library facility should remain. Additional buildings to expand and supplement
          the library use include a café, youth center, senior center, etc.
          The Civic Center Park area should include parking structures and some five-story
          residential buildings on the perimeter.
2-6

Focus Area E1 - Civic Center (Area 1)
                                      2-7
CIRCULATION
Key ideas for this topic include:
         Euclid Street is the major path of travel.
         Acacia Parkway is an important secondary path of travel in the east-west direction
         through the Civic Center area.
         Pedestrian pathways across Euclid Street should be reinforced to connect the different
         areas of the Civic Center.
         Civic Center Drive should lead north to a focal point (terminated vista).
         7th and 8th Streets should be reconfigured or vacated.
         Interwoven pedestrian paths and plazas should be developed through the new “town
         center.”
THE EXISTING CITY HALL BLOCK
This includes the area bounded by Euclid Street, Acacia Parkway, 8th Street, and Garden Grove
Boulevard.
Key ideas for this area:
         The civic uses should remain in this area. The existing City Hall building should remain, but
         also add Police and Fire building adjacent to City Hall. In addition, add a new council
         chamber that is separate from the CMC.
         The civic uses should be interspersed with parking structures and a mix of uses, including
         commercial/office buildings.
         More buildings should front onto Garden Grove Boulevard.
         Add pedestrian paths, courtyards and small plazas throughout the area.
         Create a historic park by moving historic homes onto the site. Also allow for mixed use
         next to the park.
         Allow for 4- to 5-story mixed use building along the 9th Street boundary.
THE VILLAGE GREEN
Key ideas for this area:
         The existing Baptist Church should remain.
         Look for new ways to use the church parking lot.
         More effective use of the open space in this area.
         Allow for additional uses, ideas included recreation, Arts Center, row of historic buildings,
         reuse of the Lake House as a focal point, cafes, playgrounds, interactive parks,
         commercial mixed use, senior center, or adult day care.
         The view of the Village Green from the north should remain unchanged. However,
         consider possible improvements by adding buildings along Main Street or Euclid Street, or
         a more strategic placement of buildings in this area.
MAIN STREET AREA
Key ideas for this area:
         The existing education buildings should remain.
         Commercial uses should remain prominent, but allow some residential mixed use.
         Construct parking structures to replace existing surface lots.
2-8

        Relocate the GEM Theater.
        Allow for the expansion of mixed use and commercial uses north of Acacia Parkway on
        Main Street.
        Pedestrian paths, plazas, and storefronts should be added to the area.
        Leave the Main Street buildings intact or consider demolishing the buildings and adding
        an urban plaza with an amphitheater.
New development anticipated in Focus Area E1 under the General Plan 2030 includes 1,025 new
residential units, an additional 322,500 square feet of commercial/office uses, and an additional
157,500 square feet of institutional uses.
Focus Area E2 - Civic Center (Area 2)
The industrial area located west of Nutwood Street and contiguous to Stanford Avenue is one of
the original industrial sites in the City. This area has value in its potential service as a relatively
inexpensive start-up site for small businesses and industries. This area also has the potential for
the development of live-work loft units that would allow small business owners the opportunity to
create products in close proximity to where they live.
This approximately 62-acre area around Stanford Avenue includes automotive repair shops,
industrial uses, and the post office. The new General Plan land use designation proposes an
unique type of mixed use for Garden Grove allowing industrial uses and artist’s lofts with a
residential component (i.e., live/work units). In addition, the OCTA right-of-way in this area could
serve as the starting point for the first phase of a linear park with a trail to Brookhurst Street.
New development anticipated in Focus Area E2 under the General Plan 2030 includes 425 new
residential units, an additional 25,000 square feet of commercial/office uses, and an additional
55,000 square feet of industrial uses.
Focus Area F - Brookhurst Triangle Area
This approximately 50-acre area includes the four sides of the Brookhurst Street and Garden
Grove Boulevard intersection.
The Brookhurst Triangle site offers a significant redevelopment opportunity. It is located at a
major crossing of two main commercial thoroughfares and is at the entrance to the Korean
Business District as vehicles head west on Garden Grove Boulevard. Because of its prominent
location, the land use designation envisions taller mixed use development with eye-catching
modern buildings and a vibrant streetscape. The buildings are envisioned at eight to ten stories
tall; however, taller buildings will be considered. This land use area is at the eastern end of the
Garden Grove Boulevard Focus Area, and the two are closely related.
The largest site is the Brookhurst Triangle on the north side of Garden Grove Boulevard, bounded
on the east by Brookhurst Street and on the west by Brookhurst Way. The proposal for the
triangle is mixed use with 800 mid-rise residential units and up to 300,000 square feet of
commercial uses.
Focus Area F also includes the Galleria project, which is an eight-story project with two floors of
retail and 66 residential units at the top. This project is located on the south side of Garden
Grove Boulevard across from the triangle and is the first mixed-use project being built in the City.
New development anticipated in Focus Area F under the General Plan 2030 includes 1,075 new
residential units, and an additional 550,000 square feet of commercial/office uses.
                                                                                                    2-9

     Focus Area E2 - Civic Center (Area 2)
2-10
Focus Area F - Brookhurst Triangle Area
                                        2-11
Focus Area G – Garden Grove Boulevard
(Brookhurst Street to Beach Boulevard)
Garden Grove Boulevard was once the primary route to Los Angeles, but with the construction
of the Garden Grove Freeway (SR-22), its importance diminished. The City’s namesake
boulevard is characterized by outdated and sometimes dilapidated commercial development
from its heyday, a lively Korean Business District, residential planned unit developments, and a
few new commercial buildings. With no identifiable streetscape character along its length, and
a visual barrage of uncoordinated signage, many parts of Garden Grove Boulevard look
disorderly and neglected.
This approximately 144-acre area extends along Garden Grove Boulevard from Beach
Boulevard on the west to the Brookhurst Triangle area on the east. The intent for this area is
mixed use with higher density/intensity nodes (eight- to ten-story buildings) at major intersections
(Magnolia Avenue, Beach Boulevard ). In between these taller, urban nodes will be a mix of
mid-height mixed use (five to seven stories), commercial centers, low-rise mixed use, and
residential development (one to three stories). The majority of this area will be mixed use with
commercial, office, and residential uses.
Five types of development have emerged in this Focus Area, and are depicted on Exhibit LU-2,
Land Use Development Types Along Garden Grove Boulevard. As noted above, the overall
pattern of new development will create higher density/intensity nodes at major intersections
and change the majority of the existing commercial areas to mixed use. In between the taller,
urban nodes, the development will be a mix of mid-height mixed use buildings, strictly
commercial centers, lower height mixed uses buildings with neighborhood-serving retail uses,
and residential buildings. The five types of development emerged from a review of the existing
land use pattern and from ideas for revitalization of the Boulevard. The five development types
are color coded: Orange, Blue, Brown, Yellow, and Green. A description of each development
color type follows.
Orange: This color represents tall, urban, mixed use that is eight to ten stories in height. Parts of
the Brookhurst Triangle Area are included in this development type but will allow buildings taller
than ten stories.
Specific sites included in the color include: 1) Brookhurst Triangle, 2) the area west of Brookhurst
Street and south of Garden Grove Boulevard including the Galleria project; 3) the triangular
island created by Magnolia Street, Cannery Street, and Garden Grove Boulevard, and 4) the
area south of Garden Grove Boulevard and east of Beach Boulevard.
Blue: This color represents mid-height mixed use that is five to seven stories in height. Mixed Use
development would replace existing commercial uses and provide for a mix of residential and
commercial uses.
Areas included in this color include: 1) the area south of Acacia Parkway, west of Brookhurst
Way/Kerry Place, east of Gateway Street, and north of Belfast Drive, and 2) the northwest and
southwest corners of the Garden Grove/Magnolia Street intersection.
Brown: This color represents existing commercial uses. No height or use change is proposed.
These areas are interspersed along the boulevard.
Yellow: This color represents neighborhood-serving mixed use that is three to four stories in
height. A mix of commercial and residential uses is optimal for this area; however the
designation also allow for the development of solely a commercial center or residential
development.
2-12

 Focus Area G – Garden Grove Boulevard
(Brookhurst Street to Beach Boulevard)
                                       2-13

Green: This color represents both existing residential and some commercial properties that will
be only residential in use. The residential use was applied to shallow properties without the lot
depth to support more intensive use, and to those properties located on small residential side
streets (cul-de-sacs) accessed from Garden Grove Boulevard (in particular Shackelford Lane,
Abbott Court, and Village Road. The intent is to have these residential uses front onto the side
streets rather than the Boulevard with a landscaping parkway to buffer them from the arterial
traffic.
New development anticipated in Focus Area G under the General Plan 2030 includes 1,5000
new residential units, and an additional 1,500,000 square feet of commercial/office uses.
Focus Area H – Auto Center (Trask Avenue)
The Garden Grove Auto Center, with its frontage along Trask Avenue and properties abutting
the Garden Grove Freeway, has proven to be an economic benefit to the City. It is estimated
that sales from the Auto Center attract not only residents, but also persons residing outside the
City. Business at the Auto Center generates significant sales tax revenues for the City. It is vital to
the City’s economic well-being that the Auto Center is maintained, and where possible,
enhanced.
This approximately 55-acre area includes Trask Avenue, from Harbor Boulevard on the east to
Magnolia Avenue on the west. The intent for this area is to extend the auto uses for both sales
and repair along the length of Trask Avenue.
New development anticipated in Focus Area H under the General Plan 2030 includes an
additional 150,000 square feet of commercial/office uses.
Focus Area I – Brookhurst Street and Chapman Avenue
The Brookhurst/Chapman shopping centers were originally redevelopment projects that offered
attractive modern facilities to shoppers, and when they were first completed, successfully
achieved commercial vitality. However, recent retail trends and the construction of several
large shopping malls in adjacent cities have resulted in these centers being less attractive to
consumers. Also, the multi-tenant strip mall located at the southeast corner of the Brookhurst
Street/Chapman Avenue intersection remains unimproved and detracts from the appearance,
attraction, and economic viability of the Brookhurst/Chapman commercial area.
This approximately 43-acre area includes the east side of Brookhurst Street both north and south
of Chapman Avenue, the old “Costco” site on the north of the “Promenade” shopping mall,
and the small-scale commercial development on the south side of Brookhurst Street between
Gilbert Street and the “Grove Pavilions” shopping center. The General Plan 2030 will change this
area to a mixed use land use designation adding residential use to help revitalize these areas
that surround two large shopping centers.
New development anticipated in Focus Area I under the General Plan 2030 includes 500 new
residential units, and an additional 400,000 square feet of commercial/office uses.
2-14

Focus Area H – Auto Center (Trask Avenue)
                                          2-15

New development anticipated in Focus Area J under the General Plan 2030 includes 600 new
residential units, and an additional 50,000 square feet of commercial/office uses.
Focus Area L - Western Avenue/Industrial Area
This approximately 111-acre area allows for a proposed transit line along an existing rail
easement, the line would connect Huntington Beach to Anaheim. The General Plan 2030 will
change to a mixed use land use designation that would allow existing industrial, commercial
uses to remain and allow for new residential development.
With the establishment of a new transit stop, anticipated development in Focus Area L under the
General Plan 2030 includes 600 new residential units, and an additional 95,000 square feet of
commercial/office uses.
Focus Areas M & N – Valley View Boulevard
These two focus areas include existing shopping centers/commercial development at the
intersections of Chapman Avenue (Focus Area N) and Lampson Avenue (Focus Area M). The
intent for the General Plan 2030 is to help revitalize older, underutilized multi-tenant commercial
development. To encourage redevelopment of these site, , the General Plan Update will
change the land use designation to a mixed use designation to allow some residential
development.
New development anticipated in Focus Area M under the General Plan 2030 includes 75 new
residential units, and an additional 15,000 square feet of commercial/office uses. New
development anticipated in Focus Area N under the General Plan 2030 includes 150 new
residential units, and an additional 30,000 square feet of commercial/office uses.
BENEFICIAL USE OF OCTA RIGHT-OF-WAY
The OCTA right-of-way has been vacant and barren for more than 20 years. The right-of-way
offers opportunities for alternative transportation systems, as well as for expanded recreational
and parkland opportunities. One program to utilize the OCTA right-of-way is “Go Local,” city-
initiated transit extensions to OCTA’s Metrolink commuter rail line. A proposed extension would
be from Harbor Boulevard and Westminster Boulevard in Garden Grove connecting to the Santa
Ana Regional Transportation Center
The OCTA right-of-way is a 100- to 120-foot swath of emptiness that traverses the entire
community. In residential neighborhoods, it interrupts the pleasant pattern of streets and lawns,
and emphasizes the need for usable open space near multi-family developments. In the
downtown, it adds emptiness and the appearance of neglect. Only in several instances in the
City does it serve any purpose, most often as parking for commercial centers. The OCTA right-of-
way represents the waste of valuable vacant land that provides a route across the City.
OUTDATED SPECIFIC PLANS
There are presently three Specific Plan areas in the City: Harbor Corridor, Brookhurst/Chapman,
and the Community Center Specific Plan areas. These three areas, totaling 644 acres
collectively, are governed by detailed land use regulations, including zoning classifications
unique to each Specific Plan area. These three specific plans areas were the initial focus of the
Redevelopment Agency’s efforts.
2-16

Focus Area L - Western Avenue/Industrial Area
                                              2-17
A brief description of the three Specific Plan areas is provided below.
Harbor Corridor Specific Plan
The Harbor Corridor Specific Plan was adopted as Ordinance No 1900 in June 1985. The Specific
Plan was accompanied by Design Guidelines, which have also been incorporated into the
Municipal Code.
The Harbor Corridor area encompasses approximately 210 acres and is a major commercial axis
for the City. The purpose of the Specific Plan was to stimulate the responsible redevelopment
and revitalization of the Harbor Corridor area through positive incentives and customized
regulations.
Nine use districts were established by the Specific Plan: Tourist Commercial “A,” Tourist
Commercial “B,” Transition Zone-North, Swing District-North, District Commercial, Swing District-
South, Office Professional, Transition Zone-West, and Transition Zone-South.
Community Center Specific Plan
The Community Center Specific Plan was adopted as Ordinance No. 1901 in June 1985. The
Community Center Specific Plan area encompasses approximately 392 acres. The area extends
north from the Garden Grove Freeway along Euclid Street to Chapman Avenue, and extends
east to Brookhurst Street to Ninth Street. The Plan area includes the Civic Center, the OCTA right-
of-way, Main Street, the GEM and Grove Theaters, and a mix of residential, office, and
commercial uses.
Twelve use districts were established by the Specific Plan: Core Mixed Use, Core Residential,
Business Center, Community Commercial, Community Center Office, Community Center Transit,
Community Center Public Facilities, Community Center Residential, Hospital, Office Professional,
Peripheral Residential, and District Commercial.
Brookhurst/Chapman Specific Plan
The Brookhurst/Chapman Specific Plan was prepared in May 1988 and was accompanied by
Design Guidelines. The area has been characterized by run-down, economically non-viable
commercial uses. The purpose of the Specific Plan was to provide a centrally located and
attractive shopping center to serve the residents of Garden Grove, as well as surrounding areas.
Three zones were established for the 42-acre Specific Plan:               Office/Financial, Office/
Entertainment, and Brookhurst/Chapman Commercial.
The three Specific Plans were adopted more then 20 years ago. Since that time, development
has occurred consistent with the intent of the Plans. However, with the General Plan 2030,
revised land use designations have either encompassed the land uses envisioned under the
Specific Plans or new land uses are now envisioned for these areas. Thus, the General Plan 2030
will look at eliminating the Specific Plans and utilizing the General Plan and Zoning designations
for areas that were currently covered by the Specific Plans.
2.4 DESCRIPTION OF THE LAND USE PLAN
2.4.1 OVERVIEW OF THE LAND USE PLAN
The graphic depiction of the City of Garden Grove’s official policy relative to land use is
presented on Exhibit LU-3, General Plan Land Use Diagram. This diagram illustrates the general
pattern and relationship of the various land uses in Garden Grove in 2030.
2-18

As previously discussed, new growth associated with the General Plan 2030 is anticipated to
occur within the identified Focus Areas. Table 2-2, Focus Area Land Use Projections, provides a
summary of the growth over existing conditions that would occur within each Focus Area with
the General Plan 2030.
                                                         Table 2-2
                                         Focus Area Land Use Projections
                                                                                                    Institutional
  Focus Area1           Acres         Residential (DU)      Commercial/Office (SF) Industrial (SF)
                                                                                                     Uses (SF)
       A                    401.46                   400                 4,615,000                0               0
       D                     22.84                    50                    20,000                0               0
       E1                   130.22                1,025                    322,500                0         157,500
       E2                    61.84                   425                    25,000          55,000                0
       F                     49.56                1,075                    550,000                0               0
       G                    143.91                1,500                  1,500,000                0               0
       H                     54.55                     0                   150,000                0               0
        I                    42.39                   500                   400,000                0               0
        J                    35.27                   600                    50,000                0               0
       L                    110.82                   600                    95,000                0               0
       M                     21.18                    75                    15,000                0               0
       N                     40.38                   150                    30,000                0               0
TOTAL                     1,114.42                6,400                  7,772,500          55,000          157,500
1. Focus Areas B, C, K, and O involve new policy direction only.
Table 2-3, General Plan Land Use in 2030, presents a wider calculation of all acreage in the City
and maximum potential growth for the different land use designations. The acreages of the
various land uses on the General Plan Land Use Diagram are presented, along with number of
dwelling units and the amount of non-residential square footage. The values in Table 2-3 include
the Focus Area growth anticipated with the General Plan 2030 (as presented in Table 2-2)
account for buildout of any vacant or underutilized parcels, and assume buildout of all land uses
(as if all parcels had been developed to their maximum).
2.4.2 LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
State General Plan law requires the Land Use Element to indicate the standards for building
intensity (i.e., residential densities and non-residential building intensities) allowed in the City.
Land use designations describe the type and intensity of development allowed in a given area.
While terms like “residential,” “commercial,” or “industrial” are generally understood, State
General Plan law requires a clear and concise description of the land use categories that are
depicted on Exhibit LU-3, General Plan Land Use Diagram, at the end of this Element.
This Land Use Element and General Plan Land Use Diagram contain the following 19 land use
designations:
          Residential
              - Low Density Residential (LDR)
              - Low Medium Density Residential (LMR)
              - Medium Density Residential (MDR)
              - Medium High Density Residential (MHR)
              - Community Residential (CR)
                                                                                                               2-19

                                                      Table 2-3
                                          General Plan Land Use in 2030
                                                                      Floor Area   Dwelling
                     Land Use Designation                   Acres                            Square Feet
                                                                         Ratio      Units
   Low Density Residential (1.0-11.0 du/acre)                4,659.53                27,025
   Low Medium Density Residential (11.1-21.0 du acre)          244.23                  3,718
   Medium Density Residential (21.1-32.0 du/acre)              941.53                16,571
   Medium High Density Residential (32.1 –42.0 du/acre)          4.81                    152
   Community Residential (42.1-60.0 du/acre)                     9.56                    430
   Light Commercial                                            335.42 0.40 to 0.55              4,931,177
   Heavy Commercial                                             91.07    0.56                   1,666,144
   Office Professional                                          37.84    0.40                     494,493
   Civic Center Mixed Use                                      108.42    0.50          1,025    1,112,510
   Industrial/Commercial Mixed Use                              73.15    0.50                     724,909
   Industrial/Residential MU 1                                 116.25 0.40 to 0.60       600    1,382,431
   Industrial/Residential MU 2                                  61.50     0.50           425      608,429
   International West                                          235.66 0.50 to 2.00       400    6,796,730
   Residential/Commercial MU1                                  116.44 0.50 to 1.00     2,050    2,413,528
   Residential/Commercial MU2                                  139.10    0.50          1,625    1,110,381
   Residential/Commercial MU3                                   67.59    0.50            275      408,755
   Industrial                                                  584.00     1.00                 19,079,280
   Civic/Institutional                                         720.30     0.50                  7,844,067
   Parks and Open Space                                        357.76
   Roads/Infrastructure                                      2,566.48
                                                   Total    11,470.53                54,296    48,572,835
         Commercial
               - Light Commercial (LC)
               - Heavy Commercial (HC)
         Office
               - Office Professional (OP)
         Mixed Use
               - International West Mixed Use (IW)
               - Civic Center Mixed Use (CC)
               - Residential/Commercial Mixed Use 1 (RC1)
               - Residential/Commercial Mixed Use 2 (RC2)
               - Residential/Commercial Mixed Use 3 (RC3)
               - Industrial/Commercial Mixed Use (IC)
               - Industrial/Residential Mixed Use 1 (IR1)
               - Industrial/Residential Mixed Use 2 (IR2)
         Industrial
               - Industrial (I)
         Other
               - Civic/Institutional (CI)
               - Parks and Open Space (OS)
2-20

Residential “Density”
The term “density” in a land use context is a measure of the desired population or residential
development capacity of the land. Residential density is described in terms of dwelling units per
gross acre (dwelling units per acre); thus, the density of a residential development of 100
dwelling units occupying 20 gross acres of land is 5.0 dwelling units per acre. A dwelling unit is a
building or a portion of a building used for human habitation and may vary considerably in
square footage size, from small apartments to large single-family homes. Gross residential
density is defined as the area devoted to residential use, exclusive of local serving streets, alleys,
or arterials.
Non-Residential “Intensity”
The term “intensity” refers to the degree of non-residential development based on building
characteristics such as height, bulk, floor area ratio, and percentage of lot coverage. Floor
Area Ratio (FAR) is a common expression of non-residential land use intensity. The FAR results
from dividing the total gross floor area of all buildings on a lot by the total area of that lot. For
example, a building with 5,000 square feet of gross floor area on a 10,000 square foot lot would
have a FAR of 0.5, while a building with 20,000 square feet of floor area on the same lot would
have a FAR of 2.0. Higher FARs generally indicate larger buildings and/or more stories.
Allowing all parcels to be developed to the maximum FAR or density allowed within a density
range is not the intention of this General Plan. The intention is to reflect a maximum
development envelope or density range under appropriate conditions, and in accordance with
applicable more detailed zoning regulations. There are many factors that may limit, or affect a
development achieving the density or FAR on a specific parcel, resulting from a parcel's physical
limitations, the City's zoning requirements, and how a developer chooses to address the function
and design of the development.
These factors may include, but are not limited to the following:
         Parcel size
         Height limits
         Lot coverage allowed
         Requirements for setbacks, landscaping, and open space
         Provision of required pedestrian-oriented and transit-oriented amenities
         Development standards and design guidelines
         Type of parking provided surface, below grade, or structured
         Adjacency to sensitive land uses, such as single-family neighborhoods
RESIDENTIAL LAND USES
Residential land use is classified into five categories, which begin with low density single-family
residential and then continue through residential area of increasing density. Residential land use
density is calculated on the basis of net acres (i.e., only land occupied for dwelling purposes is
measured; streets and other public facilities are not included).
Low Density Residential
Intent: The Low Density Residential (LDR) designation is intended to create, maintain, and
enhance residential areas characterized by detached, single unit structures, and single-family
residential neighborhoods that:
                                                                                                  2-21

          Provide an excellent environment for family life
          Preserve residential property values
          Provide access to schools, parks, and other community services
          Provide a high-quality architectural design
Desired Character and Uses: Future development within the Low Density Residential designation
should remain residential in character with a single unit on a parcel, and allow for compatible
uses, such as schools or other small-scale civic or institutional uses.
Density: Densities for Low Density Residential range from 1 to 9 dwelling units per acre with
detached units each on their own parcel. The majority of housing in the City of Garden Grove is
in this land use designation.
Zoning: Zoning districts that implement the Low Density Residential designation are: R-1, Single-
Family Residential. The R-1, Single-Family Residential, zone allows density ranging from 1 to 9
dwelling units per acre based on a single unit per lot and a range of allowed lot sizes prescribed
to different neighborhoods (5,000 square feet, 6,000 square feet, 7,200 square feet, 11,000
square feet, and 15,000 square feet). These lot size dimensions were based on existing patterns
of development in different neighborhoods of the City.
Low Medium Density Residential
Intent: The Low Medium Density Residential (LMR) designation is intended for the development
of single-family, duplex and triplex, detached condominiums, and single-family small-lot
subdivision l neighborhoods that:
          Provide a variety of housing types,
          Provide access to schools, parks and other community services,
          Provide a high-quality architectural design that preserves privacy,
          Provide common spaces, recreation areas and services convenient to residents,
          Provide an excellent environment for family life, and
          Preserve residential property values.
Desired Character and Uses: The Low Medium Density Residential (LMR) designation allows for
single-family and smaller scale multi-family detached and attached housing, and is a transition
between the detached single-family areas and the higher density multiple family areas. The Low
Medium Residential allows for a variety of housing types including single-family single-family
small-lot subdivisions, duplexes, triplexes, and detached condominiums.
Density: Densities for Low Medium Density Residential range from 9.1 to 18 dwelling units per
acre.
Zoning: Zoning districts that implement the Low Medium Density Residential designation are: R-2
and R-3 Multiple Family Residential.
Medium Density Residential
Intent: The Medium Density Residential (MDR) designation is intended for the development of
mainly multi-family residential neighborhoods that:
          Provide a variety of housing types,
          Provide access to schools, parks and other community services,
          Provide a high-quality architectural design that preserves privacy,
2-22
         Provide common spaces, recreation areas and services convenient to residents,
         Provide an excellent environment for family life, and
         Preserve residential property values.
Desired Character: The Medium Density Residential (MDR) designation is intended to create,
maintain and enhance residential areas characterized by mostly traditional multi-family
apartments, condominiums, townhomes, and single-family small-lot subdivisions.
Density: Densities for Medium Density Residential range from 18.1 to 32 dwelling units per acre.
Zoning: Zoning districts that implement the Medium Density Residential designation are: R-3,
Multiple-Family Residential.
Medium High Density Residential
Intent: The Medium High Density Residential (MHR) designation is found along major and
secondary arterials and is transition between the other residential land uses and the more
intensive non-residential land uses. Development at this density requires consideration of internal
and external circulation, the relationship of buildings and units to each other, and the provision
of common open space and private outdoor living areas.
Desired Character and Uses: The Medium High Density Residential (MHR) designation is intended
to create, maintain, and enhance higher density multi-family residential areas characterized by
apartments, condominiums, or townhomes.
Density: Densities range from 32.1 to 48 dwelling units per acre, with provisions for higher density
(60 dwelling units per acre) if development is adjacent and has access to an arterial roadway,
and has an innovative design plan.
Zoning: Zoning districts that implement the Medium High Density Residential designation are:
Planned Unit Development (PUD).
Community Residential
Intent: The Community Residential (CR) is the most intensive residential land use designation,
and is applicable to housing designed for a particular residential clientele.
Desired Character and Uses: The Community Residential (CR) designation is intended exclusively
for senior housing, convalescent homes, congregate housing, and institutional quarters.
Density/Intensity: Densities range from 48.1 to 60 dwelling units per acre.
Zoning: Zoning districts that implement the Community Residential designation are: Planned
Unit Development (PUD).
COMMERCIAL LAND USES
Commercial land use is classified into two land use designations.
Light Commercial
Intent: The Light Commercial (LC) designation is intended to allow a range of commercial
activities that serve local residential neighborhoods and the larger community.
                                                                                                2-23
Desired Character and Uses: The Light Commercial (LC) designation includes a variety of retail
services such as markets, drug stores, retail shops, financial institutions, service establishments,
and restaurants. Commercial uses shall be located so they are compatible with the surrounding
area and in particular with any abutting residential uses.
Intensity: The Light Commercial (LC) designation allows a Floor Area Ratio (FAR) ranging from
0.40 to 0.55.
Zoning:     Zoning districts that implement the Light Commercial designation are:              C-1,
Neighborhood Commercial, and C-2, Community Commercial. The C-1, Neighborhood
Commercial, zone allows a Floor Area Ratio of 0.50. The C-2, Community Commercial, allows a
Floor Area Ratio of 0.55.
Heavy Commercial
Intent: The Heavy Commercial (HC) designation is intended to provide for a variety of more
intensive commercial uses, some of which may be incompatible with residential neighborhoods.
Desired Character and Uses: The Heavy Commercial (HC) designation includes automotive
repair, sales, and services; wholesaling; automotive body work, or contractors’ storage yards.
Intensity: The Heavy Commercial designation allows a Floor Area Ratio ranging from 0.55 to
0.60.
Zoning: Zoning districts that implement the Heavy Commercial designation are: C-3, General
Commercial, which allows a Floor Area Ratio of 0.55.
OFFICE PROFESSIONAL LAND USES
Office Professional
Intent: The Office Professional (OP) designation is intended to provide for a variety of
professional office and support commercial uses.
Desired Character and Uses: Future development within the Office Professional (OP) designation
should be modern, attractive, office buildings.
Intensity: The Office Professional designation allows a Floor Area Ratio of 0.50.
Zoning: Zoning districts that implement the Office Professional designation are: O-P, Office
Professional, which allows a Floor Area Ratio of 0.50.
MIXED USE LAND USES
International West Mixed Use
Intent: The International West Mixed Use (IW) is a new land use designation in the General Plan
2030 for the area along Harbor Corridor, north of SR-22 and Trask Avenue to just north of
Chapman Avenue. This area is more commonly referred to as International West, and is
intended to function as the City’s resort area.
Desired Character and Uses: The International West Mixed Use (IW) designation is intended to
provide for a mix of uses, including resort, entertainment, retail, hotel, and some higher density
2-24

residential that are appropriate for a major entertainment and tourism destination.
Development shall enliven the street and embody the entertainment/resort theme.
Density/Intensity: The International West Mixed Use designation allows a Floor Area Ratio
ranging from 0.5 to 2.0 for non-residential uses. Residential densities range from 42.1 to 60
dwelling units per acre.
Zoning: A new zoning district that implements the International West Mixed Use designation will
need to be created and adopted following adoption of the General Plan.
Civic Center Mixed Use
Intent: The Civic Center Mixed Use (CC) is a new land use designation in the General Plan 2030
for the area that includes City Hall, the neighborhood bounded by 9th Street, Acacia Parkway,
and Garden Grove Boulevard, Main Street, the Community Meeting Center, and the Village
Green. This area is the center of the community.
Desired Character and Uses: The Civic Center Mixed Use (CC) designation is intended to
provide for a mix of civic, institutional, commercial, higher density residential, and open space
uses. These uses should contribute to the sense that this area is the heart and soul of the
community, as well as a public gathering place.
Density/Intensity: The Civic Center Mixed Use designation allows a Floor Area Ratio of 0.50 for
non-residential uses, and residential densities up to 42 dwelling units per acre.
Zoning: A new zoning district that implements the Civic Center Mixed Use designation will need
to be created and adopted following adoption of the General Plan.
Residential/Commercial Mixed Use 1
Intent: The Residential/Commercial Mixed Use 1 (RC1) designation is a new land use designation
in the General Plan 2030. This designation will apply to areas along Garden Grove Boulevard
and Brookhurst Street as shown on Exhibit LU-3 including:
         The areas at the intersection of Garden Grove Boulevard and Brookhurst Street
         (northeast, southeast and south west corners), including the Brookhurst Triangle Area
         The area bounded by Garden Grove Boulevard on the north and Century Boulevard on
         the west and south, including the Century Triangle Area
         The area bounded by Brookhurst way on the west, Brookhurst Street on the east and
         Garden Grove Boulevard on the south
         The area on Garden Grove Boulevard west of Brookhurst Way
         The area at the intersection of Garden Grove Boulevard and Magnolia Street
         The area at the intersection of Garden Grove Boulevard and Beach Boulevard
Desired Character and Uses: The Residential/Commercial Mixed Use 1 (RC1) designation is
intended to provide for a mix of higher density residential and commercial uses. The character
of the area will include tall, urban, mixed use development at important intersections/locations
that is eight to ten stories in height. However, the Brookhurst Triangle Area may have buildings
taller than ten stories. Modern architecture and interesting buildings at important locations are
envisioned for new development, along with a lively street scene. This designation is found in
Focus Areas F and G.
Senior housing should be allowed in this designation with density bonuses.
                                                                                               2-25
Density/Intensity: The Residential/Commercial Mixed Use designation allows a Floor Area Ratio
ranging from 0.50 to 1.0 for non-residential uses, and residential densities up to 42 dwelling units
per acre.
Zoning: A new zoning district that implements the Residential/Commercial Mixed Use RC1
designation will need to be created and adopted following adoption of the General Plan.
Residential/Commercial Mixed Use 2
Intent: The Residential/Commercial Mixed Use 2 (RC2) designation is a new land use designation
in the General Plan 2030. This designation will apply to areas throughout the City as shown on
Exhibit LU-3.
Desired Character and Uses: The Residential/Commercial Mixed Use 2 (RC2) designation is
intended to provide for a mix of residential and commercial uses mostly around older
underutilized, multi-tenant commercial developments. This mixed use development will add
residential to encourage revitalization of these sites, with building heights of 3 to 4 stories. This
designation is found in Focus Areas E1, I, J, M, N.
Senior housing shall be allowed in this designation with density bonuses.
Density/Intensity: The Residential/Commercial Mixed Use 2 allows a Floor Area Ratio of 0.50 for
non-residential uses, and residential densities up to 21 dwelling units per acre.
Zoning: A new zoning district that implements the RC2 designation will need to be created and
adopted following adoption of the General Plan.
Residential/Commercial Mixed Use 3
Intent: The Residential/Commercial Mixed Use 3 (RC3) designation is a new land use designation
in the General Plan 2030. This designation will apply to areas throughout the City as shown on
Exhibit LU-3.
Desired Character and Uses: The RC3 designation is intended to provide for a mix of residential
and commercial uses. These mid-height (5- to 7-story) mixed use buildings will be interspersed
with the taller nodes, commercial centers, and lower height mixed use development along
Garden Grove Boulevard. This designation is found in Focus Areas D and G.
Senior housing shall be allowed in this designation with density bonuses.
Density/Intensity: The designation allows a Floor Area Ratio of 0.50 for non-residential uses, and
residential densities up to 32 dwelling units per acre.
Zoning: A new zoning district that implements the RC3 designation will need to be created and
adopted following adoption of the General Plan.
Industrial/Commercial Mixed Use
Intent: The Industrial/Commercial Mixed Use (IC) designation is a new land use designation in
the General Plan 2030.
Desired Character and Uses: The Industrial/Commercial Mixed Use (IC) designation is intended
to provide for a mix of industrial and commercial uses.
2-26
Density/Intensity: The Industrial/Commercial Mixed Use designation allows a Floor Area Ratio of
0.50 for both industrial and commercial uses.
Zoning: A new zoning district that implements the Industrial/Commercial Mixed Use designation
will need to be created and adopted following adoption of the General Plan.
Industrial/Residential Mixed Use 1
Intent: The Industrial/Residential Mixed Use 1 (IR1) designation is a new land use designation in
the General Plan 2030.
Desired Character and Uses: The Industrial/Residential Mixed Use 1 (IR1) designation will apply to
the area north of Garden Grove Boulevard and essentially east of Western Avenue. This intent
for this area is to allow for a proposed transit line along an existing rail easement, the line would
connect Huntington Beach to Anaheim. With the establishment of a new transit station in this
area, the intent would be to allow for new residential development to be added to the existing
industrial and commercial uses.
The Industrial/Residential Mixed Use 1 (IR1) designation is intended to provide for a mix of
industrial, commercial, and residential uses.
Density/Intensity: The Industrial/Residential Mixed Use 1 designation allows a Floor Area Ratio
ranging from 0.40 to 060 for industrial uses, and ranging from 0.40 to 0.50 for commercial uses,
and for residential densities up to 42 dwelling units per acre.
Zoning: A new zoning district that implements the Industrial/Residential Mixed Use 1 (IR1)
designation will be created if the transit-oriented development becomes an actual project.
Until that time, the existing zoning will be used.
Industrial/Residential Mixed Use 2
Intent: The Industrial/Residential Mixed Use 2 (IR2) designation is a new land use designation in
the General Plan 2030. This designation will apply to the south of the OCTA right-of-way, both
north and south of Stanford Avenue extending south to Garden Grove Boulevard.
Desired Character and Uses: The intent for the Industrial/Residential Mixed Use 1 (IR1)
designation is to allow existing industrial uses to remain and to allow for new uses, such as artist’s
lofts with a residential component (i.e., live/work units).
Density/Intensity: The Industrial/Residential Mixed Use 2 designation allows a Floor Area Ratio
ranging from 0.50 for industrial uses, and residential densities up to 32 dwelling units per acre.
Zoning: A new zoning district that implements the Industrial/Residential Mixed Use 2designation
will need to be created and adopted following adoption of the General Plan.
INDUSTRIAL LAND USES
Industrial
Intent: The Industrial (I) designation is intended to encourage general industrial uses, such as
warehousing and distribution or business parks, and more intensive industrial uses, such
manufacturing, fabrication, assembly, processing, trucking, warehousing and distribution, and
servicing.
                                                                                                   2-27

Desired Character and Uses: The Industrial (I) designation is intended to create, maintain, and
enhance industrial areas characterized by uses that include industrial research, assembly, and
testing of electronics, instruments, office and related machinery, wholesaling, warehousing,
administrative offices, and regional or home offices of industry.
Intensity: The Industrial designation allows a Floor Area Ratio of 1.0.
Zoning: Zoning districts that implement the Industrial designation are: M-1, Limited Industrial, and
M-P, Industrial Park. Both the M-1 and M-P zones allow a Floor Area Ratio of 1.0.
OTHER LAND USES
Civic/Institutional
Intent: The Civic/Institutional (CI) designation includes educational uses, such as elementary,
middle, and high schools, colleges, universities, hospitals, and governmental facilities.
Desired Character and Uses: These uses often become focal points for the community and in
doing so, are maintained and necessary to support not only the education of the children and
adults, but also the cohesiveness and integrity of the surrounding neighborhoods.
Intensity: Depending on the use for the site, buildings or other permanent structures may or may
not be present. The maximum building intensity for the Civic/Institutional designation is a FAR of
0.50.
Zoning: Educational facilities are permitted in the OS, Open Space, and R-1, R-2, and R-3 zoning
districts. Civic facilities are permitted in all zones.
Parks and Open Space
Intent: The Parks and Open Space (OS) designation includes all parks, the Southern California
easement, the Orange County Flood Control District’s channels, and the Orange County Transit
Authority’s right-of-way.
Desired Character and Uses: The Parks and Open Space (OS) designation is intended to provide
for land within the City that meets the passive and active recreational needs of the citizens and
that promotes and preserves the health and general welfare of citizens. Parks and open space
and the activities they offer, help to sustain the high quality of life in the City. Park and open
space areas provide amenities in the community for individual and group activities. Uses
appropriate within this designation include traditional parks, bicycle and pedestrian paths/trails,
gardens, and golf courses.
Both public and private land can be designated as parks and open space. Public lands can
include areas that are specifically identified for park use, and utility, rail and flood rights-of-way.
Zoning: Zoning districts that implement the Parks and Open Space designation are: OS, Open
Space.
2.4.3 GENERAL PLAN/ZONING RELATIONSHIP
The relationship between the General Plan land use designations and zoning districts is shown in
Table 2-4, Relationship of General Plan Land Use Designations with Zoning. This table indicates
how properties should be zoned to be consistent with the General Plan Land Use Map.
2-28

       R-1.2 (5,000)                  O
       R-1.3 (6,000)                  O
       R-1.4 (7,200)                  O
       R-1.5 (9,000)                  O                                                                                            Zoning
       R-1.6 (11,000)                 O
       R-1.7 (15,000)                 O
       R-2                                  O
       R-3                                  O O                                                          Low Density Residential
       Adopt New Residential                                                                             Low Medium Residential
                                                       O O
       Zoning Category
       Adopt New Mixed Use                                                                               Medium Density Residential
       Zoning Category or                                        O O O O O O O O                         Medium High Residential
       Continue to Use PUD
       C-1                                                                                               Community Residential
       C-2                                                                                               Civic Center Mixed Use
       C-3                                                                                               International West Mixed Use
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Table 2-4
       O-P
                                                                                                         Residential/Commercial Mixed Use 1
       M-1
       M-P                                                                                               Residential/Commercial Mixed Use 2
       OS                                                                                                Residential/Commercial Mixed Use 3
       PUD*
                                                                                                         Industrial/Commercial Mixed Use
       Adopt New Zoning                                                                                                                       Land Use Designations
       Category                                                                                          Industrial/Residential Mixed Use 1
       * Allowed in any designation if requirements of the Zoning Code are met (minimum average, etc.)   Industrial/Residential Mixed Use 2
                                           O   O                                                         Light Commercial
                                                                                                                                                                      Relationship of General Plan Land Use Designations with Zoning
                                       O                                                                 Heavy Commercial
                                   O                                                                     Office Professional
                           O   O                                                                         Industrial
             O                                                                                           Civic/Institution
2-29                   O                                                                                 Parks/Open Space
Planned Unit Development
A planned unit development (PUD) is a precise plan, adopted by ordinance that provides the
means for the regulation of buildings, structures, and uses of land to facilitate the
implementation of the General Plan. It is a way to create site-specific zoning requirements. The
adopted PUD becomes the zoning classification of the property.
The regulations of the planned unit development are intended to provide for a diversity of uses,
relationships, and open spaces in an innovative land plan and design, while ensuring
compliance with the provisions of the Municipal Code.
2.5     GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
This Element is organized into goals, policies, and implementation programs. A description of
each is provided in Chapter 1, Introduction. It is important to note that the implementation
programs are specific actions to carry out all of the preceding goals and policies.
WELL-PLANNED GROWTH WITH A MIX OF USES
 Goal LU-1         The City of Garden Grove is a well-planned community with sufficient land
                   uses and intensities to meets the needs of anticipated growth and achieve the
                   community’s vision.
Policy LU-1.1      Identify appropriate locations for residential and non-residential development
                   to accommodate growth through the year 2030 on the General Plan Land
                   Use Diagram (Exhibit LU-3).
Policy LU-1.2      Encourage modern residences in areas designated as Mixed Use. Mixed use
                   housing should minimize impacts on designated single-family neighborhoods.
Policy LU-1.3      Encourage a wide variety of retail and commercial services, such as
                   restaurants and cultural arts / entertainment, in appropriate locations.
Policy LU-1.4      Encourage active and inviting pedestrian-friendly street environments that
                   include a variety of uses within commercial and mixed use areas.
Policy LU-1.5      Mixed Use should be designed to:
                        Create a pleasant walking environment to encourage pedestrian activity.
                        Create lively streetscapes, interesting urban spaces, and attractive
                        landscaping.
                        Provide convenient shopping opportunities for residents close to their
                        residence.
                        Integrate with surrounding uses to become a part of the neighborhood
                        rather than an isolated project.
                        Use architectural elements or themes from the surrounding area, as
                        appropriate.
                        Provide appropriate transition between land use designations to minimize
                        neighbor compatibility conflicts.
Policy LU-1.6      Encourage workplace development in close proximity to residences in areas
                   designated as Mixed Use.
2-30

Policy LU-1.7  Encourage the design of new commercial developments as integrated
               centers, rather than as small individual strip developments.
Policy LU-1.8  Discourage strip commercial development and encourage a pattern of
               alternating land uses along major arterials with “nodes” of commercial
               development either separated or mixed with other uses such as residential,
               industrial, or institutional.
Policy LU-1.9  Designate areas for urban land uses where adequate levels of public facilities
               and services exist or are planned.
Policy LU-1.10 Promote future patterns of urban development and land use that reduce
               infrastructure construction costs and make better use of existing and planned
               public facilities.
LU-IMP-1A      Evaluate proposed amendments to the General Plan Land Use Diagram
               (Exhibit LU-3) to consider the effects such amendments will have on the City’s
               ability to achieve its goals.
LU-IMP-1B      Amend the Zoning Code to implement mixed use zoning districts that provide
               development standards for mixed use development, which should address
               minimum density and intensity requirements; allowable uses; horizontal and/or
               vertical mix of uses, building heights; and parking standards.
LU-IMP-1C      Evaluate mixed use projects to ensure that there is an adequate mix of uses
               on the site and in the area.
NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION
 Goal LU-2     Stable, well-maintained residential neighborhoods in Garden Grove.
Policy LU-2.1  Protect residential areas from the effects of potentially incompatible uses.
               Where new commercial or industrial development is allowed adjacent to
               residentially zoned districts, maintain standards for circulation, noise, setbacks,
               buffer areas, landscaping and architecture, which ensure compatibility
               between the uses.
Policy LU-2.2  Strive to provide a diverse mix of housing types, along with uniformly high
               standards of residential property maintenance to preserve residents’ real
               estate values and their high quality of life.
Policy LU-2.3  Prohibit uses that lead to deterioration of residential neighborhoods, or
               adversely impact the safety or the residential character of a residential
               neighborhood.
Policy LU-2.4  Assure that the type and intensity of land use shall be consistent with that of
               the immediate neighborhood.
Policy LU-2.5  Continue to provide rehabilitation assistance to those neighborhoods where it
               is needed with the understanding that subsequent code enforcement will be
               used to protect the City’s investment in the area.
                                                                                              2-31

Policy LU-2.6 Ensure that every neighborhood has a unique community image that is
              incorporated and reflected in public facilities, streetscapes, signage, and
              entryways proposed for each neighborhood.
Policy LU-2.7 Ensure that the distinct character of Garden Grove’s neighborhoods are
              respected and reflected in all new development or redevelopment,
              especially infill development.
LU-IMP-2A     Continue to monitor maintenance standards in neighborhoods to maintain
              high standards of appearance and stability in the neighborhood.
LU-IMP-2B     New development shall be similar in scale to the adjoining residential
              neighborhood to preserve its character.
LU-IMP-2C     Encourage the use of property owner and other neighborhood-based
              associations to reduce crime and vandalism, maintain neighborhood
              amenities, and provide neighborhood social support through welcoming
              programs for newcomers, interest group meetings, block parties, and other
              social events.
LU-IMP-2D     Identify owners that are unable physically or financially to maintain their
              residences. Use set-aside or other appropriate funding to assist in the
              maintenance or improvement of ill-maintained housing.
MULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENTS
 Goal LU-3    Add higher density residential development adjacent to major thoroughfares
              in the City.
Policy LU-3.1 Preserve existing and encourage multi-family residential development in the
              Focus Areas allowing mixed use in older or underutilized commercial centers.
              Such housing provides convenient access to jobs and activities, and supplies
              a resident clientele to support commercial sales and services in mixed use
              areas.
LU-IMP-3A     Design new residential sites so that housing does not front onto a major
              corridor, but instead on intersecting local streets or on cul-de-sacs, in order
              that sight and sound buffering from traffic can be included in these new
              residential site plans.
LU-IMP-3B     Design multi-family housing in mixed use areas and on major corridors to
              provide a buffer between the corridor and lower density residential areas.
LU-IMP-3C     Require attractive side and rear facades and landscaping on multi-family
              housing structures in order to improve the streetscape and effect a visual
              transition to lower density residential areas.
LU-IMP-3D     Front multi-family housing on local streets with appropriate setbacks to be
              consistent with neighborhood development patterns.
2-32

LAND USE COMPATIBILITY
 Goal LU-4    The City seeks to develop uses that are compatible with one another
Policy LU-4.1 Locate higher density residential uses within proximity of commercial uses to
              encourage pedestrian traffic, and to provide a consumer base for
              commercial uses.
Policy LU-4.2 Ensure that infill development is well-planned and allows for increased density
              in Focus Areas along established transportation corridors.
Policy LU-4.3 Allow for mixed use development at varying intensities in Focus Areas as a
              means of revitalizing underutilized parcels.
Policy LU-4.4 Avoid density increases or intrusion of non-residential uses that are
              incompatible with existing neighborhoods.
Policy LU-4.5 Require that the commercial and industrial developments adjoining residential
              uses be adequately screened and buffered from residential areas.
Policy LU-4.6 Where residential/commercial or residential/industrial mixed use is permitted,
              ensure compatible integration of adjacent uses to minimize conflicts.
Policy LU-4.7 Ensure that the locations of business establishments that offer adult
              merchandise for sale or rent or liquor sales are located in appropriate
              locations in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of citizens.
Policy LU-4.8 Ensure that minimum allowable distances are maintained between the adult
              or liquor sales businesses and other land uses defined as sensitive to their
              presence, including but not limited to churches, schools, parks and
              playgrounds, day care centers and the like.
LU-IMP-4A     Monitor existing and review all requests to expand intensive commercial or
              industrial uses.
LU-IMP-4B     Continue to monitor and record criminal incidents at the existing and
              relocated adult businesses, bars and liquor stores, as well as in residential
              neighborhoods adjacent to these uses.
VITAL COMMERCIAL CENTERS
 Goal LU-5    Economically viable, vital, and attractive commercial centers throughout the
              City that serve the needs of the community.
Policy LU-5.1 Work with property owners of vacant commercially zoned property to
              develop their sites into appropriate, economically viable projects.
Policy LU-5.2 Look for ways to provide incentives to encourage lot consolidation and parcel
              assemblage to provide expanded opportunities for coordinated commercial
              development.
                                                                                         2-33
Policy-5.32   Encourage consolidation of parking and reciprocal access agreements
              between adjacent business and commercial center property owners.
LU-IMP-5A     Analyze the current inventory of developed and undeveloped commercial
              sites in the City in order to advise commercial property owners on the
              character and extent of economically viable commercial development that
              can be supported.
LU-IMP-5B     Outreach to commercial center owners to present the topics of lot
              consolidation, parcel assemblage, and parking/reciprocal access
              agreements.
LU-IMP-5C     Encourage commercial center owners to consider lot consolidation, parcel
              assemblage, and parking/reciprocal access agreements.
REVITALIZATION OF COMMERCIAL CORRIDORS AND AGING COMMERCIAL
CENTERS
 Goal LU-6    Revitalization of aging, underused or deteriorated commercial corridors,
              centers, and properties in the City.
Policy LU-6.1 Continue to monitor the uses and development proposed in the City’s
              commercial corridors to determine the viability of existing and proposed
              development.
Policy LU-6.2 Encourage a mix of retail shops and services along the commercial corridors
              and in centers that better meet the needs of area’s present and potential
              clientele.
Policy LU-6.3 Monitor the appearance of commercial and service facilities along the
              commercial corridors and in centers to prevent areas of decline by requiring
              improved maintenance or rehabilitation, as necessary.
Policy LU-6.4 Work with property owner(s) of commercial developments that have been, or
              are currently, in a state of deterioration to revitalize these centers. This
              includes areas in Focus Areas I,J, K, M, and N.
Policy LU-6.5 Work with property owners of marginally successful commercial developments
              to improve their properties. This includes areas in Focus Areas A, D, F, G, J, K,
              M, N, and I.
Policy LU-6.6 Ensure appropriate and compatible signage is provided within commercial
              centers.
Policy LU-6.7 Examine the possible transition of underused, shallow lot commercial uses to
              alternative uses. This includes areas in Focus Areas A, E1, and G.
LU-IMP-6A     Require project proponents to conduct economic/market feasibility studies to
              assess the appropriate quantity and mix of non-residential uses in the area.
LU-IMP-6B     Monitor the appearance of commercial properties to prevent evidences of
              decline by requiring improved maintenance and rehabilitation, as necessary.
2-34

LU-IMP-6C     Encourage façade renovation, enhanced parking area landscaping,
              improved lighting, development of pad buildings, and the use of pedestrian
              amenities, such as fountains, plazas, promenades, seating, and like features.
LU-IMP-6D     Assist property owner(s) to secure financing for the appropriate rehabilitation
              of the commercial center.
LU-IMP-6E     Apply City plans and codes to the sites to ensure that current and
              rehabilitated facilities meet City standards for maintenance, landscaping, and
              community design.
LU-IMP-6F     Rezone under performing commercial properties in order to effectively
              transition them to more viable land uses.
LU-IMP-6G     Revise the sign section of the Zoning Code.
HIGH QUALITY INDUSTRIAL AREAS
 Goal LU-7    The City values its industrial areas as an important contributor to a well-
              planned community and for the jobs and economic impacts they provide.
Policy LU-7.1 Tailor zoning regulations for industrial uses to ensure that future uses are in
              concert with the City’s overall land use goals and policies.
Policy LU-7.2 Limit redesignations or rezoning of land from industrial use, unless the land is
              within Focus Area E2 or Focus Area L. Avoid encroachments of incompatible
              land uses in close proximity to industrial land.
Policy LU-7.3 Monitor the appearance of industrial properties to prevent areas of decline by
              requiring improved maintenance or rehabilitation, as necessary.
LU-IMP-7A     Develop a citywide strategy to retain industrial businesses and promote the
              City to potential industrial users.
LU-IMP-7B     Require improved maintenance and rehabilitation of industrial buildings and
              sites, as necessary.
LU-IMP-7C     Apply City plans and codes to industrial building and sites to ensure that
              current and rehabilitated facilities meet City standards for maintenance,
              landscaping, and community design.
OCTA RIGHT-OF-WAY
 Goal LU-8    The OCTA Right-Of-Way offers great potential for alternative transportation
              systems, as well as for recreation or parklands that could benefit the residents
              of Garden Grove.
PolicyLU-8.1  Work with OCTA to ensure the proper maintenance of the right-of-way until
              beneficial interim uses are developed on the right-of-way.
                                                                                           2-35

Policy LU-8.2 Prepare a plan for the first phase of use of the OCTA right-of-way that lies
              between Chapman Avenue to the north and Garden Grove Boulevard to the
              south.
LU-IMP-8A     Enter into a cooperative agreement with OCTA and the City of Santa Ana to
              develop a “Go Local” transit extension from Harbor and Westminster
              Boulevards in Garden Grove to the Santa Ana Regional Transportation Center.
LU-IMP-8B     Work with OCTA and the City of Santa Ana to include a bikeway and
              pedestrian trail in the “Go Local” transit extension plan between Garden
              Grove and the Santa Ana Regional Transportation Center.
LU-IMP-8C     The “Go Local” transit extension plan should provide recommendations to
              address soil contamination on the OCTA right-of-way.
LU-IMP-8D     Work with residents, property owners and neighborhood associations to
              determine their preference for use of the OCTA right-of-way. Potential uses
              include:      1) a linear park developed and maintained with joint
              City/neighborhood responsibility; 2) landscaped park space for the use of
              multi-family developments; 3) one segment of a landscaped recreational trail
              incorporating pedestrian and bicycle paths with marked lanes through paved
              areas – the trail to be developed and maintained by the City; 4) children’s
              play area adjacent to the shopping center parking for use of shopper’s
              families – to be developed and maintained by shopping center proprietors; 5)
              extension of parking, storage, and service areas available to adjoining
              commercial and industrial facilities – such extensions to be developed and
              maintained by the industrial and commercial occupants; and 6) other
              beneficial uses supported by the community. The potential uses may be
              explored in combination with one another to provide multiple benefits to the
              community.
FOCUS AREA A (INTERNATIONAL WEST)
 Goal LU-9    Creation of a tourism- and entertainment-related destination area in the City
              that will benefit all of the City of Garden Grove.
Policy LU-9.1 Capture the benefits of the tourist trade generated by the Disneyland Resort
              and the Anaheim Convention Center.
Policy LU-9.2 Support and enhance the commercial centers at the intersection of Harbor
              Boulevard and Garden Grove Boulevard.
Policy LU-9.3 Explore the opportunities offered by properties located between Harbor Plaza
              and the Garden Grove Freeway.
Policy LU-9.4 Continue to explore opportunities to construct a mini-convention center near
              the intersection of Harbor Boulevard and Chapman Avenue.
Policy LU-9.5 Protect residential and other sensitive areas from any external impacts of
              tourist- or entertainment-related uses by separation of incompatible land uses,
              and buffering or screening, as necessary.
2-36

Policy LU-9.6  Locate tourist- or entertainment-related uses with adequate access to
               freeways or major arterials in order to encourage both local and regional
               patronage.
LU-IMP-9A      Target future sites for hotels and other tourist-serving uses within International
               West.
LU-IMP-9B      Prepare and implement a Corridor Plan for the International West Area. The
               Corridor Plan could include a Master Plan, Specific Plan, or Streetcape Plan.
LU-IMP-9C      Monitor and ensure pedestrian safety for shoppers moving between the
               centers at the intersection of Harbor Boulevard and Garden Grove Boulevard.
LU-IMP-9D      Allow expansion of the International West land use designation south of the
               Garden Grove Freeway (SR-22) to the area that is generally bounded by
               Harbor Boulevard on the east, Newhope Street on the west, and Westminster
               Boulevard on the south.            The designation will be extended to this
               approximately 167-acre area at such time as developers are actively working
               on large-scale resort center projects.
LU-IMP-9E      Provide criteria for permitted uses, capacities, activities, landscaping and
               maintenance standards for tourist- and entertainment-related uses seeking to
               locate in the City.
FOCUS AREA E1 (CIVIC CENTER)
 Goal LU-10    Restoration of the Civic Center as the heart of the City.
Policy LU-10.1 Maintain and enhance the centralized public function of the Civic Center.
Policy LU-10.2 Develop a Master Plan for the Civic Center area.
Policy LU-10.3 Redevelop, consolidate and rezone properties within the Civic Center area to
               accommodate the mix of uses allowed in this focus area.
LU-IMP-10A     Link the City Hall with other civic or institutional uses across Acacia Parkway so
               that the centrality of government services is retained in the Civic Center area.
LU-IMP-10B     Continue to encourage the use of the Civic Center’s facilities for public and
               private community and social events.
LU-IMP-10C     Continue to support cultural activities conducted near the Civic Center, such
               as theater productions or the Strawberry Festival, and experiment with offering
               new citywide celebrations to be held in this area.
LU-IMP-10D     Maximize the opportunities offered by higher educational institutions to be
               located in the Civic Center area.
                                                                                               2-37

FOCUS AREA I (BROOKHURST STREET AND CHAPMAN AVENUE)
 Goal LU-11    Maintenance and completion of the redevelopment and revitalization of the
               Brookhurst/Chapman commercial area.
Policy LU-11.1 Revitalize the commercial properties on the southwest and southeast corners
               of the Brookhurst Street/Chapman Avenue intersection.
LU-IMP-11A     Encourage the property owner(s) to improve the appearance of the shopping
               centers, which may include façade renovation, parking area landscaping,
               undergrounding utilities, coordinated signage, and improved lighting.
LU-IMP-11B     Redesign the site plan for the shopping center on the southwest corner of the
               Brookhurst Street/Chapman Avenue intersection to make productive use of
               the land behind the commercial buildings, which is presently devoted to an
               oversupply of parking.
SPECIFIC PLANS
 Goal LU-12    Specific Plans are a useful planning tool to provide additional planning and
               development directions for finite areas in the City.
Policy LU-12.1 Consider the retirement of the Harbor Corridor, Community Center, and
               Brookhurst/Chapman Specific Plans.
Policy LU-12.2 Develop new Specific Plans for critical areas of the City.
Policy LU-12.3 Consider the preparation and implementation of a Specific Plan for Garden
               Grove Boulevard (Focus Area G).
LU-IMP-12A     Retirement of adopted Specific Plans requires changes to the Zoning Code
               and amendments to Title 9. This should proceed in a timely fashion and follow
               all requirements in order to expedite necessary zone and code changes.
LU-IMP-12B     Eliminate the zoning standards for the existing Specific Plans and craft new
               Zoning Code (traditional, overlay, master plan) incorporating the goals and
               policies of the General Plan 2030.
LU-IMP-12C     Prepare and implement Specific Plans that promote development, land
               recycling, and other related activities consistent with the General Plan.
DEVELOPMENT IN ADJACENT JURISDICTIONS
 Goal LU-13    The City understands that development on lands adjacent to the City’s
               corporate boundary can profoundly affect Garden Grove residents and
               businesses.
Policy LU-13.1 Cooperate with other jurisdictions in developing compatible land uses on
               lands adjacent to, or near, the City’s corporate boundaries to minimize
2-38

               significant impacts and potentially benefit residents, businesses, and/or
               infrastructure systems in Garden Grove.
LU-IMP-13A     Monitor planning and environmental assessments for development projects in
               adjacent jurisdictions and participate in public hearings for the projects.
ANNEXATION/DE-ANNEXATION AREAS
 Goal LU-14    The City seeks rationalized corporate boundaries and may choose to annex or
               de-annex areas of the City that have a closer relationship either with the City
               of Garden Grove or adjacent cities.
Policy LU-14.1 Fully investigate all effects of any proposed changes to the incorporated area
               of the City.
Policy LU-14.2 Pursue to the extent feasible exchanges of land with contiguous cities, as well
               as annexations of County islands, that will rationalize and clarify City
               boundaries and will provide minimal costs and maximum benefits to the City.
Policy LU-14.3 Consider annexation to the City of Garden Grove land that lies south of
               Garden Grove Boulevard, north of the Garden Grove Freeway, and west of
               Beach Boulevard (Focus Area O).
Policy LU-14.4 Consider de-annexation to the City of Westminster land that lies south of
               Hazard Avenue and east of Ward Street (Focus Area B).
Policy LU-14.5 Consider de-annexation to the City of Westminster land that lies south of
               Hazard Avenue, north of Bolsa Avenue, and east of Bushard Avenue (Focus
               Area C).
Policy LU-14.6 Consider negotiations with the City of Santa Ana to annex that portion of
               Garden Grove lying east of Ward Street and south of Hazard Avenue in
               exchange for Garden Grove’s annexation of that portion of Santa Ana that
               lies south of Westminster Avenue, east of Harbor Boulevard, including the site
               of the Willowick Municipal Golf Course.
Policy LU-14.7 Consider expansion of the Redevelopment Project Area to include new areas
               annexed into the City.
LU-IMP-14A     Coordinate with the City of Westminster, the Local Agency Formation
               Commission, and affected property owners in both annexation and de-
               annexation procedures.
LU-IMP-14B     Conduct detailed cost/benefit analysis to determine the economic effects of
               both de-annexation of land from and annexation of land to the City.
LU-IMP-14C     Provide identity to any area annexed as part of the City of Garden Grove.
COUNTY ISLANDS
 Goal LU-15    Resolution of the problems created by County islands adjoining the City.
                                                                                           2-39

Policy LU-15.1  Work with the County of Orange to secure the City’s preliminary review and
                counsel for all development or redevelopment proposed for County islands
                adjoining Garden Grove.
Policy LU-15.2  Work with the County of Orange to require that City of Garden Grove building
                and development standards are met in all new development or
                redevelopment within adjoining County islands.
Policy LU-15.3  Work with the County of Orange to improve deteriorated neighborhoods
                within County islands adjoining Garden Grove.
LU-IMP-15A      Work with the Local Agency Formation Commission to encourage the
                annexation of County islands to the appropriate adjoining city.
JOINT FORCES TRAINING BASE (JFTB) LOS ALAMITOS
 Goal LU-16     Land use patterns in the City of Garden Grove must be protected from impacts
                associated with the Joint Forces Training Base (JFTB) Los Alamitos.
Policy LU-16.1  Prohibit structures that are determined to be a “hazard” by the Federal
                Aviation Administration within the Airport Environs Land Use Plan area.
Policy LU-16.2   Allow development consistent with Airport Environs Land Use Plan.
LU-IMP-16A      Consult with the Airport Land Use Commission to ensure consistency with the
                scope and intent of the Airport Land Use Commission Law (Public Utilities
                Code Section 21670, et seq.).
CODE ENFORCEMENT
 Goal LU-17     The quality and character of the City is preserved and enhanced by
                compliance with relevant codes and regulations.
Policy LU-17.1  Review the Zoning Code and determine which sections are outdated to meet
                current trends, regulations, adopted community visions, and the General Plan
                2030 land use designations, and revise as necessary.
Policy LU-117.2 Provide equitable, consistent, and effective code enforcement services that
                resolve complaints citywide, addressing quality of life issues that come from
                poorly maintained properties.
LU-IMP-17A      Ensure adequate staffing for Code Enforcement to maintain and streamline
                enforcement efforts.
LU-IMP-17B      Provide public education about property maintenance and Zoning Code
                requirements.
2-40

                                                                                                                     LEGEND
Note: Land Uses that are not changing have a transparency layer and will appear slightly lighter in
color than what appears in the Legend. Focus Areas do not have a transparency layer, so colors are
true to the Legend.
                                                                                                                       NOT TO SCALE
                                                                                                    SOURCE: RBF Consulting, GIS Department, 2008.
                                                                                                                 Focus Areas
 05/08 • JN 10-104660
                                                                                                                                        EXHIBIT LU-1

                                                                                LEGEND
                                                             SOURCE: City of Garden Grove.
                     Land Use Development Types Along Garden Grove Boulevard
05/08 • JN 10-104660
                                                                                           EXHIBIT LU-2

                                                    LEGEND
                                   SOURCE: RBF Consulting, GIS Department, 2008.
                     General Plan Land Use Diagram
05/08 • JN 10-104660
                                                                       EXHIBIT LU-3

G                                 Chapter 3
       G
General P
          l an 2 0 30
                      Community Design Element
Chapter 3
COMMUNITY DESIGN
ELEMENT
3.1       INTRODUCTION
Community identity is the visual image of the community
that is held in the minds of residents and visitors. The many
visual images that people associate with the community,
include the City’s physical form, districts and gathering
areas, landmarks, street corridors, buildings, signs, and
other similar physical features.
A City has a clear physical identity when people readily perceive
the community in images that differentiate it from surrounding
communities. This is particularly important in an urbanized region
where communities run together with minimal distinguishing
characteristics. Community design is the collective experience
of the shapes, forms, and spaces that make up Garden Grove’s
built environment and form its identity. It is created by many
factors, including the physical setting, roadway corridors, existing
neighborhoods, public spaces, and industrial and commercial
development. The scale of community design, therefore,
encompasses groups of related elements rather than individual
buildings.
This element aims to recognize and enhance design
opportunities throughout Garden Grove that will improve the
livability of the community through physical design
considerations in public areas and encourage quality new
development through appropriate development policies. The
Community Design Element of the General Plan is intended to
build upon existing unique community characteristics and
enhance efforts to differentiate Garden Grove as a unique place
to live, work, play, and visit. The Community Design Element
establishes goals, policies, and implementation programs that
address the following topics:
        Community Image and Neighborhood Identity
        Entries
        Wayfinding and Signage
        Paths and Corridors
        Landmarks
        Public Art
        Districts and Gathering Places
                                                                     3-1

 3.2      AUTHORITY FOR THE ELEMENT
 The Community Design Element is not a State-mandated element of the General Plan. Authority
 for the Community Design Element is found in Section 65303 of the State Government Code,
 which allows cities and counties to add optional elements. Once adopted, this element
 becomes an integrated part of the General Plan, with the same authority and must be
 consistent with the other elements of the plan.
 3.3      KEY THEMES AND VISION FOR GENERAL PLAN
 COMMUNITY IMAGE AND NEIGHBORHOOD IDENTITY
 The City of Garden Grove was founded on the mining and agricultural industry; it has evolved
 from being characterized by rows of farmland and ranch style homes, to commercial centers,
 condominiums, and a growing urban skyline, with everything in between. The City's evolution of
 building form has also been influenced by Korean and Vietnamese culture. Creating harmony
 between the variety of development styles and cultural influences poses challenges, but also
 provides a unique opportunity to build upon positive elements throughout the community to
 create a sense of place distinct to Garden Grove.
 RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOODS
 Residential neighborhoods in Garden Grove are generally located off main corridors in the
 northern and southern portion of Garden Grove. Additionally, the area west of Knott Street is
 primarily residential.   A few homes remain from
 Garden Grove’s earliest days, these homes reflect a
 unique and timeless architectural style that may be
 used as examples for new development to enhance
 the hometown feel within newer neighborhoods.
 The majority of homes in Garden Grove are from the
 1940s to 1950s and are reminiscent of the wartime
 tract architectural style; characterized as small one-
 story buildings set on a concrete perimeter
 foundation with a pitched roof. Homes from the
 1950s and 1960s were primarily built in the California
 Ranch architectural style, characterized by its one-
 story, pitched-roof construction, wood or brick exterior Older style homes create a “hometown
                                                             feel” in residential neighborhoods
 walls, sliding and picture windows, and sliding doors
 leading to patios. Over time, these single-family
 homes have been remodeled, increasing their size
 and creating a larger variety of façade treatments
 that disrupt the consistency of the established
 neighborhoods.      Landscaping in these areas is
 generally mature and extends out to the back of the
 curb face. In some neighborhoods, large lawns and
 deep setbacks create a more rural feel in an
 otherwise urban environment.
 Garden Grove’s multi-family residences typically
 include one- or two-story buildings set back from the
 street.        The    most    successful    multi-family    Wartime Tract Single-Family Home
 neighborhoods in the City are those that are
3-2

designed at a pedestrian scale: include deep roof
overhangs; create visual interest through good
architectural detail: and locate parking in the back of
the development.            Most recently landscaping and
private     outdoor         space      in       the      multi-family
neighborhoods offer more extensive vegetation which
reduce urban temperatures and creates a pleasant
natural environment for residents.
                                                                         Existing Multi-family Residential in Garden Grove
           Multi-family can be designed to fit into existing residential neighborhoods and maintain “hometown” feel.
COMMERCIAL
Commercial development is focused along primary
corridors and at the major intersections of the City’s
secondary corridors. The City’s vision is to move away
from the old style of strip commercial development
that is dominated by parking and automobiles to a
pedestrian        friendly,     attractive,        and        diverse
commercial/mixed-use development type with well-
designed       rear      parking.         This more urban
commercial/mixed-use style of development would
encourage both local and regional commerce, while
also enhancing the City’s image. Commercial areas                              Human scale, a broken façade with mixed
should work in harmony with adjacent residential uses                      materials, and rear parking makes this shopping
by maintaining a pedestrian scale and consistent                               center more  appealing for the pedestrian.
architectural styles, providing appealing access, well
designed landscaping, and pedestrian amenities that
foster interaction.
Main Street, located off Euclid Street offers a unique
sense of place within the heart of Garden Grove.
Residents and visitors identify with this area, and its
contribution in the community is of profound value.
Main Street’s architecture styles and scale, street trees
decorative paving, walkability, and friendly atmosphere
may create a unique experience and can provide
design inspiration for other areas of the City.                              Building form and architectural style along Main
                                                                                  Street creates a unique sense of place.
                                                                                                                          3-3

 Two other key commercial areas, the Korean Business District along Garden Grove Boulevard
 and the extension of “Little Saigon” from the City of Westminster, offer unique cultural and
 shopping experiences. These two areas provide an
 opportunity to emphasize a strong cultural,
 architectural, and landscape statement for the City,
 catering to the pedestrian in both the scale and visual
 appeal, while also celebrating the diversity of the
 community.
 INDUSTRIAL
 Industrial development in the City is concentrated
 east of Knott Avenue, but is also found in other areas
 of the City. Architecture associated with industrial
 uses varies noticeably, from single story flat roof
 structures, to tilt-up concrete buildings with modest
 window treatments. The best examples of industrial
 building design in Garden Grove locate the building
                                                            Well designed live/work units in light industrial and
 near the street in a manner that strengthens the               office areas create a unique place in a city.
 pedestrian experience, provide strong architectural
 detailing, and include landscaping that softens the
 façade and breaks up parking areas, loading docks, and storage lots.
 As Garden Grove looks to the future and nears its build-out
 potential, the City must encourage a high level of design in
 both private and public development and redevelopment
 projects. Through more visually distinct gateways, public
 and private signage, and architectural style, the City can
 establish an even stronger sense of identity through its
 industrial development.
 ENTRIES
 As shown in Exhibit CD-1, Corridors, Entries, and Landmarks,
 primary entries into the City are from the Garden Grove                   Existing Entry Monument
 Freeway and major corridors at City boundaries.
 Secondary entries are more local, entries into the City.
 Special district entries are smaller entries denoting a
 transition into these unique areas within Garden Grove.
 WAYFINDING AND SIGNAGE
 Cities and towns are complex environments; they are often
 confusing to a first time visitor or even long-time residents.
 Yet, views from the road often form our first and most lasting
 view of a community. A wayfinding system does more than
 simply create informational and directional signs; they
 provide the following:
        Welcome
        A sense of place
        Communicate quickly and effectively                             Existing Wayfinding Signage
        Are attractive and well-made
3-4

     Increase visitor retention
     A safe, consistent experience
Garden Grove has incorporated a wayfinding program that includes entry monuments, district
monuments, and wayfinding signage at key locations throughout the City. To enhance the
sense of arrival, the City should continue to incorporate strong wayfinding and entry treatments
throughout the City.
Primary entries should incorporate trees specific or
characteristic of the district corridor or area, major City of
Garden Grove monuments, and sconces (could use a
design similar to those found in the Village Green Clock
Tower). Secondary entries should have similar treatment,
but at a smaller scale. Wayfinding signage and district
entries should also be enhanced to provide similar
treatments.
In addition to the wayfinding signage in the public right-
of-way, the City should also encourage the use of
attractive and appropriate signage in commercial and                         Unique Entry Signage that Complements
residential areas of the City.                                                    the Residential Development
      Example of a Primary Entry at Harbor Boulevard off ramp: accent paving of crosswalks, large corner setbacks
                                        with low planting, low brick wall behind.
                                                                                                                 3-5

 PATHS AND CORRIDORS
 Paths and corridors are methods of movement within a community that include walkways,
 streets, transit lines, and highways. There are four types of paths – primary corridors, secondary
 corridors, collectors, and alleys – found within Garden Grove; refer to Exhibit CD-1 for locations.
 A well-designed community network gives equal weight to all modes of transit; in Garden Grove
 this includes automobiles, pedestrians, and bicycles.
 PRIMARY CORRIDORS
 Primary corridors serve as both the highest traveled vehicular
 routes, as well as the highest level of pedestrian use. With this
 in mind, primary corridors are the most visible and highest
 priority for streetscape enhancements. Although each of the
 primary corridors may differ in specific streetscape elements,
 each corridor itself should have a continuous and cohesive
 treatment for its entire length.        Primary corridors within
 Garden Grove include:
        Valley View Street
        Brookhurst Street;
        Chapman Avenue;
        Euclid Street;
        Harbor Boulevard and,
        Garden Grove Boulevard.
                                                                            Median Treatment
 The renovation of the City’s primary corridors will need to be
 innovative, thoughtful, and site-specific given the existing conditions. Past street widenings and
 haphazard development over time have created an inconsistent and impacted streetscape.
 New streetscape treatments should include wide sidewalks and substantial naturalistic
 landscaping that includes canopy trees. Sidewalks should be further enhanced with paving
 patterns (used effectively on Harbor Boulevard). To create pathways that are truly pedestrian-
 friendly streets should be planted with double rows of canopy trees with the pedestrian zone
 between the rows of trees (a design element for an urban trail). Low growing evergreen shrub
 massing in street-adjacent wells and property-adjacent setbacks will unify the pedestrian zone.
 Widened pockets of sidewalk can occur at various locations (setback side) to accommodate
 pedestrian amenities such as benches, seat walls, trash receptacles, etc.
 Medians along primary corridors should incorporate the same types of trees to be consistent with
 the sidewalk plantings and employ a continuous and tightly spaced pattern. Groundcovers and
 accent shrub massing should be low growing, low maintenance, and with little or no water
 requirements once established. Although typical high-level cobra-head style lighting may still be
 required for the high level of traffic, secondary thematic, pedestrian level lighting should be
 considered within or oriented toward the sidewalk area.
 SECONDARY CORRIDORS
 The secondary corridors within Garden Grove, in many cases carry as much traffic as the
 primary corridors; however, they tend to have less intensive commercial uses and are less
 pedestrian oriented than the primary corridors. These streets still require a consistent and high
 level of streetscape enhancements. While each of the secondary corridors has varying right-of-
 way widths and varying adjacent land uses, each should have its own consistent, continuous
 streetscape for its entire length of within distinct neighborhoods.
3-6

Generally, sidewalks within the secondary corridors have enough width to allow for street-
adjacent trees in cutout tree wells, wide pedestrian concrete walkways, and landscaped
setbacks on the property side of the sidewalk. Landscaped setbacks should have enough room
for a continuous planting of low groundcover or shrub mass, as well as a second row of trees. In
addition, bus shelters should be provided for in expanded rights-of-way behind the sidewalks.
Block or masonry walls, which are discouraged
along sidewalk edges, must be setback far enough
for landscape screening.
Medians should be provided to the maximum
extent possible. Median treatments will include
formal and informal groupings of trees that match
or compliment the street trees within the sidewalk
areas, and low growing, low maintenance, low
water usage, shrub massing or groundcover.
Median noses and occasional sections of medians
can be treated with enhanced concrete pattern
and/or permeable rock and aggregate accent
material.
                                                               Wide Pedestrian Sidewalk, Tree Wells, and
                                                          Landscaped Setback provided on Existing Corridor.
COLLECTOR AND RESIDENTIAL STREETS
Residents value the older neighborhoods in Garden Grove, and do not wish to see the
streetscapes altered significantly. In these areas, it would be appropriate to leave the
streetscape consistent with the existing theme of the neighborhood. In other residential
neighborhoods, which need revitalization or lack any consistent street tree plantings and
cohesive streetscape pattern, enhancements and consistency will improve the area and foster
heightened pedestrian activity.
      Maintain Consistent Character of Residential 4 – 6 Foot Sidewalk with Parkway Creates a Safe and
                    Neighborhood.                                 Appealing Streetscape.
Preferred streetscape elements on these typically residential streets would be a traditional four-
foot wide sidewalk separated from the street with a four- to six-foot wide parkway. Sidewalks
should either be continuously parallel to the street or meander from side to side, depending on
the neighborhood character. Street trees should be planted within the parkway areas, with
ground cover and shrubs filling in underneath.
                                                                                                         3-7

 In addition, street lighting should also reflect the smaller scale and
 traditional character of the residential neighborhood by replacing
 the standard cobra-head style with a smaller pedestrian scaled
 thematic streetlights.
 ALLEYS
 Alleys occur throughout the City in all
 land use zones and act as an
 important element of both circulation
 and infrastructure, as well as potential
 areas for neighborhood socialization.
 Most alleys are primarily serving
 vehicular access, however they can
 provide pedestrian linkages as well.
 While maintenance and safety are
 top priority, visual enhancement of
 rear properties, special accent paving
 at entries, pedestrian level lighting,
 and landscaping where feasible
                                                    Street Lighting with
 should be encouraged.                            Pedestrian Scale Theme
 LANDMARKS
 Landmarks are unique structural or natural features in a
 community. They are typically visible from a distance and
 often used as a reference point. They evoke feelings of
 familiarity with a particular area and help in establishing
 identity. The following four landmarks are important to the
 community and contribute towards Garden Grove’s
 identity; refer to Exhibit CD-1.
      Clock Tower: Located in the Village Green Park, this
         structure serves as a entrance monument at the
         north end of the Civic Center.
      Hyatt Hotel (Plaza Alicante): This 17-story hotel is
         connected to a 10-story office building converted
         into additional hotel rooms by a 160-foot glass
         atrium. The building is located at the north end of             Clock Tower in the Village Green
         Harbor Boulevard.
      Crystal Cathedral: The City’s most prominent landmark. The 236-foot steeple of highly
         polished stainless steel prisms is a visible from nearby freeways and adjacent cities.
      Stanley Ranch Museum and Heritage Park: The Stanley Ranch house, and general store
         are notably visible along Euclid Street with a water tank and windmill on the grounds.
      Main Street: Main Street, located off Euclid Street, Is an old time pedestrian shopping
         street that has maintained its character and “hometown” feel.
3-8

Hyatt Hotel (Plaza Alicante)                 Crystal Cathedral
                                                            Above: Main Street
                             Left: Stanley Ranch Museum and Heritage Park.
                                                                            3-9
 PUBLIC ART
 The term public art usually refers to works of art in any media that has been planned and
 executed within the public domain, usually outside and accessible to all. Public art includes
 statues and murals that are visible from public spaces and streets. Currently, the primary
 location of public art within the City of Garden Grove is within the Civic Center.
 Opportunities for additional pieces of public art should be considered. Most aspects of the built
 environment can be seen as candidates for consideration as, or location for, public art,
 including, street furniture, lighting, etc. Public art is not confined to physical objects - dance,
 procession, street theatre and even poetry have proponents that specialize in public art.
                                               Existing Public
                                                Art in Garden
                                                    Grove
                                                     Public Art can be Provided in a Variety of Ways
3-10
DISTRICTS AND GATHERING PLACES
A “district” is defined as a geographic area that has common distinguishing characteristics
and/or functions. It is identifiable as a place that is distinct from other areas of the community.
Distinguishing features may include building type, the types of businesses, activity, and/or
inhabitants. Districts also have a high concentration of activity and serve as gathering places or
“nodes”. The City of Garden Grove has several well-defined districts/gathering places. As
shown in Exhibit CD-2, Districts, Garden Grove’s districts can be characterized by the following.
INTERNATIONAL WEST DISTRICT
International West or the Harbor Corridor is
emerging as a major entertainment and tourism
destination. Hotels and entertainment uses line the
corridor from the northern boundary of the City to
Lampson Avenue and are envisioned to expand
throughout the entire Harbor corridor.
Existing streetscape treatment in the district varies;
the northern portion is more defined then the
southern portion; and the Garden Grove Freeway
divides the corridor.          Enhancing the existing
                                                                  Existing streetscape on Harbor Boulevard
streetscape and extending it along the entire length
of Harbor Boulevard will help to connect the southern portion of the corridor with the north.
Streetscape enhancements such as consistent sidewalk widths, high quality accent paving
pattern, curb-adjacent planted parkways, with occasional breaks for expanded
sidewalk/access to street edges, continuous parkway planting, and intersections with special
accent treatments will visually set this district apart from other areas in the City.
             Extended streetscape improvements                Expand tourism and
                   throughout the district               entertainment focus within the
                                                                    district
To be an area known for tourism and entertainment, great gathering places or nodes are also
important in the International West District.           As redevelopment occurs in the corridor,
opportunities for additional public spaces and linkages between spaces should be considered.
To bring more activity onto the street, taller development should be setback from the street with
retail, shopping or other pedestrian amenities located adjacent to the street.
                                                                                                           3-11

     Harbor Boulevard will have a series of public
       spaces connected by pedestrian paths
                                                     Buildings should relate to the street
           Public spaces should engage and
          entertain users through design, art,
              fountains, and landscaping
                                                   Taller development should be setback from
                                                       the street with pedestrian amenities
                                                               adjacent to the street
            Well landscaped pedestrian path
3-12
CIVIC CENTER DISTRICT
The Civic Center District includes the City Hall, Main
Street, as well as a number of institutional uses. At the
heart of the Civic Center District are two parks – the
Village Green and the Civic Center Park – both serve as
gathering places for the community.                         New
development and redevelopment should open onto
these green spaces to create a human-scale
environment that maintains the atmosphere of a
traditional town center. Parcels that do not face an
open space area should also maintain a pedestrian-
friendly, traditional street frontage.
To heighten activity within this district and distinguish the                   Lake at Civic Center Park
Civic Center District as a unique area, a pedestrian-
friendly streetscape and amenities should be incorporated as the amenities would include
specific streetscape furniture, pavement treatments, consistent landscaping and tree type, and
thematic street lights.
Within this area, Acacia Parkway, between Main Street and Ninth Street, and all of Civic Center
Drive should be given the highest level of attention to pedestrian and visual improvements in
order to create the sense of importance of the Civic Center. Successful streets in town centers
have building frontages towards the sidewalk, forming a consistent street wall. The intent is to
make the street part of the public realm, part of the network of buildings and public spaces in
the Civic Center. The most essential element of mixed-use buildings for town centers is the shop
front. Regardless of the height of the building, the articulation of the ground floor façade is
critical in creating a viable retail experience and pedestrian-friendly environment. Elements of
an effective shop front include generous storefront windows, ample ceiling heights, pedestrian-
oriented signage and canopies. Sidewalks and roadways should be paved in the same special
material, with extra tree plantings in sidewalks, lighting, bollards lining the sidewalks edge, and
numerous benches, seating areas, and other pedestrian amenities.
               Large windows draw customers in and create an entertaining environment for pedestrians
                                                                                                          3-13

 Located within the Civic Center District, Main
 Street is one of Garden Grove’s landmarks.
 Today Main Street has a unique character
 comprised of small businesses and a
 pedestrian friendly environment. The area
 includes a variety of building facades
 including red title roofs and white and tan
 stucco finishes. Streetscape elements along
 Main Street include stamped paving along
 the sidewalk, historic light fixtures, and
 Sycamore trees.          The character on this
 unique street should be preserved and
 enhanced.
                                                            The Civic Center District is envisioned to be a pedestrian-
                                                               friendly area with small shops and restaurants with
                                                                                  outdoor dining
          Existing streetscape on Main Street                     Outdoor dining should be encouraged
                                     Alleys can also be valuable pedestrian space
3-14

ARTIST LOFT/LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
The Artist Loft/Light Industrial District located west of the Civic Center includes the Post Office
and mostly automotive, and light industrial uses. The Pacific Electric Corridor, owned by the
OCTA, runs in a southeast-northwest direction through the district. This vacant corridor has the
potential to be used for a regional transit system. In the interim, this corridor has great potential
to be a multi-use trail. As this area grows, new development should focus on the industrial
character of the area, adding artist/industrial lofts and including some neighborhood serving
retail and services.
                                                                   Multi-use trail concept
                 Artist/Industrial Lofts
                                                                                                 3-15
 BROOKHURST TRIANGLE/GARDEN GROVE CORRIDOR DISTRICT
 The Brookhurst Triangle/Garden Grove Corridor is one of the
 major corridors within the City.                  Within this area are
 opportunities to preserve and enhance smaller businesses as
 well as create key activity nodes at the major intersections
 including Brookhurst Street, Magnolia Avenue, and Beach
 Boulevard.
 Brookhurst Triangle, located at the intersection of Garden
 Grove Boulevard and Brookhurst Street, is in large part vacant,
 and provides the opportunity for a major activity node within
 this district. This intersection is also where Korean, Vietnamese,
 and other businesses converge. Future development should
 reflect the different cultures as well as provide a major focal
 point for the area.
 Further west of Brookhurst Triangle along Garden Grove
 Boulevard is the Korean Business District.                   Two major
 intersections, Magnolia Avenue, and Beach Boulevard, offer                     Modern architecture reflecting
 opportunities for minor activity nodes. These intersection,                    different cultures at key nodes
 although less intense than the Brookhurst Triangle, should also
 serve as focal points for the district. Unique and culturally influenced gateway monuments at
 strategically located intersections would help to identify this area. Around these key nodes,
 development should continue to stay pedestrian in character and reflect the unique character
 of the Korean Business District.
                                                                   Development around key nodes should be
                                                                           pedestrian in character
                    Development at the key intersections
                       should create a sense of arrival
3-16
TRASK CORRIDOR DISTRICT
The Trask Corridor District is the primary automotive sales and service corridor of the City. The
area is envisioned to expand to become a regional destination. Future development and
redevelopment should reinforce district scale, identity, and urban form. A consistent streetscape
design would reinforce that the district has been expanded along the length of Trask Avenue.
Similarly, signs that identify the District would be effective. The Trask Corridor District provides
additional opportunities for new or expanded automobile sales and service businesses and the
redevelopment of the area.                 New development shall protect the adjoining residential
neighborhoods from intrusions by commercial uses and their patrons. The following photos
capture what is envisioned for the area.
        The Trask Corridor District is the primary
    automotive sales and service corridor of the City
                                                                                                 3-17
 MIXED-USE SHOPPING CENTER DISTRICTS
 The older shopping centers and strip malls are the commercial lifelines of the community. . They
 provide needed retail and services to the community and offer opportunities for enhancement
 and expansion. As these commercial areas expand it will be important to respect the character
 of the adjacent single-family neighborhoods while providing aesthetically pleasing gathering
 places for the community. Pedestrian access to these areas is also important. Mixed-use
 shopping districts should create pedestrian access both within the center and between the
 centers and adjacent neighborhoods.
                             Commercial character should respect the neighboring
                                                 residential uses
 FUTURE TRANSIT-ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
 The Future Transit-Oriented Development District is currently comprised of light industrial uses with
 the Union Pacific Railway corridor running along the eastern edge of the district. Should this
 corridor be used for mass transit, this district may have the opportunity to evolve into a transit-
 oriented mixed-use node within the City. The district should encourage mixed-use development
 with a focus on transit and the pedestrian as well as quality development that is compatible with
 the surrounding area and the community.
                       With the potential for future transit in the district, development
                             and redevelopment should cater to the pedestrian.
3-18
LITTLE SAIGON DISTRICT
Located adjacent to the Little Saigon district in
Westminster, the Garden Grove Little Saigon District is
generally located along Brookhurst Avenue south of
the Garden Grove Freeway.
The District is home to a large number of Vietnamese
businesses. The City has recently installed flags and
entry    monuments        to    distinguish     this  area.
Opportunities to strengthen and celebrate this district
include developing detailed signage guidelines,
enhancing        the pedestrian        experience,     and
developing a Vietnamese inspired streetscape and
architecture program.                                               Entry monument in Little Saigon
3.4     GOALS, POLICIES AND
        IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
This Element is organized into goals, policies, and implementation programs. A description of
each is provided in Chapter 1, Introduction. It is important to note that the implementation
programs are specific actions to carry out all of the preceding goals and policies.
  Goal CD-1         Create a positive and distinctive City image by protecting historic resources,
                    and by strengthening the positive qualities of the City’s overall image and
                    neighborhood identity.
Policy CD-1.1       Enhance the positive qualities that give residential, commercial, and industrial
                    areas their unique identities, while also allowing flexibility for innovative design.
Policy CD-1.2       Preserve the unique character and integrity of the City's traditional residential
                    neighborhoods.
Policy CD-1.3       Improve the appearance and function of regional commercial centers
                    through improved site design, landscaping, and architectural integrity.
Policy CD-1.4       Seek to create unique retail spaces that are architecturally rich, pedestrian
                    friendly, culturally sensitive, and economically viable.
Policy CD-1.5       Prepare and implement design guidelines for special districts or areas with
                    unique character in the City of Garden Grove.
CD-IMP-1A           Promote commercial uses near residential neighborhoods that serve local
                    residents and create neighborhood-gathering places.
CD-IMP-1B           Review the existing Zoning Code and develop standards for citywide design
                    considerations, with particular attention to infill development and
                    redevelopment projects and major ground floor additions and renovations to
                    ensure compatibility with surrounding uses.
                                                                                                      3-19

 SIGNAGE
  Goal CD-2    Provide attractive       and   appropriate  signage   throughout  the   City  of
               GardenGrove.
 Policy CD-2.1 Continue and expand the wayfinding signage program throughout the City.
 Policy CD-2.2 Incorporate special signage in unique districts within the City.
 Policy CD-2.3 Prepare and implement comprehensive signage guidelines for commercial,
               residential, industrial, and special uses.
 CD-IMP-2A     Continue the use of monument signs to identify significant areas of the City.
 CD-IMP-2B     Develop updated distinctive street and directional signs, which identify the
               City of Garden Grove.
 CD-IMP-2C     Encourage the use of individually designed entry monuments for new
               residential, commercial, and industrial projects.
 CD-IMP-2D     Develop new sign standards in the Zoning Code that are up to date with
               current industry design such as larger pylon and monument signs for shopping
               centers. Look for opportunities for different types of signs that reinforce the
               character of specific areas such as blade signs and old-fashioned wall-
               painted signs on Main Street/Civic Center District.
 ENTRIES
  Goal CD-3    Clearly marked major entry points into Garden Grove create a sense of
               arrivan and symbolize the City’s identity
 Policy CD-3.1 Encourage entry points that incorporate distinctive landscaping, signage and
               wall treatments appropriate for the area/district.
 Policy CD-3.2 Create gateways that not only identify an area; but portray the character of
               the area.
 CD-IMP-3A     Require unique, cultural, and or heritage inspired gateway monuments.
 CD-IMP-3B     Encourage and implement the development of new logo designs identifying
               special districts and citywide entry signs.
 PATHS AND CORRIDORS
  Goal CD-4    Create comfortable and safe corridors that accommodate all modes of
               transportation.
 Policy CD-4.1 Encourage improvement to the function and appearance of corridors based
               on each corridor's contribution to the City , its land use and transportation
               function, and how it is experienced by the public.
3-20

Policy CD-4.2 Develop a comprehensive or a series of focused streetscape programs to
              retrofit/redevelop primary and secondary corridors with appropriate design
              features, including sidewalks, paving patterns, street trees, parkways, , median
              planting, lighting, benches, trash receptacles, etc.
PolicyCD-4.3  Adopt a comprehensive landscaping program to encourage public-private
              partnerships for landscaping collector and residential streets.
Policy CD-4.4 Require new development and redevelopment projects to improve and
              maintain dedicated alleys location on their sites. In addition, encourage,
              where feasible, the utilization of vacated alleyways.
Policy CD-4.5 Encourage new public and private parking facilities to meet aesthetic and
              functional standards beneficial to the urban environment.
CD-IMP-4A     Require walls and fences that act as attractive elements of the streetscape,
              while providing privacy and views, creative design, and visual continuity.
CD-IMP-4B     Review and update all street standards to support design features that will
              create an attractive and safe environment for pedestrians, transit users, and
              bicyclists.
CD-IMP-4C     Develop a primary, secondary, and residential street tree planting and
              replacement program.
CD-IMP-4D     Develop citywide recommendations for landscape planting including trees
              with appropriate irrigation systems. Encourage water-saving techniques and
              drought-tolerant plants.
CD-IMP-4E     Require that all sides of a building visible from City streets display fully finished
              architectural detail, including finished doors, windows, and exterior surfaces
              identical to, or which complement the front of the building.
CD-IMP-4F     Require landscaping treatment on all parts of a building site, visible from City
              streets.
LANDMARKS
 Goal CD-5    Landmarks contribute to the character and image of Garden Grove.
Policy CD-5.1 Preserve existing landmarks and encourage the creation of new buildings and
              monuments that will function as neighborhood and district landmarks.
Policy CD-5.2 Within new development or redevelopment projects, encourage civic, public,
              or religious buildings to have a special location and prominent design so that
              they function as landmark structures.
CD-IMP-5A     Continue to maintain existing landmarks in the community.
CD-IMP-5B     Encourage new development to create new landmarks for the community.
                                                                                                 3-21
 PUBLIC ART
  Goal CD-6         Public art throughout the community that enhances the image and character
                    of the City.
 Policy CD-6.1      Encourage the development and display of public art to promote the history,
                    heritage, and culture of Garden Grove.
 CD-IMP-6A          Continue funding of and support for the Art in Public Places Program and
                    encourage diversity in the selection of art in public places.
 CD-IMP-6 B         Consider adopting a public art ordinance that charges a fee for commercial
                    and industrial projects.
 CD-IMP-6C          Enable artists to create artwork which enlivens, enriches and enhances the
                    quality of Garden Grove's visual environment and public spaces.
 CD-IMP-6D          Identify locations for placement of substantial culturally or historically
                    influenced public art, along primary corridors, within special districts and as
                    part of major development projects.
 CD-IMP-6E          Look for additional opportunities in the built environment to incorporate public
                    art.
 Related Goals and Policies: Refer to the Parks, Recreation, and Open Space Element for goals
 and policies related to cultural arts, events, and diversity.
 DISTRICTS
  Goal CD-7         Unique and distinct districts will further enhance and strengthen the City’s
                    identity.
 Policy CD-7.1      Encourage future development and redevelopment projects to reinforce
                    district scale, identity, and urban form.
 Policy CD-7.2      Develop unique streetscape palettes for the International West, Brookhurst
                    Triangle/Garden Grove Boulevard, and Civic Center Areas. The landscape
                    palettes shall reinforce the existing character of these districts, for instance,
                    Civic Center includes sycamores along Main Street and on major streets, so
                    the use of sycamores or a similar type of tree would create a consistent
                    landscape element that identifies an important place.
 Policy CD-7.3      Promote linkages between separate districts through bike trails, pedestrian
                    paths, common medians or parkway landscaping in connecting streets, and
                    other physical improvements as necessary.
 CD-IMP-7A          Encourage the use of specific plans, master plans, or other planning and
                    design tools to develop detailed plans, revitalization strategies, and
                    implementation tools for Garden Grove’s districts, incorporating the General
                    Plan 2030 (particularly Community Design) ideas, goals, and policies.
3-22

CD-IMP-7B     Through conditions of project approval, public improvement projects, and
              other measures, support the development of new connections and
              enhancements of existing connections between districts.
CD-IMP-7C     Place design elements that signify district identities at the district entrances
              and at district focal points.
CD-IMP-7D     Establish minimum standards for pedestrian-oriented circulation in the
              International West, Brookhurst Triangle/Garden Grove Boulevard, Civic Center,
              and other pedestrian-oriented districts.
CD-IMP-7E     Urban Trails on public and/or private property shall have identifiable
              landscape plantings and signage.
GATHERING PLACES
 Goal CD-8    Lively and attractive activity nodes or gathering places, with a combination of
              quality seating, shade, fountains, and other pedestrian amenities enhance the
              experience for people to gather.
Policy CD-8.1 Ensure that activity nodes and gathering places are visible from the street or
              parking areas.
Policy CD-8.2 Incorporate interesting design features, which draw people of all ages
              together such as novelty fountains, public art, or historical references.
Policy CD-8.3 Provide ample and comfortable sitting areas, preferably moveable seating, in
              shaded plazas, courtyards, and arcades.
CD-IMP-8A     Amend the City’s Zoning Code to incorporate development standards.
                                                                                           3-23

 This page intentionally left blank.
3-24
                                                       LEGEND
                                                         NOT TO SCALE
                                      SOURCE: RBF Consulting.
                     Corridors, Entries, and Landmarks
05/08 • JN 10-104660
                                                                      EXHIBIT CD-1

                                      LEGEND
                                        NOT TO SCALE
                     SOURCE: RBF Consulting.
                                             Districts
05/08 • JN 10-104660
                                                     EXHIBIT CD-2

G                                     Chapter 4
       G
General P
          l an 2 0 30
                      Economic Development Element
Chapter 4
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
ELEMENT
4.1 INTRODUCTION
Economic development is a critical component of any successful
community. The importance of economic development in
Garden Grove is twofold: 1) The City must enhance its revenues
to have the financial resources to increase the prosperity of their
residents through the delivery of quality police, fire, housing,
recreation, transportation, and other services, and 2) The City
can indirectly enhance the prosperity of their residents by
understanding economic needs and taking actions to increase            Embassy Suites Hotel in the
the City’s competitiveness. This also requires residents to have     International West Resort Area
access to workforce training and other opportunities to enhance
their skills and training. The Economic Development Element of
the General Plan will set the framework for a balanced and
stable economic base in Garden Grove. The background report
prepared by Dr. John Husing in April 2008 serves as the basis for
direction in this Element and can be found in Appendix G.
4.2 AUTHORITY FOR THE ELEMENT
The Economic Development Element is not a mandatory
element required by State Planning Law. The City has added this
Element to its General Plan because the economic health of the
City is important in order to maintain and improve the quality of
life in the community.
4.3 KEY THEMES AND VISION FOR
          GENERAL PLAN
Local governments can promote economic development by
establishing a favorable environment for business attraction and
retention,     private    investment,  economic     diversification,
entrepreneurship, and the attraction of well paying jobs. Garden
Grove’s current economic condition makes the City well
positioned to enhance its economic vitality through a number of               Crystal Cathedral
key opportunities, including the following described below.                on Chapman Avenue
TOURISM
The City of Garden Grove is located in the midst of an Orange
County economy that is one of the most successful in America.
Given the proximity to the Disneyland Resort, the Anaheim
Convention Center, and the Crystal Cathedral, Garden Grove
has benefited from its efforts to provide entertainment and
                                                                                  4-1

 lodging. Expanding hotel and tourism amenities, especially along Harbor Boulevard, would
 bring additional revenues to the City.
 BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT
 The City’s Business Attraction, Retention, and Expansion
 Program works in partnership with the business community
 to retain and attract companies to Garden Grove by
 providing support, economic incentives, and development
 opportunities including:
          Financial assistance from the Redevelopment
          Agency;                                                          Restaurant in the International West
          Assistance with commercial loans;                                            Resort Area
          Industrial development bond financing;
          Assistance with site location and permits;
          Special planning and coordination for commercial rehabilitation programs; and,
          Assistance with infrastructure and water systems.
 As the City looks ahead with this General Plan, it is imperative that
 the City continues to provide for fiscal stability through the
 attraction of new businesses and the retention and/or expansion
 of existing businesses within the community.
 RETAIL SECTOR
 Garden Grove’s retail market has grown modestly in the past
 decade. From 1990-2005, its taxable sales per capita grew by 19.0
 percent.      The City has benefited from service station and
 automotive sales due to the City’s location along the Garden
 Grove 22-freeway. In addition, the City’s industrial zone has
 helped by providing direct retail sales to customers. On the other
 hand, Garden Grove does not have a major destination retail mall
 to compete with the numerous nearby centers like The Block                      Hyatt Regency Orange County
 (Orange), Westminster Mall (Westminster), Main Place (Santa Ana),                Hotel in the International West
 Anaheim Plaza (Anaheim), or Bella Terra (Huntington Beach). Thus,                          Resort Area
 while the City’s retail sales ($1.3 billion in 1999 to $1.8 billion in 2006)
 are growing, its per capita retail sales were below Orange County
 as a whole, indicating that sales taxes are leaking from the City to
 surrounding communities.
 EMPLOYMENT
 Orange County has become a major professional and financial
 center within Southern California. In many areas of Orange
 County the demand for new office and industrial space is
 exceeding supply. Given the lack of available land in Garden
 Grove, and the fact that much of Orange County’s job growth is
 now in offices, the City needs a strategy for expanding the
 availability of such space to capture new demand from other                        Office Max located in the
 areas of Orange County.                                                                  Industrial Zone
4-2

Potential growth in office and industrial activity is equally dependent on retaining current firms,
as well as attracting new firms. As other cities and states compete for new industry, it is critical
that Garden Grove be able to retain, if not expand, its current office and industrial base. Both
existing and new firms must be made aware of the City’s ability to satisfy their needs.
LABOR FORCE DEVELOPMENT
Another opportunity for the City is to provide better education and preparation of the City’s
labor force for jobs of the future. The City works closely with the Garden Grove Unified School
District, community colleges, and surrounding universities to develop an educated and well-
prepared work force. Enhancing the programs available to resident’s seeking jobs, and
increasing the job preparedness will develop a strong and qualified workforce that attracts
employers and businesses of all sizes into the community.
FISCAL STABILITY
Garden Grove currently has a fiscally sustainable City budget, though it is highly dependant on
retail sales tax revenue. In recent years, Garden Grove’s revenue has grown strong. From fiscal
year 1999 to 2007 revenues increased 60.8 percent, while inflation was just 30.9 percent during
this timeframe. In addition, City revenue per capita grew 45.7 percent, indicating that the City
has more purchasing power per resident to supply services. However, the City should develop a
strategy to reduce retail leakage to ensure sales tax generation continues to grow.1
4.4 GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
This Element is organized into goals, policies, and implementation programs. A description of
each is provided in Chapter 1, Introduction. It is important to note that the implementation
programs are specific actions to carry out all of the preceding goals and policies.
TOURISM
  Goal ED-1          Opportunities for development of tourism-related businesses shall be
                     enhanced.
Policy ED-1.1        Continue to encourage the development and expansion of hotel facilities in
                     key corridors of the City (i.e., Harbor Boulevard).
Policy ED-1.2        Investigate potential nighttime entertainment activities, which would
                     encourage tourists and business oriented travelers to remain in the City of
                     Garden Grove for the duration of their visit (i.e., theater events, restaurants,
                     movie theaters, commercial recreation opportunities, etc.).
Policy ED-1.3        Continue to explore traditional, non-traditional, and international marketing
                     approaches to attract local, regional, and foreign tourism.
Policy ED-1.4        Pursue opportunities for a unique theme park that takes advantage of
                     potential international commerce and cultural activities.
ED-IMP-1A            Use City resources and assist the development community with available
                     financial and economic incentives, where feasible.
         1 Garden Grove Economic Strategy. John E. Husing, Ph.D. April 29, 2008.
                                                                                                 4-3

 ED-IMP-1B     Encourage the upgrading of the hotel/motel facilities within the City that are
               older and/or dilapidated.
 ED-IMP-1C     Concentrate tourist supported commercial activities in selected areas of the
               City in order to create identifiable centers of interest for visitors.
 ED-IMP-1D     Continue to coordinate with visitor and tourism bureaus.
 ED-IMP-1E     Develop a Streetscape Plan along Harbor Boulevard (International West) that
               links hotels and tourist-oriented businesses along an attractive, walkable
               street.    Develop clear streetscape elements that provide identifiable
               characteristics that reinforce to a visitor they are in a unique district of Garden
               Grove.
 BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT
  Goal ED-2    The City must attract new businesses, while supporting and assisting those
               already located within Garden Grove.
 Policy ED-2.1 Support a business friendly environment for new businesses to locate and
               existing businesses to flourish.
 Policy ED-2.2 Continue to enhance programs which work toward retaining and expanding
               businesses in Garden Grove.
 Policy ED-2.3 Explore the feasibility of establishing an International Cultural and Commerce
               Center, which would provide for the exchange of products, ideas, and
               commerce on an international scale.
 Policy ED-2.4 Examine the feasibility of initiating activities in for-profit retailing of the
               products of the arts, skills, and crafts of ethnic groups in Garden Grove.
 ED-IMP-2A     Work with the Vietnamese, Hispanic, and Korean business community to
               develop strategies to help bring success and distinction to their firms.
 ED-IMP-2B     Identify top non-store (including sales by manufacturers, distributors, lumber
               companies, and other such entities) retail sales providers and begin a process
               of interviewing them on a regular basis to understand who they are, what
               needs they have, and if there are any issues that they face in remaining in the
               City.
 ED-IMP-2C     Maintain an open line of communication with industrial firms in the City.
               Develop a sensitivity to particular company needs, concerns, problems, and
               opportunities. Monitor major firms’ needs through on-going contact.
 ED-IMP-2D     Annually review and enhance the City’s Business Attraction, Retention, and
               Expansion Program.
 ED-IMP-2E     Monitor market information in nearby communities where businesses have
               relocated, in order to more effectively compete with these communities and
               retain the current retail, office and industrial firms located in the City.
4-4

ED-IMP-2F     Continue to coordinate with the Chambers of Commerce, Orange County
              economic development groups, and other business associations to attract,
              retain, and expand businesses.
ED-IMP-2G     Continue to sponsor opportunities to assist the business community through
              speakers, seminars, training workshops and meetings.
ED-IMP-2H     Consider placement of advertisements in trade journals and other media
              forms which market the benefits of locating a business to Garden Grove.
RETAIL SECTOR
 Goal ED-3    The City must maximize its market potential in order to enhance and retain
              retail opportunities to serve the population.
Policy ED-3.1 Monitor the conditions and status of older shopping centers and smaller,
              underutilized commercially zoned parcels.
Policy ED-3.2 Provide rehabilitation assistance in targeted commercial districts to enable
              the upgrading of commercial properties.
Policy ED-3.3 Enhance and retain retail opportunities to serve the population.
Policy ED-3.4 Continue to encourage bringing big box retailers to the community.
Policy ED-3.5 Continue to retain, expand, and support the auto-related uses along Trask
              Avenue.
Policy ED-3.6 Encourage the concentration of commercial clusters in the City.
Policy ED-3.7 Encourage and facilitate the development of mixed use.
ED-IMP-3A     Evaluate and target underutilized and/or older centers; develop strategies
              with the owners and tenants to revitalize these areas. While the designation
              of many underutilized and/or older centers with a new land use of mixed-use
              allows the opportunity to add residential units, the City should carefully review
              the loss of existing commercial/ retail space.
ED-IMP-3B     Focus on upgrading dilapidated centers in order to encourage new or
              expanding businesses to relocate to these areas.
ED-IMP-3C     Provide opportunities for mixed-use development that responds to market
              and community needs in terms of size, location and cost.
ED-IMP-3D     Provide informational material to the owners of underutilized or dilapidated
              properties, identifying the types of assistance available and work with them in
              upgrading their properties.
ED-IMP-3E     Work with owners of commercial sites, counseling them on market analysis of
              securing commercial viable tenants, unified design guidance to provide
              attractive facades, landscaping, and client amenities, and resources for
              funding improvements.
                                                                                            4-5
 ED-IMP-3F     Provide assistance to local businesses with improvement programs through
               the commercial revitalization program as opportunities arise.
 ED-IMP-3G     Support the provision of incentives for private development and
               redevelopment (as appropriate) joint public-private partnerships, and public
               improvements through redevelopment actions.
 ED-IMP-3H     Encourage specialty retail development to concentrate in targeted areas of
               the City to establish “critical mass” thresholds of such uses.
 INDUSTRIAL SECTOR
  Goal ED-4    A stable existing industrial base and enhanced opportunities are important for
               the future industrial base.
 Policy ED-4.1 Allow conversions of larger, older industrial structures into smaller units.
               Continue to monitor the trend of industrial conversions in Garden Grove and
               Orange County.
 Policy ED-4.2 Continue to monitor the availability of vacant facilities or land zoned for
               industrial purposes and provide information to firms in Garden Grove.
 Policy ED-4.3 Support a diversity of industries in the City.
 Policy ED-4.4 Monitor and limit the amount of non-industrial activity in industrial areas.
 Policy ED-4.5 Evaluate the impacts on both the commercial and industrial uses in industrial
               areas.
 ED-IMP-4A     Maintain on-going contact with local realtors to keep abreast of local real
               estate prices and trends relative to surrounding competitive areas.
 ED-IMP-4B     Periodically assess the ability of the City to meet the growth needs of local
               firms.
 ED-IMP-4C     Initiate strategies to pursue those industries that have favorable growth
               prospects, a work force that has a relatively large number of managerial and
               skilled positions, and wage rates of non-supervisorial employees that are
               above average for manufacturing industries.
 OFFICE SPACE AND “RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT”
  Goal ED-5    The development of office and research and development space to meet the
               needs of the community and to provide jobs for local residents is
               encouraged.
 Policy ED-5.1 Develop and implement programs to attract new regional office users.
 Policy ED-5.2 Develop programs that encourage home-based businesses seeking
               expansion or new, small size, startup businesses to utilize incubator office
               spaces within the City.
4-6

Policy ED-5.3 Encourage support services as part of office/industrial and mixed use
              development (i.e., child care, convenience shopping, personal services,
              restaurants, etc.).
ED-IMP-5A     Initiate strategies to pursue office and research and development employers.
              These types of employers have a potential work force with a higher number of
              managerial and skilled positions and generally higher wage rates
              commensurate with the position and/or skill.
ED-IMP-5B     Periodically assess the ability of the City to meet the growth needs of office
              and research and development firms.
LABOR FORCE DEVELOPMENT
 Goal ED-6    Provide programs that increase the ability of community members of all ages
              to find quality employment.
Policy ED 6.1 Continue to promote job training, skill enhancement, and educational
              excellence for people of all ages in the community.
ED-IMP-6A     Work with local educational institutions, employers, real estate developers,
              and others to anticipate changes in employment demands in the City.
ED-IMP-6B     Continue to support employee training/re-training programs and employer-
              staffed programs to provide the skill requirements of current and prospective
              employers.
FISCAL STABLITY
 Goal ED-7    Cumulative growth that provides net fiscal gains to the City is desired.
Policy ED-7.1 Strive for the cost of services to be balanced with the revenues generated on
              a recurring basis.
Policy ED-7.2 Monitor the fiscal health of the community and focus on major public/private
              economic achievements.
Policy ED-7.3 Prioritize capital improvement investments based on the potential fiscal
              revenue stream that will be generated by the development related to the
              capital improvements.
Policy ED-7.4 Identify and pursue categories of resident retail demands, which are not
              being met within the City.
Policy ED-7.5 Encourage upscale restaurants to locate in clusters in areas targeted for
              specialty retail.
ED-IMP-7A     Provide, when appropriate, fiscal impact analyses in order to provide input
              into assessment of citywide impact of development activities and to
              determine what costs, if any, to the City may be subject to mitigation.
                                                                                         4-7
 ED-IMP-7B Continue to assess the structure of utility rates and user fees to ensure that
           such rates and fees adequately cover the true cost to the City.
 ED-IMP-7C Prepare a Community Development Annual Report to the community and
           City Council.
 ED-IMP-7D Develop an Economic Five-Year Plan. As part of this plan, develop a variety
           of economic incentives to generate a balance of projects that will contribute
           to the local economy.
 ED-IMP-7E Identify major capital improvements necessary to attract desired levels of
           development to the City and achieve other goals of the Economic
           Development Element, such as streetscape, median, and infrastructure
           improvements.
 ED-IMP-7F Evaluate the potential fiscal revenue streams associated with targeted land
           uses, and prioritize capital improvements based on the extent to which
           specific capital improvements will facilitate the development of fiscally
           positive land uses.
 ED-IMP-7G Periodically evaluate which retail categories are experiencing leakage and
           approach existing retailers within these categories (specifically the upscale
           restaurants) and encourage their relocation to, or expansion in, Garden
           Grove.
4-8
G                            Chapter 5
       G
General P
          l an 2 0 30
                      Circulation Element
Chapter 5
CIRCULATION ELEMENT
5.1 INTRODUCTION
The Circulation Element represents the City’s overall transportation
plan. The transportation plan consists not only of the physical
transportation system itself, such as streets, highways, bicycle
routes and sidewalks, but also to the various modes of
transportation, such as cars, buses, trucks (goods movement), rail,
bicycles, ridesharing and walking, as well. Circulation also refers
to the movement of people and goods and products within and
through the City. The circulation and transportation system plays
an important role in shaping the overall structure and form of the
City, in that it both divides and connects land uses at the same
time.
The relationship of the Circulation Element to the Land Use
Element is critical since the circulation system must adequately
handle future traffic as the City and surrounding areas continue
to grow, and provide the means to move people and goods
through and within the City of Garden Grove. Land use and
circulation must be closely tied to ensure that citizens are able to
move in and around the City to locations where they live, work,
shop, and spend leisure hours. The circulation system is directly
affected, and even shaped by existing and future land use
patterns.
The Circulation Element identifies and establishes the City's
policies governing the system of roadways, intersections, bicycle
paths, pedestrian ways and other components of the circulation
system, which collectively provide for the movement of people
and goods throughout the City.             The Circulation Element
establishes official city policy that:
         Identifies the transportation facilities that will be required
         to serve both present and future vehicular and non-
         vehicular travel demand in the City;
         Identifies classifications    and    design   standards     for
         circulation facilities; and
         Identifies strategies to implement the City's circulation
         system.
The Circulation Element describes existing circulation conditions
in the City, and establishes standards for implementation of
future improvements in conjunction with planned growth, and
provides a method for measuring system performance for future
updates.       The Element considers not only the physical
                                                                         5-1

 requirements of the transportation system (roadway facility type, number of lanes, etc.), but also
 operational issues such as the provision of transit services, and programs and policies that
 encourage use of alternative transit modes.
 5.2 AUTHORITY FOR ELEMENT
 Government Code Section 65302 (b) requires that a General Plan include:
      “A circulation element consisting of the general location and extent of existing and
      proposed major thoroughfares, transportation routes, terminals, and other local public
      utilities and facilities, all correlated with the land use element of the plan.”
 5.3 RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER PLANS
 CONGESTION MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
 The City of Garden Grove is required to show continued compliance with the countywide
 Congestion Management Program (CMP). Currently, SR-22 Freeway, Valley View Street, Katella
 Avenue, Harbor Boulevard, and Westminster Avenue are arterials in the CMP Highway System. In
 addition, the intersections of SR-22/Harbor Boulevard and SR-22/Valley View Street are included
 in the highway system for level of service determination.
 Since the inception of the countywide CMP guidelines, the City of Garden Grove has enjoyed
 compliance with all provisions of the program. The benefits of compliance with the CMP
 provisions include the allocation of the City's fair share of gas tax subventions collected by the
 State of California.
 GROWTH MANAGEMENT PROGRAM AND MEASURE M AND RENEWED
 MEASURE M COMPLIANCE
 The City of Garden Grove participates, and will continue to participate, in the inter-jurisdictional
 forums as part of the Measure M and Renewed Measure M Growth Management Program.
 Measure M began in 1991; the projected amount of Measure M towards the City of Garden
 Grove was about $30 million and the projected amount for the Renewed Measure M is about
 $98 million. The revenues generated under this measure will be allocated through a variety of
 programs to fund freeway, transit, and local streets and roads projects. As part of Growth
 Management Areas (GMA) 2, 3, and 6, Garden Grove shares in these forums with the Cities of
 Anaheim, Orange, Villa Park, Santa Ana, Stanton, Los Alamitos, Seal Beach, Fountain Valley,
 Cypress, La Palma, Westminster, Huntington Beach and Buena Park. The purpose of these
 forums, as stated in the Measure M Ordinance is “to cooperate in easing cumulative traffic
 impacts and coordinating improvements in transportation and other facilities at the inter-
 jurisdictional level.”
 Provision that are part of the Measure M program in the City of Garden Grove include traffic
 signal synchronization demonstration projects along Euclid Street and OCTA Bus service
 discounts for Garden Grove’s seniors and disabled community members. A Renewed Measure
 M Early Action Plan is in place and will continue transportation improvement in Orange County
 for another 30 years until 2041.
 Pursuant to Measure M policy requirements, cities in Orange County, including Garden Grove,
 must satisfy the specific requirements to be eligible for receiving Measure M funds. Those
 requirements are detailed in the General Plan EIR.
5-2

The City of Garden Grove has complied with all of the Measure M requirements, including
adoption of a Growth Management Element (March 26, 1992) and a TDM Ordinance (April 23,
1991).
REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM
The Regional Transportation Improvement Program (RTIP) is the Southern California Association of
Government’s compilation of state, federal, and local funded transportation projects. In
addition to projects identified in the STIP, the RTIP includes federal Congestion Mitigation Air
Quality (CMAQ) and Surface Transportation Program (STP) funds, other federal funds, and
projects entirely funded out of local and private funds.
The following projects that are included in the 2008 RTIP are partially or entirely within the Plan
area:
         Harbor Boulevard ITS; and
         Connect 21 Signals on the west side of the City to the TMC.
5.4 EXISTING CIRCULATION SYSTEM (2007/2008)
The existing regional and local roadway network in Garden Grove is a hierarchical system of
highways and local streets developed to provide regional traffic movement and local access.
The following section provides a description of the functional classification of the facilities within
the City. Exhibit CIR-1, Existing Circulation System and MPAH Designations, illustrates the existing
circulation system within the City.
REGIONAL ACCESS
Regional roadways include those facilities that serve regional demand and under the jurisdiction
of other agencies, such as Caltrans. Within the city limits of Garden Grove, the Garden Grove
Freeway (SR-22) is the primary regional facility. SR-22 is the primary regional facility that provides
access to the City of Garden Grove. The facility has four general-purpose lanes and one
carpool lane in each direction, plus auxiliary lanes between interchanges. It is considered as a
limited-access corridor between the Costa Mesa Freeway (SR-55) to the east and the San Diego
Freeway (I-405) to the west. There are eight full-access interchanges on SR-22 within the City.
These interchanges are: Garden Grove Boulevard/Haster Street; Harbor Boulevard; Euclid Street;
Brookhurst Street; Magnolia Street; Beach Boulevard; Knott Street; and Valley View Street.
I-405 also provides regional access and circulation in the westerly end of Garden Grove at Bolsa
Chica Road/Valley View Street. In the vicinity of Garden Grove, I-405 is a ten-lane limited
access corridor that provides regional circulation from Orange County in the south to Los
Angeles County in the north.
While not in the city limits, access to the Santa Ana Freeway (I-5) is provided less than one mile
from the City’s easterly border, at State College Boulevard and Chapman Avenue. I-5 is a major
regional transportation corridor traversing the State of California from the Mexico border to the
south to the Oregon border to the north. Currently, I-5 proximate to Garden Grove is a ten-lane
freeway plus carpool lanes.
LOCAL CIRCULATION
Local circulation within the City of Garden Grove is provided by a primarily grid-pattern system
of arterial streets, most of which are under the sole jurisdiction of the City. The local arterial street
system is classified by a functional hierarchy.
                                                                                                   5-3

 The network of major roadways is primarily designed in a north-south and east-west grid pattern
 with major and primary arterials spaced between one mile and one-half mile intervals. Many of
 the major and primary arterials within the City of Garden Grove are built out to the full paved
 cross-section along the entire length. Local streets generally follow the same grid pattern.
 Exhibit CIR-2, General Plan Typical Roadway Cross-Sections, depicts typical cross-sections for all
 of the roadway classifications.
                                                          Table 5-1
                                             Arterial Highway Classification
                 Number of                      Right-of-        Daily Volume
      Type                        Median                                                              Function
                    Lanes                       Way (ft)1          Capacity2
                                                                                  Carry large volume of regional traffic on
 Principal             8            Yes            160              72,000
                                                                                  high capacity thoroughfare.
                                                                                  Carry large volume of regional traffic not
 Major                 6            Yes            120              56,300
                                                                                  handled by freeways.
                                                                                  Carry regional traffic, but with less capacity
 Primary               4            Yes            100              37,500
                                                                                  than Major arterial.
                                                                                  Distribute traffic between local streets and
 Secondary             4             No             80              25,000
                                                                                  Major and Primary arterials.
 1 Right-of-way width is a general guide, as consistency with the County MPAH is measured by number of lanes.
 2 Capacity volume is based on County of Orange MPAH standards for an acceptable LOS E. It should be noted that the City of
    Garden Grove LOS threshold for streets is LOS D.
 Principal Arterials
 Principal arterials are eight-lane facilities that provide service to non-local through trips with
 minimal direct access to adjacent land uses. They have a design cross-section of eight lanes
 (four in each direction) with medians and turn lanes at a limited number of access points.
 Regional arterials are typically within a 160-foot right-of-way. At the Level of Service (LOS) E,
 most regional arterials can carry up to 72,000 vehicles per day. Bike lanes may also be included
 on regional arterials where separate facilities are not available.
 Principal arterials comprise approximately three miles of the circulation system of the City of
 Garden Grove. Principal arterials include the following roadways:
           Beach Boulevard – Garden Grove Boulevard to Trask Avenue
           Katella Avenue - Euclid Street to Dale Street
 Major Arterials
 Major arterials are primarily intended to serve through, non-local traffic and provide limited local
 access. They generally have a cross-section of three through lanes, and a median for left-
 turning traffic in each direction. Major arterials are designated within a 120-foot right-of-way.
 Bike routes may be included on major arterials when separate facilities are not available.
 However, the wide right-of-way sometimes allows for the development of off-street facilities. At
 LOS E, major arterials can accommodate up to 56,300 vehicles per day.
5-4

Major arterials comprise approximately ten miles of the circulation system of the City of Garden
Grove. Major arterials include the following roadways:
          Valley View Street - Catalina Avenue to SR-22 Freeway
          Brookhurst Street – Katella Avenue to Hazard Avenue
          Harbor Boulevard - Chapman Avenue to Westminster Boulevard
          Bolsa Avenue - Ward Street to Starboard Street
          Westminster Avenue - Euclid Street to eastern City limit
          Fairview Road - south of Trask Avenue to Garden Grove Boulevard
          Knott Avenue - Patterson Drive to Garden Grove Boulevard
Primary Arterials
Primary Arterials are intended to service through, non-local traffic and provide limited local
access. They have a cross-section of two through lanes traffic in each direction and a median
for left-turning. Primary arterials are four-lane divided highways. The function of a Primary Arterial
is similar to that of a Major Arterial; the principal difference is capacity. Primary Arterials are
designated within a 100-foot right-of-way. Bike lanes may be included on primary arterials when
separate facilities are not available. However, the wide right-of-way sometimes allows for the
development of off-street facilities. At LOS E, Primary Arterials can accommodate up to 37,500
vehicles per day.
Primary arterials comprise approximately 23 miles of the total citywide circulation system.
Primary arterials in the City of Garden Grove include the following roadways:
          Magnolia Street - Katella Avenue to Westminster Boulevard
          Euclid Street - Katella Avenue to Chapman Avenue
          Euclid Street – Chapman Avenue to Hazard Avenue (six-lane section)
          Haster Street - Tiller Street to SR-22 Freeway
          Chapman Avenue - Knott Avenue to west of Beach Boulevard, west of Dale Street to
          Lewis Street
          Garden Grove Boulevard - Knott Avenue to west of Park Vine Street
          Westminster Boulevard - west of Erin Street to Euclid Street
Secondary Arterials
Secondary arterials provide more local access than the major arterials and primary arterials,
while also providing a lesser level of non-local through traffic service. A secondary arterial serves
as a collector distributing traffic between local streets, major and primary arterials in the City of
Garden Grove. Secondary arterials have a cross-section of four through lanes and a left-turn
lane within an 80-foot wide right-of-way. Bike lanes may be included on secondary arterials
when separate facilities are not available. These roadways are usually undivided with possible
limited on-street parking, turn lanes at major intersections, and may have partial control of
vehicular and pedestrian access from driveways, cross streets, and crosswalks. Secondary
Arterials can accommodate between up to 25,000 vehicles per day at level of service E.
In the City of Garden Grove, Secondary arterials make up approximately 25 miles of the
circulation system. Secondary arterials include the following roadways:
          Western Avenue - Simmons Place to Garden Grove Boulevard
          Dale Street - Katella Avenue to Orangewood Avenue, near Linmar
          Meadows to Chapman Avenue, Enault Lane to Garden Grove Boulevard
          Gilbert Street - Katella Avenue to Garden Grove Boulevard
                                                                                                5-5

          Ninth Street - Orangewood Avenue to Garden Grove Boulevard
          West Street - Orangewood Avenue to Garden Grove Boulevard
          Lewis Street - Chapman Avenue to Garden Grove Boulevard
          Orangewood Avenue – Knott Avenue to Western Avenue, west of Nearing Way to Euclid
          Street, Ninth Street to west of Harbor Boulevard
          Lampson Avenue - west of Manley Street to Hoover Street, east of Beach Boulevard to
          Lewis Street
          Trask Avenue - Beach Boulevard to Fairview Street
          Springdale Street - SR-22 Freeway to north of Santa Barbara Street
          Newhope Street - Westminster Avenue to Garden Grove Boulevard
          Newland Avenue - Westminster Avenue to Garden Grove Boulevard
          Ward Street - Edinger Avenue to Hazard Avenue
          Hazard Avenue - east of Bushard Street to Euclid Street
          Mc Fadden Avenue – Ward Street to Reeve Street
 Local Residential Streets
 These streets serve adjacent residential land uses only, allowing access to residential driveways
 and providing on-street parking for neighborhoods. Local residential streets in Garden Grove
 are designated 36-foot roadways within either 50-foot, 56-foot, or 60-foot rights-of-way. These
 streets are not intended to serve through traffic traveling from one street to another. Traffic
 volumes on these streets should not exceed 2,500 vehicles per day and 200-300 vehicles per
 hour.
 OCTA Smart Streets
 The Smart Street concept seeks to improve roadway traffic capacity and smooth traffic flow
 through measures such as traffic signal synchronization, bus turnouts, intersection improvements
 and addition of travel lanes by removing on-street parking and consolidating driveways. Along
 with the State highways, the Smart Street network comprises the Congestion Management
 Program (CMP) highway system, the performance of which determines compliance with CMP
 level of service (LOS) thresholds. This special street designation allows for the development of
 improvements that enhance the traffic carrying capacity of this roadway in excess of the Major
 arterial designation.
 Beach Boulevard was the first Smart Street project to be implemented. Other Smart Streets in
 the City of Garden Grove include Katella Avenue, Harbor Boulevard, Bolsa Avenue, and Valley
 View Streets. All are designated as Smart Streets in the County of Orange Congestion
 Management Program highway system.
 SMART STREETS IN THE CITY OF GARDEN GROVE
          Beach Boulevard (SR-39) – Pacific Coast Highway (SR-1) to Imperial Highway (SR-90)
          Bolsa Avenue/First Street – Bolsa Chica Road to Santa Ana Freeway (I-5)
          Harbor Boulevard – Imperial Highway (SR-90) to Costa Mesa Freeway (SR-55) extended
          Katella Avenue – San Gabriel River Freeway (I-605) to Costa Mesa Freeway (SR-55)
          Valley View Street – Garden Grove Freeway (SR-22) to Riverside Freeway (SR-91)
 5.5 EXISTING VOLUMES AND LEVELS OF SERVICE
 Sixty-three intersections and 133 roadway segments were selected for the evaluation of current
 traffic conditions in the City. Intersection turning movement counts at the 63 locations were
 conducted during the month of June in 2007; twenty-four hour traffic counts were conducted in
5-6

April 2008 by the City at selected roadway segments. The evaluation methodology and analysis
results are presented below.
Table 5-2, Roadway Segment Level of Service Criteria, defines and describes the level of service
criteria for roadway segments. The levels of service indicators for the roadway system are based
on the volume of traffic for designated sections of roadway during a typical day and the
practical vehicular capacity of that segment. These two measures for each monitored segment
of the roadway system are expressed as a ratio. The volume-to-capacity ratio (V/C) is then
converted to an alpha descriptor identifying operating conditions and expressed as a level of
service, LOS A through LOS F. LOS A identifies the best operating conditions along a section of
roadway and is characterized by free-flow traffic, low volumes, and little or no restrictions on
maneuverability. LOS F characterizes forced traffic flow with high traffic densities, slow travel
speeds, and often stop-and-go conditions. City of Garden Grove has established LOS D as its
criterion for an acceptable LOS.
                                                           Table 5-2
                                    Roadway Segment Level of Service Criteria
    Level of                                                                                             Volume-to-
                                                       Interpretation
    Service                                                                                             Capacity Ratio
               Free-flow speeds prevail. Vehicles are almost unimpeded in their ability to maneuver
       A                                                                                                  0.00 - 0.60
               within the traffic stream
               Reasonably free-flow speeds are maintained. The ability to maneuver within traffic is
       B                                                                                                  0.61 - 0.70
               only slightly restricted.
               Flow with speeds at or near free-flow speed of the roadway. Freedom to maneuver
       C       within the traffic stream is noticeably restricted and lane changes require more care      0.71 - 0.80
               and vigilance on the part of the driver.
               Speeds begin to decline slightly with increasing flows. In this range, density begins to
       D       increase somewhat more quickly with increasing flow. Freedom to maneuver within the        0.81 - 0.90
               traffic stream is noticeably limited.
               Operation at capacity with no usable gaps in the traffic stream. Any disruption to the
       E                                                                                                  0.91 - 1.0
               traffic stream has little or no room to dissipate.
       F       Breakdown the traffic flow with long queues of traffic. Unacceptable conditions.              >1.0
 Source: Highway Capacity Manual, 2000.
ROADWAY CAPACITIES
The capacity per lane for each roadway type can be defined for different analysis periods. The
theoretical daily capacities of roadways determined by the number of lanes and type of
roadway were previously shown in Table 5-1. These capacity assumptions were used to
calculate the LOS for the City’s roadway segments.
EXISTING ROADWAY SEGMENT OPERATING CONDITIONS
The General Plan EIR provides a detailed summary of existing conditions, which will include text,
tables and exhibits. This section of the Element will just highlight key points about the existing
conditions.
The majority of the City’s arterial segments are operating at an acceptable LOS D or better
conditions. Those roadway segments operating with a V/C ratio of 0.90 or higher (i.e., volume
                                                                                                                    5-7

 greater than 90 percent of capacity, the LOS D threshold) are considered to be operating
 deficiently according to the City’s standards. The following roadway segments are operating at
 LOS E or F:
          Harbor Boulevard from Hazard Avenue to Garden Grove Boulevard
          Magnolia Street from Trask Avenue to Garden Grove Boulevard
          Newhope Street from Westminster Boulevard to Trask Avenue
          Western Avenue from Chapman Avenue to Orangewood Avenue
          Valley View Street from south of Garden Grove Boulevard to Santa Catalina Avenue
          Chapman Avenue from Haster Street to Lewis Street
          Garden Grove Boulevard from Valley View Street to Holder Avenue
          Garden Grove Boulevard from Beach Boulevard to Dale Street
          Lampson Avenue from Dale Street to Magnolia Street
          Lampson Avenue from West Street to Lewis Street
          Trask Avenue from Magnolia Street to Galway Street
          Trask Avenue from Euclid Street to Newhope Street
          Westminster Boulevard from Brookhurst Street to Bowen Street
          Beach Boulevard from Trask Avenue to Lampson Avenue
          Fairview Street from Trask Avenue to Garden Grove Boulevard
 Although these segments exceed the LOS D threshold, other factors such as intersection level of
 service and freeway access intersection operation, will determine actual operational
 performance.
 INTERSECTION LEVEL OF SERVICE
 The efficiency of traffic operations at an intersection is also measured in terms of Level of Service
 (LOS). The intersection level of service concept is a measure of average operating conditions at
 intersections during an hour and is based on a volume-to-capacity (V/C) ratio for signalized
 locations and average delay per vehicle in seconds for stop sign-controlled intersections. Traffic
 operating conditions in the City were analyzed using the “Intersection Capacity Utilization” (ICU)
 methodology for signalized intersections and the “Highway Capacity Manual” (HCM) for
 unsignalized intersections per the City of Garden Grove guidelines.
 Levels range from A to F with A representing excellent (free-flow) conditions and F representing
 extreme congestion. The ICU methodology compares the amount of traffic a through or turn
 lane is able to process (the capacity) to the level of traffic during the peak hours (volume). The
 critical V/C ratios are combined to determine the ICU value (V/C ratio) for the entire
 intersection.
 The levels of service definitions for signalized and unsignalized intersections are provided in Table
 5-3, Level of Service Definitions for Signalized Intersections, and Table 5-4, Level of Service
 Definitions for Unsignalized Intersections, respectively. It should be noted that the LOS definitions
 shown in the tables represent average conditions for all vehicles at an intersection across a one-
 hour period. Table 5-3 provides the relationship between the volume/capacity ratio for
 signalized intersections and the associated level of service. Table 5-4 represents the relationship
 between the average delay and its associated LOS for unsignalized intersections.
 Due to State legislation and the Orange County Congestion Management Program (CMP)
 requirements, a CMP highway network and level of service standards have been adopted. The
 CMP arterials in the City of Garden Grove are: the SR-22 Freeway, Valley View Street, Katella
 Avenue, Harbor Boulevard, and Westminster Avenue. The minimum level of service for CMP
 facilities is Level of Service E.
5-8

                                                          Table 5-3
                            Level of Service Definitions for Signalized Intersections
                  Intersection
   Level of
                    Capacity                                                 Definition
   Service
                   Utilization
                                     EXCELLENT. No Vehicle waits longer than one red light and no approach phase is
      A           0.000–0.600
                                     fully used.
                                     VERY GOOD. An occasional approach phase is fully utilized; many drivers begin to
      B           0.601–0.700
                                     feel somewhat restricted within groups of vehicles.
                                     GOOD. Occasionally drivers may have to wait through more than one red light;
      C           0.701–0.800
                                     backups may develop behind turning vehicles.
                                     FAIR. Delays may be substantial during portions of the rush hours, but enough lower
      D           0.801–0.900        volume periods occur to permit clearing of developing lines, preventing excessive
                                     backups.
                                     POOR. Represents the most vehicles intersection approaches can accommodate; may
      E           0.901–1.000
                                     be long lines of waiting vehicles through several signal cycles.
                                     FAILURE. Backups from nearby locations or on cross streets may restrict or prevent
      F              > 1.000         movement of vehicles out of the intersection approaches. Tremendous delays with
                                     continuously increasing queue lengths.
  Source: Highway Capacity Manual, Special Report 209, Transportation Research Board, Washington, D.C., 1985
A Level of Service E condition, as described in Table 5-4, is reflective of near, or at, capacity
conditions. This is not consistent with the goal of the City of Garden Grove in providing
satisfactory mobility within the City. In order to better provide for such goals, the City has
adopted a LOS D standard. This ensures more residual capacity along arterials and at
intersections.
                                                          Table 5-4
                           Level of Service Definitions for Unsignalized Intersections
                    Level of Service                                        Control Delay per Vehicle (secs)
                            A                                                              < 10
                            B                                                         > 10 and < 15
                            C                                                         > 15 and < 25
                            D                                                         > 25 and < 35
                            E                                                         > 35 and < 50
                            F                                                              > 50
   Source: Transportation Research Board, Highway Capacity Manual, 2000
EXISTING INTERSECTION OPERATING CONDITIONS
The morning and evening peak-hour level of service analyses were conducted for the 63 study
intersections based on the measured traffic volumes and the methodologies described above.
The City of Garden Grove has established LOS D as its criterion for an acceptable level of
service. The majority of the City’s intersections are operating at acceptable LOS D or better
conditions for the both AM and PM peak hours. There are only four intersections operating at an
                                                                                                                       5-9

 unacceptable LOS (LOS E or F) according to City of Garden Grove’s standards during AM or PM
 peak hours or both. These intersections are:
         Lampson Avenue at Gilbert Street (PM)
         Garden Grove Boulevard at Valley View Street (PM)
         Garden Grove Boulevard at Goldenwest Street (AM/PM)
         Garden Grove Boulevard at Beach Boulevard (AM)
 5.6 BUILDOUT VOLUMES AND LEVELS OF SERVICE
 General Plan Buildout traffic forecasts have been modeled by Iteris, Inc., based on data
 provided by the Orange County Transportation Authority (OCTA) and the City of Garden Grove
 Planning Department. Modeled forecast volumes are used to anticipate possible improvements
 associated with future traffic volume growth. In this way, arterial and intersection capacity will
 be sufficient to accommodate the traffic generated by the future land uses, and the Circulation
 Element is balanced with the Land Use Element. A detailed description of the traffic modeling
 procedures, including the trip generation, trip assignment and model validation, is included in
 the City of Garden Grove Traffic Model: Model Validation Report, available at the City of
 Garden Grove, Community Development Department, Planning Division.
 GENERAL PLAN BUILDOUT ROADWAY SEGMENT OPERATING CONDITIONS
 Table 5-5, Buildout Average Daily Traffic Volumes and Volume to Capacity Ratios, summarizes
 and Exhibit CIR-3, Land Use Plan Daily Traffic Volumes and Volume to Capacity Ratios, shows the
 General Plan Buildout ADT Volumes and Volume to Capacity (V/C) Ratios along primary
 roadways within the study area with current and future planned roadway improvements. The
 volumes shown are the average daily traffic that the roadway may be carrying under Buildout
 conditions. The V/C ranges used to determine the Level of Service for the roadway and the
 theoretical capacities of roadways determined by the number of lanes and type of roadway
 were previously presented.
 Roadways operating at a Level of Service of D or better are considered to be operating at an
 acceptable level of service. Roadways operating at a Level of Service E or worse are
 considered to be operating at deficient levels. The following roadway segments are projected
 to be operating deficiently:
         Brookhurst Street from Hazard Avenue to Garden Grove Boulevard
         Euclid Street from Hazard Avenue to Garden Grove Boulevard
         Euclid Street from Chapman Avenue to Katella Avenue
         Harbor Boulevard from Hazard Avenue to Lampson Avenue
         Haster Street from Chapman Avenue to Simmons Avenue
         Magnolia Street from Westminster Avenue to Garden Grove Boulevard
         Newhope Street from Westminster Boulevard to Trask Avenue
         Western Avenue from Chapman Avenue to Orangewood Avenue
         Valley View Street from south of Garden Grove Boulevard to Santa Catalina Avenue
         Chapman Avenue from West Street to Lewis Street
         Garden Grove Boulevard from Valley View Street to Dale Street
         Garden Grove Boulevard from Brookhurst Street to Nelson Street
         Lampson Avenue from Manley Street to Valley View Street
5-10

               Lampson Avenue from Western Avenue to Santa Rosalia Street
               Lampson Avenue from West Street to Harbor Boulevard
               Lampson Avenue from Haster Street to Lewis Street
               Trask Avenue from Newland Street to Brookhurst Street
               Trask Avenue from Euclid Street to Harbor Boulevard
               Westminster Boulevard from Bushard Street to Bowen Street
               Beach Boulevard from Trask Avenue to Lampson Avenue
       A significant reason for the above segments to operate at deficient levels of service is the
       impacts of regional traffic on the area. Even with the expansion of the SR-22 corridor, many of
       the arterial corridors will continue to experience high traffic volumes. Although these segments
       exceed the LOS D threshold, other factors such as intersection level of service and freeway
       access intersection operation, will determine actual system operational performance.
                                                      Table 5-5
                     Buildout Average Daily Traffic Volumes and Volume to Capacity Ratios
                                  Segment             Buildout       Existing Lanes            Planned Lanes
     Roadway
                                                      Volume
                         From                 To               Lanes Capacity    V/C LOS Lanes Capacity   V/C LOS
Brookhurst St.    Hazard Av.         Westminster Bl.   54,871   6D    56,300     0.97 E   6D     56,300   0.97 E
Brookhurst St.    Westminster Bl.    Trask Av.         61,820   6D    56,300     1.10 F   6D     56,300   1.10 F
Brookhurst St.    Trask Av.          Garden Grove Bl.  55,847   6D    56,300     0.99 E   6D     56,300   0.99 E
Brookhurst St.    Garden Grove Bl.   Lampson Av.       47,424   6D    56,300     0.84 D   6D     56,300   0.84 D
Brookhurst St.    Lampson Av.        Chapman Av.       46,672   6D    56,300     0.83 D   6D     56,300   0.83 D
Brookhurst St.    Chapman Av.        Orangewood Av.    45,456   6D    56,300     0.81 D   6D     56,300   0.81 D
Brookhurst St.    Orangewood Av.     Katella Av.       41,696   6D    56,300     0.74 C   6D     56,300   0.74 C
Dale St.          Garden Grove Bl.   Lampson Av.       11,867   4U    25,000     0.47 A   4U     25,000   0.47 A
Dale St.          Chapman Av.        Orangewood Av.    13,981   4U    25,000     0.56 A   4U     25,000   0.56 A
Dale St.          Orangewood Av.     Katella Av.       16,521   4U    25,000     0.66 B   4U     25,000   0.66 B
Euclid St.        Hazard Av.         Westminster Bl.   52,623   6D    56,300     0.93 E   6D     56,300   0.93 E
Euclid St.        Westminster Bl.    Trask Av.         56,264   6D    56,300     1.00 E   6D     56,300   1.00 E
Euclid St.        Trask Av.          Garden Grove Bl.  57,643   6D    56,300     1.02 F   6D     56,300   1.02 F
Euclid St.        Garden Grove Bl.   Lampson Av.       38,190   6D    56,300     0.68 B   6D     56,300   0.68 B
Euclid St.        Lampson Av.        Chapman Av.       39,799   6D    56,300     0.71 C   6D     56,300   0.71 C
Euclid St.        Chapman Av.        Orangewood Av.    37,979   4D    37,500     1.01 F   4D     37,500   1.01 F
Euclid St.        Orangewood Av.     Katella Av.       38,939   4D    37,500     1.04 F   4D     37,500   1.04 F
Gilbert St.       Trask Av.          Garden Grove Bl.   8,415   2U    15,000     0.56 A   4U     25,000   0.34 A
Gilbert St.       Garden Grove Bl.   Lampson Av.       12,064   2U    15,000     0.80 C   4U     25,000   0.48 A
Gilbert St.       Lampson Av.        Chapman Av.       10,992   2U    15,000     0.73 C   4U     25,000   0.44 A
Gilbert St.       Chapman Av.        Orangewood Av.    15,467   4U    25,000     0.62 B   4U     25,000   0.62 B
Gilbert St.       Orangewood Av.     Katella Av.       15,488   4U    25,000     0.62 B   4U     25,000   0.62 B
Harbor Bl.        Hazard Av.         Westminster Bl.   54,376   6D    56,300     0.97 E   6D     56,300   0.97 E
Harbor Bl.        Westminster Bl.    Trask Av.         62,305   6D    56,300     1.11 F   6D     56,300   1.11 F
Harbor Bl.        Trask Av.          Garden Grove Bl.  62,239   6D    56,300     1.11 F   6D     56,300   1.11 F
Harbor Bl.        Garden Grove Bl.   Lampson Av.       52,413   6D    56,300     0.93 E   6D     56,300   0.93 E
                                                                                                        5-11
                                                    Table 5-5 [continued]
                    Buildout Average Daily Traffic Volumes and Volume to Capacity Ratios
                                Segment                  Buildout       Existing Lanes        Planned Lanes
     Roadway
                       From                  To           Volume Lanes Capacity V/C LOS Lanes Capacity V/C LOS
Harbor Bl.      Lampson Av.        Chapman Av.            45,103    6D   56,300    0.80 C 6D    56,300   0.80 C
                                   Wilken Way
Harbor Bl.      Chapman Av.                               42,564   6D    56,300    0.76 C 6D    56,300   0.76 C
                                   (north city limits)
Haster St.      Garden Grove Bl.   Lampson Av.            30,264   4D    37,500    0.81 D 4D    37,500   0.81 D
Haster St.      Lampson Av.        Chapman Av.            33,727    4D   37,500    0.90 D 4D    37,500   0.90 D
                                   Simmons Av.
Haster St.      Chapman Av.                               33,991   4D    37,500    0.91 E 4D    37,500   0.91 E
                                   (north city limits)
Goldenwest St.  Trask Av.          Garden Grove Bl.       46,873   6D    56,300    0.83 D 6D    56,300   0.83 D
Knott St.       Garden Grove Bl.   Lampson Av.            49,204   6D    56,300    0.87 D 6D    56,300   0.87 D
Knott St.       Lampson Av.        Chapman Av.            46,596    6D   56,300    0.83 D 6D    56,300   0.83 D
Knott St.       Chapman Av.        Orangewood Av.         40,694   6D    56,300    0.72 C 6D    56,300   0.72 C
Magnolia St.    Hazard Av.         Westminster Bl.        49,090    6D   56,300    0.87 D 6D    56,300   0.87 D
Magnolia St.    Westminster Bl.    Trask Av.              45,581    6D   56,300    0.81 D 6D    56,300   0.81 D
Magnolia St.    Trask Av.          Garden Grove Bl.       41,765   4D    37,500    1.11 F 4D    37,500   1.11 F
Magnolia St.    Garden Grove Bl.   Lampson Av.            30,938    4D   37,500    0.83 D 4D    37,500   0.83 D
Magnolia St.    Lampson Av.        Chapman Av.            28,592    4D   37,500    0.76 C 4D    37,500   0.76 C
Magnolia St.    Chapman Av.        Orangewood Av.         19,542   4D    37,500    0.52 A 4D    37,500   0.52 A
Magnolia St.    Orangewood Av.     Katella Av.            20,511   4D    37,500    0.55 A 4D    37,500   0.55 A
Newhope St.     Westminster Bl.    Trask Av.              32,706    4U   25,000    1.31 F 4U    25,000   1.31 F
Newhope St.     Trask Av.          Garden Grove Bl.       25,577   4U    25,000    1.02 F 4U    25,000   1.02 F
Newland St.     Westminster Bl.    Trask Av.              25,178    4U   25,000    1.01 F 4U    25,000   1.01 F
Newland St.     Trask Av.          Garden Grove Bl.       22,235   4U    25,000    0.89 D 4U    25,000   0.89 D
Ninth St.       Garden Grove Bl.   Lampson Av.            13,165   2U    15,000    0.88 D 4U    25,000   0.53 A
Ninth St.       Lampson Av.        Chapman Av.            12,001    2U   15,000    0.80 C 4U    25,000   0.48 A
Ninth St.       Chapman Av.        Orangewood Av.         14,307   2U    15,000    0.95 E 4U    25,000   0.57 A
Springdale St.  Garden Grove Bl.   Lampson Av.            19,625   4U    25,000    0.79 C 4U    25,000   0.79 C
Springdale St.  Lampson Av.        Chapman Av.            18,614    4U   25,000    0.74 C 4U    25,000   0.74 C
                                   Santa Catalina Av.
Springdale St.  Chapman Av.                               11,303   4U    25,000    0.45 A 4U    25,000   0.45 A
                                   (north city limits)
West St.        Garden Grove Bl.   Lampson Av.            20,039   4U    25,000    0.80 C 4U    25,000   0.80 C
West St.        Lampson Av.        Chapman Av.            19,453    4U   25,000    0.78 C 4U    25,000   0.78 C
West St.        Chapman Av.        Orangewood Av.         19,034    4U   25,000    0.76 C 4U    25,000   0.76 C
Western Av.     Garden Grove Bl.   Lampson Av.            19,571   4U    25,000    0.78 C 4U    25,000   0.78 C
Western Av.     Lampson Av.        Chapman Av.            21,773    4U   25,000    0.87 D 4U    25,000   0.87 D
Western Av.     Chapman Av.        Orangewood Av.         25,461   4U    25,000    1.02 F 4U    25,000   1.02 F
                s/o Garden Grove
Valley View St.                    Garden Grove Bl.       76,527   6D    56,300    1.36 F 6D    56,300   1.36 F
                Bl.
Valley View St. Garden Grove Bl.   Lampson Av.            73,820   6D    56,300    1.31 F 6D    56,300   1.31 F
      5-12
                                                         Table 5-5 [continued]
                     Buildout Average Daily Traffic Volumes and Volume to Capacity Ratios
                                   Segment                     Buildout     Existing Lanes         Planned Lanes
     Roadway
                         From                     To           Volume Lanes Capacity V/C LOS Lanes Capacity V/C LOS
Valley View St.  Lampson Av.            Chapman Av.             74,941  6D    56,300    1.33 F 6D    56,300   1.33 F
                                        Santa Catalina Av.
Valley View St.  Chapman Av.                                    72,777  6D    56,300    1.29 F 6D    56,300   1.29 F
                                        (mid-east city limits)
Chapman Av.      Bailey St.             Valley View St.         10,023  4D    37,500    0.27 A 4D    37,500   0.27 A
Chapman Av.      Valley View St.        Springdale St.          17,579  4D    37,500    0.47 A 4D    37,500   0.47 A
Chapman Av.      Springdale St.         Knott St.               18,075  4D    37,500    0.48 A 4D    37,500   0.48 A
Chapman Av.      Knott St.              Western Av.             18,018  4D    37,500    0.48 A 4D    37,500   0.48 A
                                        Santa Paula St.
Chapman Av.      Western Av.                                    23,999  4D    37,500    0.64 B 4D    37,500   0.64 B
                                        (mid-east city limits)
                 Briarwood St
Chapman Av.                             Magnolia St.            16,940  4D    37,500    0.45 A 4D    37,500   0.45 A
                 (mid-west city limits)
Chapman Av.      Magnolia St.           Gilbert St.             21,704  4D    37,500    0.58 A 4D    37,500   0.58 A
Chapman Av.      Gilbert St.            Brookhurst St.          25,313  4D    37,500    0.68 B 4D    37,500   0.68 B
Chapman Av.      Brookhurst St.         Nutwood St.             33,479  4D    37,500    0.89 D 4D    37,500   0.89 D
Chapman Av.      Nutwood St.            Euclid St.              30,527  4D    37,500    0.81 D 4D    37,500   0.81 D
Chapman Av.      Euclid St.             Ninth St.               33,756  4D    37,500    0.90 D 4D    37,500   0.90 D
Chapman Av.      Ninth St.              West St.                33,739  4D    37,500    0.90 D 4D    37,500   0.90 D
Chapman Av.      West St.               Harbor Bl.              39,449  4D    37,500    1.05 F 4D    37,500   1.05 F
Chapman Av.      Harbor Bl.             Haster St.              45,141  4D    37,500    1.20 F 4D    37,500   1.20 F
Chapman Av.      Haster St.             Lewis St.               48,674  4D    37,500    1.30 F 4D    37,500   1.30 F
Garden Grove Bl. Valley View St.        Holder Av.              40,797  4D    37,500    1.09 F 4D    37,500   1.09 F
Garden Grove Bl. Holder Av.             Knott St.               37,494  4D    37,500    1.00 E 4D    37,500   1.00 E
Garden Grove Bl. Knott St.              Western Av.             34,198  6D    56,300    0.61 B 6D    56,300   0.61 B
Garden Grove Bl. Western Av.            Beach Bl.               41,609  6D    56,300    0.74 C 6D    56,300   0.74 C
Garden Grove Bl. Beach Bl.              Dale St.                43,599  4D    37,500    1.16 F 4D    37,500   1.16 F
Garden Grove Bl. Dale St.               Magnolia St.            27,252  6D    56,300    0.48 A 6D    56,300   0.48 A
Garden Grove Bl. Magnolia St.           Gilbert St.             29,331  6D    56,300    0.52 A 6D    56,300   0.52 A
Garden Grove Bl. Gilbert St.            Brookhurst St.          32,584  6D    56,300    0.58 A 6D    56,300   0.58 A
Garden Grove Bl. Brookhurst St.         Nelson St.              35,142  6D    56,300    0.62 B 6D    56,300   0.62 B
Garden Grove Bl. Nelson St.             Euclid St.              20,078  6D    56,300    0.36 A 6D    56,300   0.36 A
Garden Grove Bl. Euclid St.             Newhope St.             29,341  6D    56,300    0.52 A 6D    56,300   0.52 A
Garden Grove Bl. Newhope St.            Harbor Bl.              33,519  6D    56,300    0.60 A 6D    56,300   0.60 A
Garden Grove Bl. Harbor Bl.             Haster St.              31,873  6D    56,300    0.57 A 6D    56,300   0.57 A
Garden Grove Bl. Haster St.             Lewis St.               32,183  6D    56,300    0.57 A 6D    56,300   0.57 A
Hazard Av.       Cork St.               Brookhurst St.          17,923  4U    25,000    0.72 C 4U    25,000   0.72 C
                                                                                                            5-13
                                                        Table 5-5 [continued]
                    Buildout Average Daily Traffic Volumes and Volume to Capacity Ratios
                                   Segment                    Buildout     Existing Lanes         Planned Lanes
    Roadway
                        From                     To           Volume Lanes Capacity V/C LOS Lanes Capacity V/C LOS
                Manley St.
Lampson Av.                            Valley View St.         22,739  4D    37,500    0.61 B 4D    37,500   0.61 B
                (west city limits)
Lampson Av.     Valley View St.        Springdale St.          19,085  4D    37,500    0.51 A 4D    37,500   0.51 A
Lampson Av.     Springdale St.         Knott St.               17,258  4D    37,500    0.46 A 4D    37,500   0.46 A
Lampson Av.     Knott St.              Western Av.             15,712  4U    25,000    0.63 B 4U    25,000   0.63 B
                                       Santa Rosalia St.
Lampson Av.     Western Av.                                    22,723  4U    25,000    0.91 E 4U    25,000   0.91 E
                                       (mid-east city limits)
Lampson Av.     Dale St.               Magnolia St.            15,700  2U    12,500    1.26 F 4U    25,000   0.63 B
Lampson Av.     Magnolia St.           Gilbert St.             13,853  2U    12,500    1.11 F 4U    25,000   0.55 A
Lampson Av.     Gilbert St.            Brookhurst St.          10,096  2U    12,500    0.81 D 4U    25,000   0.40 A
Lampson Av.     Brookhurst St.         Nutwood St.             11,734  2U    12,500    0.94 E 4U    25,000   0.47 A
Lampson Av.     Nutwood St.            Euclid St.              10,288  2U    12,500    0.82 D 4U    25,000   0.41 A
Lampson Av.     Euclid St.             Ninth St.               14,777  2U    12,500    1.18 F 4U    25,000   0.59 A
Lampson Av.     Ninth St.              West St.                18,404  2U    12,500    1.47 F 4U    25,000   0.74 C
Lampson Av.     West St.               Harbor Bl.              26,410  2U    12,500    2.11 F 4U    25,000   1.06 F
Lampson Av.     Harbor Bl.             Haster St.              21,498  2U    12,500    1.72 F 4U    25,000   0.86 D
Lampson Av.     Haster St.             Lewis St.               23,004  2U    12,500    1.84 F 4U    25,000   0.92 E
Orangewood Av.  Knott St.              Western Av.              8,479  4U    25,000    0.34 A 4U    25,000   0.34 A
                Jane Wy.
Orangewood Av.                         Dale St.                 5,449  4U    25,000    0.22 A 4U    25,000   0.22 A
                (mid-west city limits)
Orangewood Av.  Dale St.               Magnolia St.             6,786  4U    25,000    0.27 A 4U    25,000   0.27 A
Orangewood Av.  Magnolia St.           Gilbert St.              5,933  4U    25,000    0.24 A 4U    25,000   0.24 A
Orangewood Av.  Gilbert St.            Brookhurst St.           9,535  4U    25,000    0.38 A 4U    25,000   0.38 A
Orangewood Av.  Brookhurst St.         Palmwood Dr.             9,772  4U    25,000    0.39 A 4U    25,000   0.39 A
Trask Av.       Beach Bl.              Newland St.             15,553  4U    25,000    0.62 B 4U    25,000   0.62 B
Trask Av.       Newland St.            Magnolia St.            22,664  4U    25,000    0.91 E 4U    25,000   0.91 E
Trask Av.       Magnolia St.           Galway St.              34,010  4U    25,000    1.36 F 4U    25,000   1.36 F
Trask Av.       Galway St.             Brookhurst St.          32,621  4U    25,000    1.30 F 4U    25,000   1.30 F
Trask Av.       Brookhurst St.         Benton St.              18,608  4U    25,000    0.74 C 4U    25,000   0.74 C
Trask Av.       Benton St.             Euclid St.              12,539  4U    25,000    0.50 A 4U    25,000   0.50 A
Trask Av.       Euclid St.             Newhope St.             34,336  4U    25,000    1.37 F 4U    25,000   1.37 F
Trask Av.       Newhope St.            Harbor Bl.              24,407  4U    25,000    0.98 E 4U    25,000   0.98 E
Trask Av.       Harbor Bl.             Clinton St.             14,778  4U    25,000    0.59 A 4U    25,000   0.59 A
Westminster Bl. Newland St.            Magnolia St.            24,575  4D    37,500    0.66 B 4D    37,500   0.66 B
Westminster Bl. Magnolia St.           Bushard St.             33,910  4D    37,500    0.90 D 4D    37,500   0.90 D
Westminster Bl. Bushard St.            Brookhurst St.          35,620  4D    37,500    0.95 E 4D    37,500   0.95 E
Westminster Bl. Brookhurst St.         Bowen St.               41,521  4D    37,500    1.11 F 4D    37,500   1.11 F
Westminster Bl. Bowen St.              Euclid St.              22,356  4D    37,500    0.60 A 4D    37,500   0.60 A
     5-14
                                                  Table 5-5 [continued]
                     Buildout Average Daily Traffic Volumes and Volume to Capacity Ratios
                                Segment                Buildout      Existing Lanes          Planned Lanes
     Roadway
                          From              To         Volume Lanes Capacity V/C LOS Lanes Capacity V/C      LOS
Westminster Bl.   Euclid St.       Newhope St.          30,924  6D     56,300    0.55 A  6D    56,300   0.55  A
Westminster Bl.   Newhope St.      Harbor Bl.           23,959  6D     56,300    0.43 A  6D    56,300   0.43  A
Westminster Bl.   Harbor Bl.       Clinton St.          37,697  6D     56,300    0.67 B  6D    56,300   0.67  B
Beach Bl.         Trask Av.        Garden Grove Bl.     85,485  8D     72,000    1.19 F  8D    72,000   1.19  F
Beach Bl.         Garden Grove Bl. Lampson Av.          78,089  8D     72,000    1.08 F  8D    72,000   1.08  F
Fairview St.      Trask Av.        Garden Grove Bl.     49,470  4U     25,000    1.98 F  6D    56,300   0.88  D
       Suggested Improvements
       Corridors where widening would provide improved daily operations are along Lampson Avenue
       and Valley View Street. In addition, the expansion of Harbor Boulevard to eight through lanes
       and the inclusion of the Smart Street design features would improve operating conditions along
       that corridor, providing acceptable levels of service. The corridors with the greatest shortage of
       capacity are the north-south Smart Street corridors in the western portion of the City—Valley
       View Street and Beach Boulevard. Both are projected to be operating at LOS F at buildout.
       Capacity improvements along these two Smart Street corridors will need to be coordinated with
       OCTA.
       It should also be noted that residual capacity is forecast on parallel routes to most of the
       deficient roadway segments.             Therefore, system-wide, the City’s circulation network will
       accommodate the forecast daily traffic volumes. However, the widening of Harbor Boulevard
       to accommodate eight through lanes should be included in the General Plan.
       INTERSECTION LEVEL OF SERVICE
       Peak-hour intersection operating conditions for the forecast land uses were analyzed using the
       “Intersection Capacity Utilization (ICU)” methodology for signalized intersections, and the
       “Highway Capacity Manual (HCM)” methodology for unsignalized intersections previously
       discussed and consistent with City policies and the County Congestion Management and
       Growth Management Requirements.
       Intersection levels of service are determined to identify possible lane geometrics that may be
       required to accommodate General Plan buildout traffic volumes. Intersection levels of service
       will continue to be monitored as part of the development review process, and appropriate
       intersection improvements will be required to be constructed to accommodate future
       development traffic at least the standard LOS D conditions.
       Table 5-6, Land Use Plan Intersection Level of Service Analysis, summarizes the intersection level
       of service analysis for General Plan Buildout conditions with currently programmed intersection
       configurations. Several intersection improvements are programmed to be constructed prior to
       the 2030 Buildout year. These improvements have been included for this base scenario. The
       results show that the following 22 intersections are projected to operate at LOS E or F with the
       existing and currently programmed lanes:
                                                                                                      5-15

            Chapman Avenue at Ninth Street (PM)
            Chapman Avenue at Haster Street (PM)
            Lampson Avenue at Valley View Street (AM/PM)
            Lampson Avenue at Gilbert Street (AM/PM)
            Lampson Avenue at Ninth Street (PM)
            Lampson Avenue at West Street (AM/PM)
            Lampson Avenue at Harbor Boulevard (PM)
            Lampson Avenue at Haster Street (AM/PM)
            Garden Grove Boulevard at Valley View Street (AM/PM)
            Garden Grove Boulevard at SR-22 Eastbound On Ramp (AM/PM)
            Garden Grove Boulevard at Goldenwest Street (AM/PM)
            Garden Grove Boulevard at Beach Boulevard (AM/PM)
            Garden Grove Boulevard at Euclid Street (PM)
            Garden Grove Boulevard at Newhope Street (PM)
            Garden Grove Boulevard at Haster Street (PM)
            Trask Avenue at SR-22 Westbound On and Off Ramps (PM)
            Trask Avenue at Brookhurst Street (PM)
            Trask Avenue at Euclid Street (PM)
            Trask Avenue at Harbor Boulevard (AM/PM)
            SR-22 Westbound On & Off Ramps at Harbor Boulevard (PM)
            Westminster Avenue at Euclid Street (PM)
            Westminster Avenue at Harbor Boulevard (AM/PM)
                                                     Table 5-6
                                Land Use Plan Intersection Level of Service Analysis
                                                                            Buildout AM          Buildout PM
 #                       Intersection                    Control Type
                                                                       LOS   Delay      V/C  LOS   Delay     V/C
 1  Orangewood Ave & Dale Ave                             Signalized     A             0.574  D             0.894
 2  Orangewood Ave & Magnolia Ave                         Signalized     A             0.561  B             0.677
 3  Orangewood Ave & Gilbert St                           Signalized     A             0.552  C             0.708
 4  Orangewood Ave & Brookhurst St                        Signalized     B             0.678  C             0.732
 5  Chapman Ave & Valley View St                          Signalized     D             0.900  D             0.840
 6  Chapman Ave & Springdale St                           Signalized     A             0.511  A             0.544
 7  Chapman Ave & Knott Ave                               Signalized     B             0.612  B             0.686
 8  Chapman Ave & Western Ave                             Signalized     A             0.539  B             0.648
 9  Chapman Ave & Magnolia Ave                            Signalized     B             0.677  C             0.766
10  Chapman Ave & Gilbert St                              Signalized     A             0.559  C             0.746
11  Chapman Ave & Brookhurst St                           Signalized     C             0.709  D             0.842
12  Chapman Ave & Euclid St                               Signalized     D             0.827  D             0.896
13  Chapman Ave & Ninth St                                Signalized     C             0.764  F             1.032
14  Chapman Ave & West St                                 Signalized     D             0.823  D             0.870
15  Chapman Ave & Harbor Blvd                             Signalized     C             0.712  D             0.865
16  Chapman Ave & Haster St                               Signalized     D             0.894  F             1.009
17  Lampson Ave & Valley View St                          Signalized     E             0.950  F             1.146
18  Lampson Ave & Springdale St                           Signalized     A             0.475  B             0.603
19  Lampson Ave & Knott Ave                               Signalized     B             0.688  C             0.773
   5-16
                                               Table 5-6 [continued]
                                Land Use Plan Intersection Level of Service Analysis
                                                                            Buildout AM          Buildout PM
 #                       Intersection                    Control Type
                                                                       LOS   Delay      V/C  LOS   Delay     V/C
20 Lampson Ave & Western Ave                              Signalized     A             0.498  A             0.513
21 Lampson Ave & Magnolia Ave                             Signalized     B             0.689  C             0.736
22 Lampson Ave & Gilbert St                              Unsignalized    F    185.7           F    283.4
23 Lampson Ave & Brookhurst St                            Signalized     B             0.639  C             0.756
24 Lampson Ave & Euclid St                                Signalized     C             0.761  D             0.883
25 Lampson Ave & Ninth St                                 Signalized     C             0.769  E             0.933
26 Lampson Ave & West St                                  Signalized     E             0.904  E             0.911
27 Lampson Ave & Harbor Blvd                              Signalized     C             0.704  E             0.965
28 Lampson Ave & Haster St                                Signalized     E             0.902  E             0.924
29 SR22 WB Off & Valley View St                           Signalized     C             0.710  C             0.772
30 Garden Grove Blvd & Valley Vie                         Signalized     F             1.071  F             1.137
31 Garden Grove Blvd & SR22 EB On                         Signalized     E             0.991  E             0.966
32 Garden Grove Blvd & Goldenwest                         Signalized     F             1.264  F             1.376
33 Garden Grove Blvd & Western Av                         Signalized     C             0.770  C             0.748
34 Garden Grove Blvd & Beach Blvd                         Signalized     F             1.171  F             1.016
35 Garden Grove Blvd & Dale Ave                           Signalized     A             0.498  B             0.698
36 Garden Grove Blvd & Magnolia A                         Signalized     C             0.704  D             0.804
37 Garden Grove Blvd & Gilbert St                         Signalized     A             0.546  D             0.849
38 Garden Grove Blvd & Brookhurst                         Signalized     B             0.620  C             0.715
39 Garden Grove Blvd & Euclid St                          Signalized     D             0.813  E             0.995
40 Garden Grove Blvd & Newhope St                         Signalized     D             0.856  E             0.907
41 Garden Grove Blvd & West St                            Signalized     B             0.628  D             0.863
42 Garden Grove Blvd & Harbor Blv                         Signalized     A             0.545  C             0.749
43 Garden Grove Blvd & Haster St                          Signalized     B             0.672  E             0.914
44 SR22 WB Off & Haster St                                Signalized     B             0.642  D             0.811
45 SR22 EB Off & Fairview St                              Signalized     D             0.875  D             0.874
46 Trask Ave & Newland St                                 Signalized     B             0.636  B             0.695
47 Trask Ave & Magnolia Ave                               Signalized     C             0.789  D             0.884
48 Trask Ave & SR22 WB Off                                Signalized     A             0.417  B             0.604
49 Trask Ave & SR22 WB On/Off                             Signalized     D             0.847  E             0.958
50 Trask Ave & Brookhurst St                              Signalized     D             0.838  F             1.009
51 Trask Ave & Euclid St                                  Signalized     C             0.748  E             0.986
52 Trask Ave & SR22 WB On/Off                             Signalized     C             0.707  C             0.786
53 Trask Ave & Newhope St                                 Signalized     C             0.767  D             0.836
54 Trask Ave & Harbor Blvd                                Signalized     F             1.060  E             0.948
55 Trask Ave & SR22 EB On/Off                             Signalized     A             0.534  A             0.486
56 SR22 WB On/Off & Harbor Blvd                           Signalized     D             0.851  E             0.998
57 SR22 EB On/Off & Magnolia Ave                          Signalized     A             0.466  A             0.595
                                                                                                      5-17
                                                       Table 5-6 [continued]
                                     Land Use Plan Intersection Level of Service Analysis
                                                                                       Buildout AM            Buildout PM
 #                           Intersection                         Control Type
                                                                                 LOS     Delay      V/C   LOS   Delay     V/C
59 SR22 EB On/Off & Euclid St                                      Signalized      C               0.794   D             0.811
60 Westminster Ave & Magnolia Ave                                  Signalized      C               0.716   D             0.894
61 Westminster Ave & Brookhurst S                                  Signalized      B               0.698   C             0.793
62 Westminster Ave & Euclid St                                     Signalized      D               0.845   E             0.947
63 Westminster Ave & Harbor Blvd                                   Signalized      E               0.910   F             1.158
Bold denotes a deficient intersection.
Note: Intersection counts were conducted in July 2007.
Levels of services were calculated using Orange County Congestion Management Program (2003) LOS Criteria.
      The General Plan Circulation Element street classifications identify additional through lanes for
      Lampson Avenue and Valley View Street above existing conditions. Table 5-7, Land Use Plan
      Intersection Level of Service Analysis With General Plan Improvements, lists the intersection
      conditions assuming the additional roadway through lanes are in place. With anticipated
      General Plan improvements, the following five intersections would operate at an acceptable
      level of service:
                 Chapman Avenue at Ninth Street
                 Lampson Avenue at Ninth Street
                 Lampson Avenue at West Street
                 Lampson Avenue at Harbor Boulevard
                 Lampson Avenue at Haster Street
      The following 17 intersections would still operate at LOS E or F:
                 Chapman Avenue at Haster Street (PM)
                 Lampson Avenue at Valley View Street (AM/PM)
                 Lampson Avenue at Gilbert Street (AM/PM)
                 Garden Grove Boulevard at Valley View Street (AM/PM)*
                 Garden Grove Boulevard at SR-22 Eastbound On Ramp (AM/PM)
                 Garden Grove Boulevard at Goldenwest Street (AM/PM)*
                 Garden Grove Boulevard at Beach Boulevard (AM/PM)*
                 Garden Grove Boulevard at Euclid Street (PM)
                 Garden Grove Boulevard at Newhope Street (PM)
                 Garden Grove Boulevard at Haster Street (PM)
                 Trask Avenue at SR-22 Westbound On and Off Ramps (PM)
                 Trask Avenue at Brookhurst Street (PM)
                 Trask Avenue at Euclid Street (PM)
                 Trask Avenue at Harbor Boulevard (AM/PM)
                 SR-22 Westbound On & Off Ramps at Harbor Boulevard (PM)
                 Westminster Avenue at Euclid Street (PM)
                 Westminster Avenue at Harbor Boulevard (AM/PM)
                 * Intersection is outside the City of Garden Grove.
    5-18
                                             Table 5-7
       Land Use Plan Intersection Level of Service Analysis With General Plan Improvements
                                                                   Buildout AM           Buildout PM
 #                   Intersection               Control Type
                                                               LOS   Delay      V/C  LOS   Delay     V/C
 1 Orangewood Ave & Dale Ave                     Signalized     A              0.571  B             0.644
 2 Orangewood Ave & Magnolia Ave                 Signalized     A              0.561  B             0.677
 3 Orangewood Ave & Gilbert St                   Signalized     A              0.552  C             0.708
 4 Orangewood Ave & Brookhurst St                Signalized     B              0.678  C             0.732
 5 Chapman Ave & Valley View St                  Signalized     D              0.900  D             0.840
 6 Chapman Ave & Springdale St                   Signalized     A              0.511  A             0.544
 7 Chapman Ave & Knott Ave                       Signalized     B              0.612  B             0.686
 8 Chapman Ave & Western Ave                     Signalized     A              0.539  B             0.648
 9 Chapman Ave & Magnolia Ave                    Signalized     B              0.677  C             0.766
10 Chapman Ave & Gilbert St                      Signalized     A              0.559  C             0.746
11 Chapman Ave & Brookhurst St                   Signalized     C              0.709  D             0.842
12 Chapman Ave & Euclid St                       Signalized     D              0.827  D             0.896
13 Chapman Ave & Ninth St                        Signalized     B              0.679  C             0.792
14 Chapman Ave & West St                         Signalized     D              0.823  D             0.870
15 Chapman Ave & Harbor Blvd                     Signalized     C              0.712  D             0.865
16 Chapman Ave & Haster St                       Signalized     D              0.894  F             1.009
17 Lampson Ave & Valley View St                  Signalized     E              0.950  F             1.146
18 Lampson Ave & Springdale St                   Signalized     A              0.475  B             0.603
19 Lampson Ave & Knott Ave                       Signalized     B              0.688  C             0.773
20 Lampson Ave & Western Ave                     Signalized     A              0.498  A             0.513
21 Lampson Ave & Magnolia Ave                    Signalized     B              0.689  C             0.736
22 Lampson Ave & Gilbert St                     Unsignalized    F    185.7            F    283.4
23 Lampson Ave & Brookhurst St                   Signalized     B              0.639  C             0.756
24 Lampson Ave & Euclid St                       Signalized     B              0.661  C             0.777
25 Lampson Ave & Ninth St                        Signalized     C              0.731  C             0.797
26 Lampson Ave & West St                         Signalized     B              0.684  C             0.736
27 Lampson Ave & Harbor Blvd                     Signalized     B              0.628  C             0.796
28 Lampson Ave & Haster St                       Signalized     C              0.741  C             0.769
29 SR22 WB Off & Valley View St                  Signalized     C              0.710  C             0.772
30 Garden Grove Blvd & Valley Vie                Signalized     E              0.952  F             1.041
31 Garden Grove Blvd & SR22 EB On                Signalized     E              0.991  E             0.966
32 Garden Grove Blvd & Goldenwest                Signalized     F              1.264  F             1.376
33 Garden Grove Blvd & Western Av                Signalized     C              0.770  C             0.748
34 Garden Grove Blvd & Beach Blvd                Signalized     F              1.171  F             1.016
35 Garden Grove Blvd & Dale Ave                  Signalized     A              0.498  B             0.698
36 Garden Grove Blvd & Magnolia A                Signalized     C              0.704  D             0.804
37 Garden Grove Blvd & Gilbert St                Signalized     A              0.464  C             0.712
38 Garden Grove Blvd & Brookhurst                Signalized     B              0.620  C             0.715
39 Garden Grove Blvd & Euclid St                 Signalized     D              0.813  E             0.995
                                                                                              5-19
                                                       Table 5-7 [continued]
                Land Use Plan Intersection Level of Service Analysis With General Plan Improvements
                                                                                       Buildout AM            Buildout PM
   #                           Intersection                      Control Type
                                                                                  LOS     Delay      V/C  LOS   Delay     V/C
  40       Garden Grove Blvd & Newhope St                          Signalized      D                0.856  E             0.907
  41       Garden Grove Blvd & West St                             Signalized      B                0.628  D             0.863
  42       Garden Grove Blvd & Harbor Blv                          Signalized      A                0.545  C             0.749
  43       Garden Grove Blvd & Haster St                           Signalized      B                0.672  E             0.914
  44       SR22 WB Off & Haster St                                 Signalized      B                0.642  D             0.811
  45       SR22 EB Off & Fairview St                               Signalized      D                0.875  C             0.786
  46       Trask Ave & Newland St                                  Signalized      B                0.636  B             0.695
  47       Trask Ave & Magnolia Ave                                Signalized      B                0.670  C             0.790
  48       Trask Ave & SR22 WB Off                                 Signalized      A                0.417  B             0.604
  49       Trask Ave & SR22 WB On/Off                              Signalized      D                0.847  E             0.958
  50       Trask Ave & Brookhurst St                               Signalized      D                0.838  F             1.009
  51       Trask Ave & Euclid St                                   Signalized      C                0.748  E             0.986
  52       Trask Ave & SR22 WB On/Off                              Signalized      C                0.707  C             0.786
  53       Trask Ave & Newhope St                                  Signalized      C                0.767  D             0.836
  54       Trask Ave & Harbor Blvd                                 Signalized      F                1.060  E             0.948
  55       Trask Ave & SR22 EB On/Off                              Signalized      A                0.534  A             0.486
  56       SR22 WB On/Off & Harbor Blvd                            Signalized      D                0.851  E             0.998
  57       SR22 EB On/Off & Magnolia Ave                           Signalized      A                0.466  A             0.595
  58       SR22 EB On/Off & Brookhurst St                          Signalized      C                0.783  C             0.798
  59       SR22 EB On/Off & Euclid St                              Signalized      C                0.794  D             0.811
  60       Westminster Ave & Magnolia Ave                          Signalized      C                0.716  D             0.894
  61       Westminster Ave & Brookhurst S                          Signalized      B                0.698  C             0.793
  62       Westminster Ave & Euclid St                             Signalized      D                0.845  E             0.947
  63       Westminster Ave & Harbor Blvd                           Signalized      E                0.910  F             1.158
Bold denotes a deficient intersection.
Note: Intersection counts were conducted in July 2007.
Levels of services were calculated using Orange County Congestion Management Program (2003) LOS Criteria.
        Table 5-8, Land Use Plan Intersection Level of Service Analysis With Additional Improvements,
        summarizes the improvements necessary for the previously listed intersections to operate at LOS
        D or better. For all but four intersections, the recommended improvements should fit within the
        available right-of-way. Four intersections, Valley View Avenue with Lampson Avenue and with
        Garden Grove Boulevard, Golden West Street with Garden Grove Boulevard, and Brookhurst
        Street with Garden Grove Boulevard, are expected to require additional improvements beyond
        the currently available right-of-way to provide the necessary intersection improvements. The
        Valley View corridor was previously identified as a corridor that is expected to operate with a
        poor level of service on the roadway segments as well. A focus area of future development is
        located around the Valley View/Lampson intersection. In addition, the Garden Grove
        Boulevard intersections are also shown as having poor levels of service in existing conditions.
      5-20
                                                           Table 5-8
                    Land Use Plan Intersection Level of Service Analysis With Additional Improvements
                       Control     North Bound South Bound    East Bound   West Bound       Buildout AM          Buildout PM
 #   Intersection
                        Type
                                   L    T    R L    T    R   L     T    R L    T     R  LOS   Delay     V/C  LOS   Delay     V/C
   Chapman Av.
                      Signalized   1    1    0 1    1    1   1     2    1 1    2      0  C             0.764  F             1.032
13 & Ninth St.
   -with General
   Plan               Signalized   1    2    0 1    2    0   1     2    1 1    2      1  B             0.679  C             0.792
   Improvements
   Chapman Av.
                      Signalized   1    2    1 1    2    0   1     3    1 1    2      1  D             0.894  F             1.009
16 & Haster St.
   -with additional
                      Signalized   1    2    1 1    2    1   1     3    1 1    3      0  C             0.773  D             0.880
   improvements
   Lampson Av. &
                      Signalized   1    3    1 1    3    1   1     2    0 1    2      0  E             0.950  F             1.146
17 Valley View St.
   -with additional
                      Signalized   2    3    1 1    3    1   2     2    0 1    2      1  C             0.741  D             0.877
   improvements
   Lampson Av. &
                     Unsignalized  0    1    0 0    1    0   0     1    0 0    1      0  F    185.7           F    283.4
22 Gilbert St.
   -with additional
                      Signalized   1    1    0 1    1    0   1     1    0 1    1      0  C             0.684  C             0.744
   improvements
   Lampson Av. &
                      Signalized   1    1    0 1    1    0   1     1    1 1    1      1  C             0.769  E             0.933
25 Ninth St.
   -with General
   Plan               Signalized   1    2    0 1    1    0   1     1    1 1    1      1  C             0.731  C             0.797
   Improvements
   Lampson Av. &
                      Signalized   1    2    0 1    2    0   1     1    1 1    1      1  E             0.904  E             0.911
26 West St.
   -with General
   Plan               Signalized   1    2    0 1    2    0   1     2    0 1    2      0  B             0.684  C             0.736
   Improvements
   Lampson Av. &
                      Signalized   1    3    0 1    3    1   1     2    0 1    1      1  C             0.704  E             0.965
27 Harbor Bl.
   -with General
   Plan               Signalized   1    3    0 1    3    1   1     2    0 1    2      1  B             0.628  C             0.796
   Improvements
   Lampson Av. &
                      Signalized   1    2    1 1    2    1   1     1    1 1    1      1  E             0.902  E             0.924
28 Haster St.
   -with General
   Plan               Signalized   1    2    1 1    2    1   1     2    1 1    2      0  C             0.741  C             0.769
   Improvements
   Garden Grove
   Bl. & Valley       Signalized   0    2    1 2    2    0   0     0    0 1    0     2>  F             1.071  F             1.137
30 View St.
   -with General
   Plan               Signalized   0    3    1 2    3    0   0     0    0 1    0     2>  E             0.952  F             1.041
   Improvements
   -with additional
                      Signalized   0    3    1 2    3    0   0     0    0 1    0     3>  D             0.804  D             0.898
   improvements
   Garden Grove
   Bl. & SR-22 EB     Signalized  1.5  0.5   0 1    0    1   2     1    0 0    2    1>>  E             0.991  E             0.966
31 On
   -with additional
                      Signalized  1.5  0.5   0 1    0   1>   2     1    0 0    2    1>>  C             0.795  D             0.880
   improvements
                                                                                                               5-21
                                                    Table 5-8 [continued]
                    Land Use Plan Intersection Level of Service Analysis With Additional Improvements
                      Control   North Bound   South Bound    East Bound     West Bound       Buildout AM          Buildout PM
 #   Intersection
                       Type
                                L    T     R  L    T    R   L     T    R   L    T     R  LOS   Delay     V/C  LOS   Delay     V/C
   Garden Grove
   Bl. &             Signalized 1    2     1  1    2    0  1.5  1.5     1 1.5  1.5    1>  F             1.264  F             1.376
32 Goldenwest St.
   -with additional
                     Signalized 1    3    1>  2    2    0   2     2     1  2    1    1>>  D             0.866  D             0.867
   improvements
   Garden Grove
                     Signalized 1    4     1  1    4    0   1     2     1  1    2      1  F             1.171  F             1.016
34 Bl. & Beach Bl.
   -with additional
                     Signalized 2    4     0  2    4    0   2     2    1>  2    2      1  D             0.883  D             0.854
   improvements
   Garden Grove
                     Signalized 1    3     0  1    3    1   1     3     0  1    3      0  D             0.813  E             0.995
39 Bl. & Euclid St.
   -with additional
                     Signalized 1    3     0  1    3    1   1     3     0  2    3      0  C             0.726  D             0.865
   improvements
   Garden Grove
   Bl. & Newhope     Signalized 2    1     1  1    1    1   1     3     0  1    3      0  D             0.856  E             0.907
40 St.
   -with Modified
   General Plan      Signalized 2   0.5   1.5 1    1    1   1     3     0  1    3      0  C             0.713  C             0.738
   Improvements
   Garden Grove
                     Signalized 0    0     0  2    1   1>   1     2   1>>  1    3      1  B             0.672  E             0.914
43 Bl. & Haster St.
   -with additional
                     Signalized 0    0     0  2    1   1>   1     2   1>>  1    3     1>  A             0.567  B             0.651
   improvements
   Trask Av. &
   SR-22 WB          Signalized 1    0     2  0    0    0   0     2     0  1    2      0  D             0.847  E             0.958
49 On/Off
   -with additional
                     Signalized 1    0    2>  0    0    0   0     2     0  1    2      0  B             0.681  C             0.769
   improvements
   Trask Av. &
                     Signalized 2    3     1  2    3    1   1     2    1>  1    2      0  D             0.838  F             1.009
50 Brookhurst. St.
   -with additional
                     Signalized 2    3     1  2    3    1   1     2   1>>  1    2      0  D             0.838  D             0.879
   improvements
   Trask Av. &
                     Signalized 1    3     1  2    3    1   1     2     1  2    2     1>  C             0.748  E             0.986
51 Euclid St.
   -with additional
                     Signalized 1    4     0  1    3    1   2     2     1  2    2     1>  C             0.830  D             0.896
   improvements
   Trask Av. &
                     Signalized 1    3     1  2    4    0   1     2     1  1    2     1>  F             1.060  E             0.948
54 Harbor Bl.
   -with additional
                     Signalized 1    3    1>  2    4    0   2     2    1>  1    2     1>  D             0.894  D             0.889
   improvements
   SR-22 WB
   On/Off &          Signalized 1    3   1>>  0    3    0   1     0     1 1.5  0.5     1  D             0.851  E             0.998
56 Harbor Bl.
   -with additional
                     Signalized 2    3   1>>  0    3    0  1.5    0   0.5 1.5  0.5     1  C             0.760  D             0.882
   improvements
   Westminster
                     Signalized 1    3     0  1    3    0   1     3     1  1    3      1  D             0.845  E             0.947
62 Av. & Euclid St.
   -with additional
                     Signalized 1    3     0  1    3    0   2     3     0  2    3      1  D             0.825  D             0.884
   improvements
         5-22
                                                                        Table 5-8 [continued]
                        Land Use Plan Intersection Level of Service Analysis With Additional Improvements
                            Control         North Bound         South Bound           East Bound           West Bound              Buildout AM                Buildout PM
 #      Intersection
                             Type
                                           L      T     R       L     T       R      L     T      R      L       T       R    LOS     Delay      V/C     LOS      Delay     V/C
      Westminster
      Av. & Harbor        Signalized       1      3     1       1     3       1      1     3       0     1        3      1      E              0.910        F             1.158
63 Bl.
      -with additional
                          Signalized       1      3     1       2     3       0      1     3       0     1        3     1>      D              0.832       D              0.891
      improvements
Note: Only intersections with deficient a LOS in Table 8 are listed in this table. > = Right-turn overlap traffic signal phasing >> = Freeflow right-turn lane - Designates
locations where General Plan cross-sections provide acceptable levels of service. Other intersections already have GP or more cross-sections. - Designates locations
where improvements required to provide acceptable levels of service may not be feasible. Waiting to obtain City staff comments. Levels of services were calculated
using Orange County Congestion Management Program (2003) LOS Criteria.
             As development proposals are analyzed by the City and peak hour intersection impacts are
             identified, circulation improvements should be recommended that are compatible with the
             general arterial classification of the roadways and consistent with the recommended
             improvements in Table 5-8.
             The forecast deficiencies are caused by several factors including in part proposed new
             development. The proportion of the growth in traffic forecast for these intersections and
             roadways within the City is attributable to traffic generated not only with the local sites, but also
             that from the adjacent communities and those passing through the city destined for other
             regional centers.
             5.7 GENERAL PLAN BUILDOUT CIRCULATION MAP
             Exhibit CIR-4, Master Plan of Streets and Highways, illustrates the Circulation Map for the City of
             Garden Grove. This Master Plan of Streets is consistent with the County Master Plan of Arterial
             Highways, based upon the arterial designation and future number of lanes.
             Several additions to the Garden Grove Master Plan of Streets and Highways are included in the
             plan shown in Exhibit CIR-4. They include the following:
                        Euclid Street, a Primary arterial, is composed of six lanes between Chapman Avenue and
                        Hazard Avenue (i.e., Major arterial standards).                                      While no designation change is
                        recommended, the theoretical capacity of this roadway is reflective of the existing six-
                        lane configuration.
                        Harbor Boulevard, a major arterial, is designated as an OCTA Smart Street and is
                        proposed to have an eight-lane cross-section.                                         While no designation change is
                        recommended, the theoretical capacity of this roadway would increase to
                        approximately that of a Principal arterial and will ultimately provide additional capacity
                        to accommodate forecast buildout volumes.
             In addition to the additions to the Garden Grove Master Plan of Streets and Highways, the
             following modifications are necessary to accommodate General Plan buildout traffic:
                        Lampson Avenue, a Secondary arterial, between Knott Avenue and the City Limit is
                        shown as analyzed as a Primary Arterial because that section of the roadway has either
                                                                                                                                                             5-23
           no driveways directly accessing the street and a raised median in the section that does.
           This increases the capacity of the street from 25,000 ADT to 37,500 ADT and will ultimately
           provide additional capacity to accommodate forecast buildout volumes.
 5.8 NEIGHBORHOOD TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT
 As traffic increase on the major roadways and
 freeways and arterials, drivers looking to reduce their
 travel times begin to look at alternative routes on the
 local street system to avoid problem areas.              This
 neighborhood intrusion by cut-through traffic has
 become a growing concern for some residential areas.
 Potential strategies to minimize and/or prevent intrusion
 of regional cut through traffic into residential
 neighborhoods through traffic management and traffic
 calming strategies include traffic circles, entrance
 treatments, curb extensions, diverters and speed                    Traffic-calming features include small
 humps.                                                            roundabouts like this one that reduce the
                                                                  speed of neighborhood traffic and enhance
 The City has adopted Traffic Engineering policies for the             the neighborhood’s appearance.
 study and installation of traffic management devices,
 including traffic circles, as tools to address neighborhood traffic management issues.
 The City has also adopted a Neighborhood Traffic Safety Program with the goals of:
           Reducing the number of car crashes, deaths, and injuries on our streets
           Reducing the number of motorists who drive at excessive speeds
           Reducing speeding by providing a hotline number
           Improving the use of safety belts and enforce the State's Child Passenger Safety Law
           Developing community support for this program
           Reducing cut-through traffic
 The Neighborhood Traffic Safety Program is a three phase program that:
           Identifies and contacts offending drivers
           Addresses neighborhood traffic concerns by taking minor measures such as the
           installation of signs, striping, and/or pavement marking.
           Addresses longer-term traffic concerns with more restrictive physical measures.
 Through community input, several neighborhoods and streets have been identified for study of
 implementing traffic management techniques.                The important key to effective traffic
 management is providing adequate capacity on major roadways to reduce the need for
 people to look for alternative routes and good site designs that do not encourage traffic to use
 adjacent residential and local streets to have good functional access to sites.
 5.9 TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND ITS
 One method for improving the capacity of existing streets and highway without extensive lane
 widening is the development of Intelligent Transportation System (ITS), or what is often referred to
 as “Smart Roads.” These types of system alternatives include traffic signals that can monitor
 traffic flow and adjust to the needs of traffic to reduce unnecessary delay. Driver information
 systems can provide motorists with information on changing road conditions to allow them to
 avoid congested locations and use less congested alternative routes. Another alternative are
5-24

video monitors so that intersections and roadway segments can be monitored to identify
developing conditions and identify potential problem conditions.
The OCTA Smart Street concept seeks to improve roadway traffic capacity and smooth traffic
flow through measures such as traffic signal synchronization, bus turnouts, intersection
improvements and addition of travel lanes by removing on-street parking and consolidating
driveways.
The Renewed Measure M Plan includes monies to develop a Regional Traffic Signal
Synchronization program. The goal of the program is to improve the flow of traffic by
developing and implementing regional signal coordination across jurisdictional boundaries.
When implemented, drivers in a synchronized signal corridor can often pass through a series of
green lights before stopping. Expanding signal synchronization is a cost-effective way to
increase roadway capacity without major new construction. These systems are usually applied
during peak morning and evening hours.
OCTA is proposing a countywide signal synchronization program, which targets more than 2,000
signalized intersections across the county. The first corridor to be coordinated under this
program in the City of Garden Grove is Euclid Street.
5.10 RAIL FREIGHT
The Union Pacific Railroad provides rail freight spur line service in western Garden Grove in the
area generally bounded by Knott Avenue on the west, the City boundary on the north, Beach
Boulevard on the east, and Garden Grove Boulevard on the south. All crossings with streets in
this area are at-grade. In the City of Garden Grove, the rail lines cross the following arterial
streets:
          Garden Grove Boulevard
          Lampson Avenue
          Chapman Avenue
          Western Avenue
5.11 TRUCK ROUTES
The City of Garden Grove has adopted a truck route system (Municipal Code 10.40 et. seq.) to
provide access to those land uses requiring truck transportation, while protecting those land uses
sensitive to the impacts of truck travel (i.e., noise, vibration, congestion, etc.). The truck route is
illustrated in Exhibit CIR-5, City of Garden Grove Designated Truck Routes, and is intended to
designate those roadways for use by commercial vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight
of 6,000 pounds and with a maximum length from the kingpin to the rearmost axle not
exceeding 38 feet (Municipal Code 10.40.030). In addition, “large truck routes” are also
indicated for roadway designated for use by any commercial vehicle exceeding 38 feet in
length from the kingpin to the rearmost axle. These arterials are part of the truck route, and
include the following routes.
     Name of Street                Segment Designated as Truck Route
     Beach Boulevard               Garden Grove Boulevard, south to Trask Avenue
     Brookhurst Street             Katella Avenue, south to Hazard Avenue
     Chapman Avenue                Valley View Street, east to Beach Boulevard
     Euclid Street                 Garden Grove Boulevard, south to Hazard Avenue
     Garden Grove Boulevard        Knott Street, east to Beach Boulevard
                                                                                                 5-25

     Harbor Boulevard             Garden Grove Boulevard, south to Westminster Avenue
     Katella Avenue               Dale Street, east to Euclid Street
     Knott Street                 City limits north of Orangewood Avenue, south to Garden Grove
                                  Boulevard
     Valley View Street           City limits north of Chapman Avenue, south to Garden Grove
                                  Freeway
     Western Avenue               City limits north of Orangewood Avenue, south to Garden Grove
                                  Boulevard
     Western Avenue               Newland Street, east to Fairview Street
 5.12 PUBLIC TRANSIT
 OCTA provides extensive bus and rail transit service throughout Orange County. Public transit
 service in Garden Grove includes local fixed-route bus service, commuter bus service, and
 paratransit services. The existing transit routes in the study area are illustrated in Exhibit CIR-6,
 Existing Transit Routes.
 OCTA FIXED-ROUTE SERVICES
 Nineteen OCTA bus routes have stops within the City of Garden Grove. These include local
 service, community shuttles, intra-county express routes serving connecting cities, and inter-
 county express routes. The routes currently serving the City of Garden Grove are detailed in the
 General Plan EIR.
 BUS RAPID TRANSIT
 Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) is a new approach to traditional bus travel. The new buses will only stop
 at key destinations in order to provide faster service in existing transit corridors. BRT is planned to
 offer frequent service, have its own distinct identity, offer traffic signal priority, and serve
 customized bus shelters that display real-time bus arrival information.
 Harbor Boulevard BRT
 The Harbor Boulevard BRT Project is the first of three BRT projects to be implemented by the
 Orange County Transportation Authority (OCTA) in the next four years, and is scheduled for
 completion in late 2008. Route 43, which travels along Harbor Boulevard, is the busiest bus route
 in the county. The goal for the Harbor Boulevard BRT Project is to decrease travel time for
 customers and improve travel speed.
 Westminster Boulevard/17th Street BRT
 The Westminster Boulevard/17th Street BRT Project is the second of three BRT projects to be
 implemented by OCTA in the next four years, and is scheduled for completion in late 2009.
 Service on Westminster/17th will operate over a 22-mile, east-west route between Santa Ana
 and Long Beach, becoming the first truly regional BRT service operated by OCTA by providing
 direct connections to multimodal transit services in Los Angeles County at the Long Beach Transit
 Mall.
 PARK-N-RIDE
 There is a City-operated Park-n-Ride facility located on the northwest corner of Euclid Avenue
 and Trask Avenue. The lot has about 30 spaces designated for park-n-ride customers. Direct
 connections to OCTA routes 37 and 56 are available from the lot.
5-26
There are no other transit centers currently in the City of Garden Grove.
OTHER OCTA TRANSIT SERVICES
OCTA provides ACCESS bus service for senior citizens & people with disabilities. ACCESS is a
shared-ride service for people who are unable to use the regular, fixed-route bus service
because of functional limitations caused by a disability. These passengers must be certified by
OCTA to use the ACCESS system by meeting the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) eligibility
criteria. OCTA’s Ridematch program helps registered users find a carpool partner to ride with,
based on both the commuters schedules. OCTA also has vanpool services. Commuters can
form groups and can apply for the vanpool service through OCTA. Commuters can get
subsidies from OCTA or their employers
LONG RANGE TRANSIT CONCEPTS
A Joint Powers Authority (including one Orange County city — Los Alamitos) has been created
to oversee the planning and development of the proposed Orangeline Maglev line, proposed
to travel from Los Angeles’ Union Station (Union Passenger Terminal), generally along Union
Pacific’s Stanton Branch and the Pacific Electric right-of-way into Orange County, to a terminus
yet to be determined. The system, which is proposed as an elevated high-speed Maglev
system, might go as far north as Palmdale and as far south as Irvine.
GO LOCAL PROJECT
The Cities of Garden Grove and Santa Ana have entered into a partnership for the Transit Vision
and Go Local Project (Go Local). The Go Local program is a four-step process to plan and
implement city-initiated transit extensions to OCTA’s Metrolink commuter rail line. The Metrolink
rail line is the backbone of transit in Orange County. Two-thirds of Orange County’s population
and jobs are within a four-mile radius of each of the County’s 11 Metrolink stations. The Santa
Ana-Garden Grove Go Local would create a five-mile transportation corridor that links Garden
Grove (at the Pacific Electric right-of-way/SR-22) to both the Santa Ana Civic Center and the
Santa Ana Regional Transportation Center and Metrolink station. The Go Local program intends
to expand the multi-modal transportation network by accommodating streetcars, bus rapid
transit, automobiles, bicycles, and pedestrians.
5.13 BIKEWAYS AND TRAILS
BICYCLE FACILITIES
With the increased popularity of cycling as a form of recreation and alternate transportation,
the City of Garden Grove has established bicycle routes to meet the growing demand for safe
places to ride bicycles. All proposed and existing bikeway routes in Garden Grove and the
surrounding area are classified in three types of facilities, as shown on Exhibit CIR-7, Master Plan
of Bikeway Facilities. A Class I bicycle trail is a facility that is physically separated from a
roadway and designated primarily for the use of bicycles. A Class II bicycle lane facility is a
facility featuring a striped lane on the paved area of a road for preferential use by bicycles. A
Class III bicycle route is a facility typically identified by green and white “Bike Route” guide
signage only.
Several Class III bikeway segments exist in Garden Grove. Along portions of Lampson and Trask
Avenue, Class III facilities total 0.5 miles.
                                                                                               5-27

 Several Class II bikeways have been developed in the City. These include:
           Chapman Avenue
           Lampson Avenue
           Brookhurst Street
           Trask Avenue east of Euclid Avenue
           Orangewood Avenue between Gilbert and Dale Streets
           Newhope Street between Westminster Avenue and Garden Grove Boulevard
           Western Avenue between north city limit and Seaboard Circle
 Located along portions of Lampson and Trask Avenues and Ward and 9th Streets, Class II
 facilities total 22.75 miles. These Class II bicycle lane segments are located along the edge of
 the paved area outside the motor vehicle travel lanes, and are restricted to vehicular parking.
 However, if sufficient pavement exists, the bicycle lane will be located between the parking
 lane and the outside motor vehicle travel lane. The three segments of bicycle routes in Garden
 Grove are characterized as bicycle facilities with typical widths of four feet (striping to curb),
 and widths of 12 feet (striping to curb) where on-street parking is permitted.
 One very short Class I bikeway is located along Knott Avenue and totals 0.5 miles in length. No
 existing bicycle parking facilities have been identified in the City.
 According to the City Master Plan of Bikeway Facilities, facilities that are most needed in Garden
 Grove are those proposed constructed or completed along Lampson Avenue, Orangewood
 Avenue, Ninth Street, and Bushard Street. These routes have been proposed by the Orange
 County Environmental Management Agency (OCEMA) because they provide vital links to major
 activity centers, while allowing continuous travel from one regional route to another. Other
 routes needed, not in OCEMA's Master Plan, that would connect longer routes together,
 providing links to areas of the City not served by major routes, are routes along Springdale Street,
 Gilbert Street, and Ward Street.
 OCTA BICYCLE MASTER PLAN
 On August 2001, the Orange County Transportation Authority (OCTA) adopted the Commuter
 Bikeways Strategic Plan (CBSP) with the intent of creating a comprehensive blueprint of the
 existing bikeways in the county, as well as proposing new facilities to complete a network of
 bikeways. The 2001 CBSP was provided to the cities and the County to adopt, if they chose to.
 Through the cooperation of the cities and the County, an inventory was taken of existing
 bikeways, and priority corridors for new bikeways were identified. The CBSP complies with the
 eligibility requirements of the Bicycle Transportation Account (BTA), which are the most stringent
 requirements of the available funding programs. The BTA is administered by Caltrans. The BTA is
 a desirable funding source, and OCTA encourages all cities and the County to pursue these
 funds.
 PLANNED IMPROVEMENTS
 Garden Grove has one Class I top priority bikeway project totaling 1 mile. This project is along a
 north-south Union Pacific rail corridor near Stanton. Top priority Class II projects total 11.75 miles.
 Table 5-9, City of Garden Grove Bicycle Facilities Projects, shows the prioritization of bikeway
 projects in the City.
5-28
                                                Table 5-9
                             City of Garden Grove Bicycle Facilities Projects
                 Class             Name                 From                     To
                   1      UP N-S Rail Trail   Chapman Ave             Garden Grove Blvd
                   2      Dale Ave            Katella Ave             Chapman Ave
                   2      Dale St             N/o Enault Ln           Lampson Ave
                   2      Orangewood Ave      Knott Ave               Western Ave
                   2      Valley View St      Cypress city limit      Chapman Avenue
                   2      Westminster Ave     Newland St              e/o Buena St
                   2      Brookhurst St       Katella Ave             Westminster Blvd
                   2      Dale St             Lampson Ave             Garden Grove Blvd
                   2      Euclid St           Trask Ave               Westminster Ave
                   2      Harbor Blvd         Chapman Ave             Westminster Ave
                   2      Knott St            Stanton Storm Channel   Garden Grove Blvd
                   2      Magnolia St         Katella Ave             Westminster Blvd
                   2      Newhope St          Lampson Ave             McFadden Ave
                   2      Newland St          Trask Ave               Hazard Ave
                   3      Orangewood Ave      Dale St                 Euclid St
                   2      Orangewood Ave      Knott Ave               Dale St
                   2      Westminster Ave     UP Rail Trail           e/o Buena St
                   2      Ward St             Hazard Ave              Ballast Ave
                   2      Lewis St            Chapman Ave             Lampson Ave
                   2      Magnolia St         Katella Ave             Slater Ave
PEDESTRIAN FACILITIES
Pedestrian facilities serve two primary purposes: transportation and recreation. Sidewalks are
the fundamental pedestrian transportation facility, while trails serve the recreation function. In
the County Master Plan of Arterial Highways, which includes the majority of arterial highways in
the City of Garden Grove, right-of-way is provided for parkways and sidewalks. All Master Plan
facilities provide for sidewalks as a means of pedestrian transportation. In addition, the existing
City of Garden Grove General Plan includes a policy to require new construction, including
subdivisions, to provide sidewalks. It is the objective of the City to provide a system of sidewalks
in all areas of the City.
The major sidewalk program has been the voter approved sidewalks installation program. These
sidewalks can be installed only on arterial streets within the City. For local residential streets, the
residents may form special assessment districts to fund sidewalk installation.
Currently, there is no sanctioned walking or hiking trail system in the City of Garden Grove.
Moreover, the County Master Plan of Riding and Hiking Trails does not include facilities in the City
of Garden Grove.
                                                                                                 5-29
 5.14 KEY THEMES AND VISION FOR GENERAL PLAN
 TRAFFIC OPERATIONS
 Traffic operations are a continuing significant concern for Garden Grove residents. Of main
 concern are: signal synchronization, coordination of Caltrans and City signal synchronization
 operations, overflow into residential areas due to congestion, and use of traffic control devices.
 MINIMIZE INTRUSION INTO RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOODS
 Neighborhood intrusion by cut-through traffic has become a growing concern for some
 residential areas. As new development occurs in the Focus Areas along major arterials, there is
 the potential for drivers to look for alternative routes. The General Plan will look for ways to
 minimize traffic intrusion into established residential neighborhoods.
 REDUCED VEHICLE TRIPS
 The Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) has several overall goals for the
 region, including improving the standard of living, maintaining the regional quality of life, and
 providing social, political, and cultural equity. Many policies to implement these goals focus on
 the reduction of vehicle miles traveled.
 ACCESS AND TRAFFIC FLOW IN PARKING AREAS
 Ingress and egress to commercial centers and access within parking areas inhibit the flow of
 traffic.
 TRUCK TRAFFIC
 Truck traffic through the City and the parking of these vehicles are concerns shared by many
 residents.
 ATTRACTIVE STREETSCAPES
 The aesthetic quality of the City’s streets has been overlooked in years past. There is a renewed
 pride evident in the community and a desire to enhance the City’s image.
 INTERJURISDICTIONAL TRANSPORTATION PLANNING
 There are a number of federal, state, regional, and local transportation programs that provide
 funding to cities. Compliance with these programs is important to maintain funding sources.
 There is concern that some regional roadway improvement projects do not benefit the residents
 of Garden Grove. It is important that Garden Grove is represented in inter-jurisdictional
 programs that affect roadways within the City.
 TRANSPORTATION PLAN COMPLIANCE
 The City of Garden Grove is in compliance with the county-wide Congestion Management
 Program and the Orange County Traffic Improvement and Growth Management Ordinance
 (Measure M), as well as the Air Quality Management Plan. Continued compliance with these, as
 well as other programs will ensure that the City receives revenues for a variety of infrastructure
 improvements.
5-30

OCTA RIGHT-OF-WAY
The OCTA right-of-way has been reserved for a potential alternative transportation system for
several years. The community supports such a system along this alignment.
BIKEWAYS
Bikeways provide connections not offered by the automobile and bikeway facilities promote
health and wellness in the community. Currently, the City has limited bicycle facilities and
amenities. The County of Orange and the City of Garden Grove have both proposed new
routes throughout the City. Securing funding and completion of these routes will provide local
and regional connections and create mobility options for residents, which will also contribute to
relief of traffic congestion citywide.
5.15 GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
This Element is organized into goals, policies, and implementation programs. A description of
each is provided in Chapter 1, Introduction. It is important to note that the implementation
programs are specific actions to carry out all of the preceding goals and policies.
TRAFFIC OPERATIONS
 Goal CIR-1        A transportation system that maximizes freedom of movement and maintains a
                   balance between mobility, safety, cost efficiency of maintenance, and the
                   quality of the City’s environment.
Policy CIR-1.1      Maintain a citywide circulation system that is balanced with the future land use
                    development anticipated in the General Plan Land Use Element.
Policy CIR-1.2      Encourage a goal of Level of Service (LOS) D or better from arterial intersections
                    under the jurisdiction of the City of Garden Grove.
Policy CIR-1.3      Strive to achieve a minimum traffic Level of Service (LOS) D throughout the City,
                    except for major development areas at those intersections that are impacted
                    by factors beyond the City’s control or at those intersections included on the
                    Deficient Intersection List.
Policy CIR-1.4      Improve those intersections that are impacted by factors beyond the control of
                    the City, and that operate at an unacceptable Level of Service.
Policy CIR-1.5      Identify roadway corridors within the City of Garden Grove where LOS E
                    operations may be acceptable if it supports transit-oriented development or
                    other appropriate travel demand reduction strategies.
Policy CIR-1.6      Adopt typical street sections consistent with the County of Orange Master Plan
                    of Arterial Highways (MPAH), and encourage their implementation.
Policy CIR-1.7      Continue to work with OCTA to implement and maintain the “Smart Street”
                    corridors in the City to provide improved multi-modal traffic operations along
                    those corridors.
                                                                                                5-31

 Policy CIR-1.8  Ensure that new development can be accommodated within the existing
                 circulation system, or planned circulation improvements, such that the standard
                 of Level of Service (LOS) D is maintained.
 Policy CIR-1.9  Review and determine if there are corridors or intersections where a future
                 operating condition of Level of service E may be acceptable if the impact of
                 the mitigation to address that condition would prohibit other important goals
                 from being achieved.
 Policy CIR-1.10 Continue to monitor land use development in adjacent cities to identify impacts
                 and implement improvements to the Garden Grove circulation system.
 Policy CIR-1.11 Continue to monitor the railroad operations in the Central Industrial Area along
                 the Stanton Line of the Southern Pacific Transportation Company to ensure that
                 these operations do not inhibit traffic flow through the area.
 CIR-IMP-1A      Continue to evaluate and pursue design and operational improvements (i.e.,
                 medians, driveway consolidations, left-turn channelization, parking or turning
                 restrictions, cul-de-sacs, deceleration lanes, etc.) to improve the efficiency of
                 the arterials and intersections in the City of Garden Grove to more closely
                 approximate theoretical carrying capacities.
 CIR-IMP-1B      Continue to update, as necessary, the Master Plan of Traffic Signals and Traffic
                 Controls for the City of Garden Grove.
 CIR-IMP-1C      Adopt the Circulation Element, and ensure its consistency with the Orange
                 County Master Plan of Arterial Highways (MPAH).
 CIR-IMP-1D      Utilize the Master Plan of Arterial Highways (MPAH) Cooperative Study process
                 to amend the Circulation Element, as necessary.
 CIR-IMP-1E      Prioritize capital improvements, focusing on those areas of the City that operate
                 at unacceptable Levels of Service, to enhance traffic safety, improve Levels of
                 Service, and implement the buildout of the Orange County Master Plan of
                 Arterial Highways (MPAH).
 CIR-IMP-1F      Monitor key intersections where congestion is likely to occur as a result of
                 increasing traffic volumes.
 CIR-IMP-1G      Perform an evaluation of the circulation system every five years to determine
                 segments and intersections that are not meeting the Level of Service standards.
                 If necessary, develop a deficiency plan to identify mitigations to achieve Level
                 of Service standards.
 CIR-IMP-1H      Use the development review and capital improvement processes to develop
                 consistent street and sidewalk widths citywide.
 CIR-IMP-1I      Require new development or redevelopment projects to identify direct project
                 impacts and provide associated mitigation at the time of key decision points,
                 such as site plan approval or significant change in the land use of an approved
                 development.
5-32
CIR-IMP-1J      Look for opportunities to have new development or redevelopment, or
                expansion of existing development to pay the full cost of circulation
                improvements needed to serve the development (i.e., signalization, turn lanes,
                etc.).
CIR-IMP-1K      Periodically evaluate development impact fees to ensure that circulation
                infrastructure funding required of new development or redevelopment projects
                is adequate to improve and/or maintain Garden Grove’s circulation system to
                meet Level of Service standards.
IMPROVED TRAFFIC CONDITIONS AT AND ALONG FREEWAYS
 Goal CIR-2    Improved traffic flows along the Garden Grove Freeway, as well as improved
               access along the Freeway, within the City of Garden Grove.
Policy CIR-2.1  Continue to coordinate with Caltrans to monitor and improve the interface
                between the City’s circulation network with that of the State.
Policy CIR-2.2  Continue to coordinate with adjacent cities and Caltrans to monitor all Freeway
                improvements.
CIR-IMP-2A      Continue to work with Caltrans to synchronize and coordinate traffic signals on
                arterials at intersections controlled solely by Caltrans.
CIR-IMP-2B      Coordinate concept design, final engineering, and construction of
                improvements with Caltrans to provide for the standard of Level of Service D or
                better operations at intersections under the control of Caltrans.
CIR-IMP-2C      Pursue agreements with Caltrans to interconnect arterial/ramp intersection
                traffic signals with the City of Garden Grove master signalization system.
CIR-IMP-2D      Coordinate with Caltrans to provide adequate freeway access signage to all
                freeways within the City of Garden Grove.
CIR-IMP-2E      Work with Caltrans to review, monitor, and improve as necessary on-/off-ramps
                at the Garden Grove Freeway.
MINIMIZE INTRUSION INTO RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOODS
 Goal CIR-3    Minimized intrusion of commuter traffic on local streets through residential
               neighborhoods.
Policy CIR-3.1  Conduct neighborhood circulation studies to determine the nature and extent
                of actual and perceived traffic through these areas.
Policy CIR-3.2  Create disincentives for traffic traveling through neighborhoods, where feasible.
Policy CIR-3.3  Review new development or redevelopment projects adjacent to established
                residential neighborhoods for potential traffic intrusion impacts. The review
                should recommend methods, such as but not limited to 1) expanding parkways
                to reduce the roadway width, 2) limiting the number of ingress/egress locations
                                                                                           5-33

                   on-site, 3) traffic circles, 4) diverters, or speed humps, 5) curb extensions, 6)
                   entrance treatments, or other effective traffic management techniques that
                   reduce or eliminate the traffic intrusion impacts.
 Policy CIR-3.4    Prioritize circulation improvements that enhance through traffic flow on Major,
                   Modified Major, Primary, and Secondary Arterials that provide parallel routes to
                   residential streets, in order to reduce through traffic during peak commute
                   periods.
 Policy CIR-3.5    Require new developments to implement access and traffic management
                   plans that will reduce the potential for neighborhood traffic intrusion through
                   factors such as driveway location, turn restrictions, shuttle bus operations,
                   and/or travel demand strategies.
 CIR-IMP-3A        Continue to work with citizens to identify and implement appropriate
                   neighborhood traffic management strategies to minimize non-local traffic
                   volumes in residential areas.
 CIR-IMP-3B        Continue to enforce the City’s posted speed limits. To this end, implement
                   vehicular speed awareness programs (e.g., mobile radar trailers, traffic stops,
                   etc.). Particular attention should be focused on those areas immediately
                   adjacent to the Garden Grove Freeway.
 Also refer to Goals and Polices in the Community Design Element.
 REDUCED VEHICLE TRIPS
   Goal CIR-4     A reduction in vehicle miles traveled in order to create a more efficient urban
                  form.
 Policy CIR-4.1      Strive to achieve a balance of land uses whereby residential, commercial,
                     and public land uses are proportionally balanced.
 Policy CIR-4.2      Strive to reduce the number of miles traveled by residents to their places of
                     employment.
 Policy CIR-4.3      Ensure the reduction in vehicle miles traveled through the approval of mixed
                     use development proposals.
 CIR-IMP-4A          Encourage the development of mixed use projects as a means of reducing
                     peak commute period traffic.
 Also refer to Economic Development Goals 3, 4, and 5 that pertain to the expanding retail
 offerings in the City, as well as expanding industrial, office and research and development
 employment sectors in the City.
 In addition, refer to implementation measures for Circulation Goals 10 and 11.
5-34

ALTERNATIVE FORMS OF TRANSPORTATION
 Goal CIR-5    Increased awareness and use of alternate forms of transportation generated in,
               and traveling through, the City of Garden Grove.
Policy CIR-5.1   Promote the use of public transit.
Policy CIR-5.2   Continue to work with OCTA to implement and maintain the “Smart Street”
                 corridors in the City to provide improved multi-modal traffic operations along
                 those corridors.
Policy CIR-5.3   Provide appropriate bicycle access throughout the City of Garden Grove.
Policy CIR-5.4   Provide appropriate pedestrian access throughout the City of Garden Grove.
Policy CIR-5.5   Continue to implement the provisions of the Transportation Demand
                 Ordinance.
CIR-IMP-5A       Promote the use of Transportation Demand Management (TDM) Measures.
CIR-IMP-5B       Encourage the creation of programs such as Transportation Systems
                 Management (TSM), public transit, carpools/ vanpools, ride-match, bicycling,
                 and other alternatives to the energy-inefficient use of vehicles.
CIR-IMP-5C       Encourage incentives for the creation and use of car or vanpools for City
                 employees.
BIKEWAYS
 Goal CIR-6    A safe, appealing, and comprehensive bicycle network provides additional
               recreational opportunities for Garden Grove residents and employees.
Policy CIR-6.1   Continue to implement an updated Master Plan of Bikeways and its
                 amendments.
Policy CIR-6.2   Continue to maintain roadways and remove barriers on streets with bikeway
                 facilities.
Policy CIR-6.3   Encourage existing major traffic generators, and new major traffic generators
                 to incorporate facilities, such as bicycle racks and showers, into the
                 development.
Policy CIR-6.4   Continue to pursue and monitor funding sources for bikeway facilities.
Policy CIR-6.5   Sponsor bicycle safety and education programs.
CIR-IMP-6A       Encourage the Public Works Department to consider bikeways in their
                 prioritization of re-paving, and street sweeping.
CIR-IMP-6B       Consider amending the City’s Zoning Code to require major traffic generators
                 to include bikeway facilities.
                                                                                          5-35

 CIR-IMP-6C       Provide incentives        to  developers    who     incorporate  bikeways    into
                  developments.
 CIR-IMP-6D       Update the existing Master Plan of Bikeways to comply with Caltrans standards
                  in order to qualify for funding of new bikeway facilities.
 CIR-IMP-6E       Consider implementing the Safe Routes to schools program to qualify for
                  funding.
 CIR-IMP-6F       Maintain awareness of Orange County Transit Authority (OCTA) grant
                  opportunities.
 CIR-IMP-6G       Encourage bicycle safety awareness classes at community centers or parks
                  where facilities are currently located.
 CIR-IMP-6H       Encourage the placement of signage that educates and informs automobiles
                  and bicyclists that use the facility.
 ACCESS AND TRAFFIC FLOW IN PARKING AREAS
  Goal CIR-7    Adequate access to appropriate parking areas within the City.
 Policy CIR-7.1   Design safe and efficient vehicular access to properties from arterial streets to
                  ensure efficient vehicular ingress and egress.
 Policy CIR-7.2   Review development plans and encourage designs that consolidate access
                  locations onto streets and provide adequate turn lanes into sites to minimize
                  conflicts with through traffic on adjacent streets.
 Policy CIR-7.3   Continue to evaluate the City’s zoning ordinance to ensure that adequate
                  parking, and access to that parking, is provided for all land uses.
 Policy CIR-7.4   Require developments to provide adequate storage for exiting vehicles
                  including multiple turning lanes at signalized access drives to reduce the time
                  needed to exit vehicles from the site and improve intersection operations.
 Policy CIR-7.5   Evaluate and determine restrictions for on-street parking along arterials in the
                  City of Garden Grove.
 CIR-IMP-7A       Minimize access on the City’s arterials by consolidating driveways and
                  encouraging reciprocal access agreements with adjoining property owners.
 CIR-IMP-7B       Require common entries and parking areas for commercial developments
                  facing onto an arterial street. Supplemental drives may be provided on alleys
                  or adjacent collector streets.
 CIR-IMP-7C       Create internal circulation and parking area guidelines for new commercial
                  and industrial development, and utilize these guidelines as part of the
                  development review process.
 CIR-IMP-7D       Revise the City’s parking standards to possibly include: requirements for paid
                  parking, parking at major employment centers, and similar issues.
5-36

CIR-IMP-7E       Consider the application of parking management tools that may include, but
                 not be limited to: parking fees, provision of peak period street parking,
                 preferential parking, establishment of parking zone permit programs, park and
                 ride lots and shuttle service.
CIR-IMP-7F       Consider the prohibition of on-street parking on arterials to increase the traffic
                 capacity and improve vehicular and pedestrian safety.
CIR-IMP-7G       Develop a permit parking program for on-street parking in multi-family
                 residential neighborhoods, where feasible and necessary.
TRUCK TRAFFIC
 Goal CIR-8    Minimized impacts associated with truck traffic through the City, as well as the
               parking locations of these vehicles.
Policy CIR-8.1   Continue to enforce the City’s adopted truck route system.
Policy CIR-8.2   Prioritize capacity and operational enhancements along designated truck
                 routes.
Policy CIR-8.3   Work with adjacent communities and regional agencies to identify alternative
                 systems for goods movement.
Policy CIR-8.4   Review current goods movement patterns and determine if possible
                 restrictions on hours of truck traffic may reduce impacts to area streets.
CIR-IMP-8A       Periodically re-evaluate the City’s adopted truck route system to ensure that
                 all truck routes, “large truck routes,” and parking locations for these vehicles
                 are appropriate.
ATTRACTIVE STREETSCAPES
 Goal CIR-9    Improved aesthetic quality and maintenance of arterial highways and local
               roadways.
Policy CIR9.1    Strive to achieve adequate funding levels for street              and parkway
                 maintenance in each budgetary cycle.
Policy CIR-9.2   Provide landscaped medians and greenbelts along major arterials, highways,
                 and freeways, when economically feasible.
Policy CIR-9.3   Ensure the aesthetic quality and maintenance of facilities within the City
                 under the jurisdiction of other agencies.
Policy CIR-9.4   Target and prioritize street beautification programs along Major arterials within
                 the City.
CIR-IMP-9A       Through design guidelines and zoning requirements, require the provision of
                 landscaped medians and parkways for all new development or
                 redevelopment projects.
                                                                                             5-37

 CIR-IMP-9B           Work with Caltrans to ensure that soundwalls along State facilities are
                      landscaped and maintained with plant materials.
 Also refer to related Goals and Policies in the Community Design Element.
 INTERJURISDICTIONAL TRANSPORTATION PLANNING
  Goal CIR-10      Participation in regional transportation planning efforts to address inter-
                   jurisdictional issues, and maintain competitive advantage in capital
                   improvement funding programs, as appropriate.
 Policy CIR-10.1      Continue to comply with, and participate in, federal, state, and regional
                      planning efforts as a means of maintaining eligibility for future roadway
                      funding, as appropriate.
 Policy CIR-10.2      Actively pursue federal, state, and regional funds for local and regional
                      roadway improvements,
 Policy CIR-10.3      Encourage employers to reduce employee-related travel.
 Policy CIR-10.4      Examine the potential impacts to the community associated with county-wide
                      street projects (i.e., effects on property values, increased noise and air quality
                      impacts, potential improvement to marginal commercial areas, etc.)
 CIR-IMP-10A          Continue to participate in interjurisdictional planning forums, in order to
                      coordinate circulation improvements in the area.
 CIR-IMP-10B          Continue to foster coordination with adjoining cities and regional agencies, as
                      well as utility companies and transportation agencies with right-of-ways within
                      the City, in order to facilitate transit opportunities.
 CIR-IMP-10C          Continue to investigate the possibility of park-and-ride facilities within the City.
 CIR-IMP-10D          Support ride sharing, flexible work scheduling, and telecommuting for City
                      employees, as well as for major businesses and industries within the City.
 CIR-IMP-10E          Investigate the feasibility of an intra-City van or municipal bus service for
                      shopping, recreation, and other transportation needs of residents, workers,
                      and the transit dependent.
 CIR-IMP-10F          Pursue every effort possible the investigation and development of a fix
                      rail/light rail transit system to connect downtown Anaheim to Huntington
                      Beach with various stops along the route, which would run through the Cities
                      of Anaheim, Stanton, Garden Grove, Westminster and Huntington Beach. The
                      investigation should consider the use of diesel- or electric-powered railcars for
                      the rail transit system, such as a diesel multiple unit (DMU), which is a self-
                      propelled commuter rail passenger car that is capable of pulling additional
                      coaches.
5-38
TRANSPORTATION PLAN COMPLIANCE
 Goal CIR-11    Continued compliance with regional congestion management, transportation
                demand, traffic improvement, air quality management, and growth
                management programs.
Policy CIR-11.1   Strive to facilitate compliance with the Congestion Management Program
                  (CMP).
Policy CIR-11.2   Continue compliance with Measure M, as amended.
Policy CIR-11.3   Continue to meet Measure M requirements to ensure the City’s eligibility to
                  receive Measure M funds.
Policy CIR-11.4   Continue to investigate the possibility of park-and-ride facilities within the City.
Policy CIR-11.5   Encourage employers to reduce employee-related travel.
CIR-IMP-11A       Continue land use coordination through the utilization of standardized traffic
                  impact analysis methodologies.
CIR-IMP-11B       Agree to expend all Measure M revenues within all three years of receipt.
CIR-IMP-11C       Continue to encourage major employers to use van pools and other high
                  occupancy vehicles (HOVs) for home to work journeys.
CIR-IMP-11D       Continue to encourage employers to use vans, small buses, and other HOVs to
                  link work places with potential park-and-ride facilities and transit centers.
CIR-IMP-11E       Encourage the provision of convenient eating and recreational facilities on-
                  site for businesses employing more than 100 people.
CIR-IMP-11F       Encourage businesses to establish incentives and regulations to spread work
                  trips over a longer period to reduce peak period congestion.
MEASURE M DEVELOPMENT PHASING AND MONITORING PROGRAM
 Goal CIR-12        A Citywide development phasing and monitoring program, as required by
                    Measure M.
Policy CIR-12.1   Continue to require for all new development or redevelopment projects a
                  development phasing plan that phases approval of development
                  commensurate with required improvements.
CIR-IMP-12A       Ensure that adequate time is allocated to design and construct infrastructure,
                  specifically transportation improvements, for approved development projects.
CIR-IMP-12B       Maintain the annual performance monitoring program of the development
                  phasing plans within the City.
                                                                                                 5-39

 OCTA RIGHT-OF-WAY
  Goal CIR-13    Use of the OCTA right-of-way for alternative transportation systems.
 Policy CIR-13.1 Coordinate with the OCTA to facilitate the potential development of an
                 alternative transportation system along the OCTA right-of-way. The City shall
                 support such a use while recognizing that any impacts to the community must
                 be appropriately mitigated.
 CIR-IMP-13A     Participate in the OCTA planning efforts to identify potential mass transit
                 corridors that will interface with the City of Garden Grove.
 CIR-IMP-13B     Coordinate with the OCTA to locate transportation station(s) along the right-
                 of-way. To this end, consider the following in the planning of these facilities:
                 parking; transportation centers adjacent to the line and convenient
                 passenger transfer between transit lines; shopping and services for commuters
                 adjacent to the station site; as well as other activity or commercial nodes in
                 the City.
 CIR-IMP-13C     Once developed, encourage the community to use the alternative
                 transportation system. To this end, work with OCTA to advertise the system’s
                 benefits, operations, destinations, etc.
5-40

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                COLLEGE
                                                                    AVE
                                    ST                                                AVE
                                                                                                                                                                             ST
                                                                                                                                            AVE
                                           KATELLA                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ST                ST                                              ST
                                                                                                                                    AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ST
                                                                                                     AVE
                                   VIEW                                                                              BLVD                                                                                                                                                                                            ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                STATE
                                           ORANGEWOOD                                                                       AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PALMWOOD
            ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        8-lane divided roadway (Principal arterial & OCTA Smart Street)
                                           CHAPMAN                                                                          AVE
                                  VALLEY
           BLACKMER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6-lane divided roadway (Major arterial)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6-lane divided roadway (Major arterial & OCTA Smart Street)
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ST
                                                                              KNOTT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6-lane divided roadway (Primary arterial)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4-lane divided roadway (Primary arterial)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LEWIS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4-lane undivided roadway (Secondary arterial)
                                           LAMPSON                                                                          AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2 to 4 lanes (Non-Master Plan of arterial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        highways local collectors)
                                                           HOLDER                                 WESTERN
                                                                                                                   BEACH
                                                                                                                                                                                                           NUTWOOD
                                                                                                                                            DALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    HASTER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NINTH             WEST
                                 GARDEN                                   GROVE                             BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ST              CE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       UR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Y
                                                                                                                                                                         GILBERT                                                   BENTON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ST
    RD                                                                                      TRASK                                         AVE
                                                  AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CLINTON ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TAFT
                                                          WESTMINSTER                                                                       AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ST
                                                                                                                                                                                     ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BLVD
  CHICA
                                                                                                                                                    ST         AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BOWEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ST                                              ST
                                                                                            HAZARD                                                                      AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ST
                                                                                                                            BLVD                                                             AVE                                ST
                                                                                                                                    BOLSA                                                                 AVE
                                                                                                                            BEACH
                                                         McFADDEN                           AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NOT TO SCALE
                                            SPRINGDALE
                                                                                                                                                                                             BROOKHURST
                                                                                                                                                   NEWLAND   MAGNOLIA                                                                                                        NEWHOPE          HARBOR
                                                                                                                                                                                   BUSHARD                                                                                                                                   FAIRVIEW
BOLSA                                                                                                                                                                                                                           WARD                   EUCLID                                                                                             SOURCE: ITERIS, May 2008.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Existing Circulation System and MPAH Designations
          05/08 • JN 10-104660
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        EXHIBIT CIR-1

                                             CLASSIFICATION
                                                        160´
                         4 LANES                                                   4 LANES
                                                                                                                                       LEGEND
                                                   PRINCIPAL
                                              8-LANE DIVIDED ROADWAY
                                          ACCOMMODATES 72,000 ADT AT LOS 'E'
                                                        120´
                     8´           45´                   14´                    45´           8´
                              3 LANES                                      3 LANES
                                                      MAJOR
                                               6-LANE DIVIDED ROADWAY
                                          ACCOMMODATES 56,300 ADT AT LOS 'E'
                                                        100´
                        8´            35´               14´                35´            8´
                                   2 LANES                            2 LANES
                                                    PRIMARY
                                               4-LANE DIVIDED ROADWAY
                                          ACCOMMODATES 37,500 ADT AT LOS 'E'
                                                          80´
                               8´                         64´                      8´
                                                      4 LANES                                                                           NOT TO SCALE
                                                  SECONDARY
                                             4-LANE UNDIVIDED ROADWAY                                                SOURCE: ITERIS, May 2008.
                                          ACCOMMODATES 25,000 ADT AT LOS 'E'
                                                                                          General Plan Typical Roadway Cross-Sections
05/08 • JN 10-104660
                                                                                                                                                    EXHIBIT CIR-2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               COLLEGE
                                                                                      AVE
                                           ST                                                                      AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AVE
                                                       KATELLA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ST                                    ST                                                                                            ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                          AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ST
                                                                                                                                                          AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15/0.62
                                         VIEW                                                                                                                                          BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      42/0.74
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    17/0.66                               21/0.55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               STATE
                                                                                                                                            8/0.34                                                                                          7/0.27                        6/0.24                                                                              10/0.39                                          39/1.04
                                                       ORANGEWOOD                                                                                                                               AVE                                                                                                                        10/0.38
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PALMWOOD
                                                                                                                                                                                                          5/0.22
                                                                                                                                                      25/1.02
                                                                            11/0.45                                                                                                                                                                                                            15/0.62                                45/0.81                                                                                                       14/0.57                              19/0.76
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14/0.56
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LEGEND
                                      VALLEY 73/1.29
                                                                                                             41/0.72                                                                                                                                      20/0.52                                                                                                                                              38/1.01
              ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             43/0.76               34/0.91
                            10/0.27                    CHAPMAN                                   18/0.48                                    18/0.48                         24/0.64             AVE                                        17/0.45                              22/0.58                                     25/0.68                    33/0.89                                   31/0.81                              34/0.90                                34/0.90                                                                                          49/1.30                                    0.00/0.00 = ADT in thousands/Volume
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             39/1.05
             BLACKMER
                                                                 18/0.47                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                45/1.20
                                                                                                                                                      22/0.87
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CapacityRatio
                                                       75/1.33              19/0.74
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ST
                                                                                                           KNOTT       47/0.83                                                                                                                            29/0.76                             11/0.44                                 47/0.83                                                                                                       12/0.48                              19/0.78
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (0.00) = Volume Capacity Ratio with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                40/0.71                                                                                                      45/0.8                34/0.90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  General Plan Lane Improvements
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LEWIS
                         23/0.61
                                                        LAMPSON                                  17/0.46                                     16/0.63                       23/0.91              AVE                                           16/1.26                           14/1.11                                    10/0.81                      12/0.94                                 10/0.82                              15/1.18                                  18/1.47
                                                             19/0.51                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         26/2.11                    21/1.72                  23/1.84
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (0.63)                            (0.55)                                     (0.40)                      (0.47)                                  (0.41)
                                                                                                                                                       WESTERN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (0.59)                                   (0.74)
                                                                            HOLDER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (1.06)                     (0.86)                  (0.92)
                                                                                       20/0.79
                        74
                                                                                                                                                                 20/0.78
                          /1
                                                                                                                                                                                     BEACH                                      12/0.47                   31/0.83                             12/0.48                                                                                                                                                         13/0.53                              20/0.80                   52/0.93
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           84
                            .3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NUTWOOD
                                                                                                                                                                                              78/1.08                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        30/0.81
   77                                                                                                                  87
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        /0.
                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                38/0.68
                                                                                                                                 /0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   HASTER
     /1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      47
       .36                                                                                                                            49
                                                                                                                                               34/0.61 42/0.74                                          44/1.16                              27/0.48                           29/0.52                                                                                                                                                             NINTH                                 WEST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               33/0.58                                                               20/0.36                                                                                                                           32/0.57
                                   GARDEN                                                           GROVE                                                                    BLVD
                                    41/1.09                                                        37/1.00                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     35/0.62                      ST                                                    29/0.52
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                22/0.89
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CE                                                                      34/0.60                                                                                 32/0.57
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NT
                                                                                                                                  47/0.83                                                                                                                                                                                                           56/0.99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   UR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    26/1.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           GILBERT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      42/1.11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BENTON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        8/0.34
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BL                                                                                                                                      49/1.98
                                                                                                                                                                                                  19                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                62/1.11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      58/1.02
                                                                                                                                                                                               /1.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (0.88)
    RD                                                                                                                                        TRASK                                          85                   AVE                                                           34/1.36                                         33/1.30                          19/0.74                                ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               13/0.50                           34/1.37                       24/0.98                                                 15/0.59
                                                                   AVE                                                                                                                                       16/0.62                         23/0.91
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 25/1.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    62/1.10                                                                 56/1.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      46/0.81
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TAFT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    33/1.31                          62/1.11
                                                                           WESTMINSTER                                                                                                                               AVE                       25/0.66                              34/0.90                                   36/0.95                            42/1.11                                                                                                                                                 38/0.67
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               22/0.60                          31/0.55                        24/0.43
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                49/0.87                                                           55/0.97                                                                                                                                             BLVD
  CHICA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    53/0.93                                                                             54/0.97
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ST                                     AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BOWEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ST                                                                                              ST
                                                                                                                                             HAZARD                                                                                                                                       AVE                                 18/0.72
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                BLVD                                                                                                                                            AVE                                      ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         L E G E N D
                                                                                                                                                                                                           BOLSA                                                                                                                                                  AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        City boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Analyzed intersection
                                                                                                                                                                                                BEACH
                                                                          McFADDEN                                                           AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NOT TO SCALE
                                                             SPRINGDALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BROOKHURST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NEWLAND                               MAGNOLIA                                                                                                                                                                                       NEWHOPE                          HARBOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BUSHARD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NOT TO SCALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FAIRVIEW
BOLSA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    WARD                             EUCLID                                                                                                                                                                                         SOURCE: ITERIS, May 2008.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Land Use Plan Daily Traffic Volumes and Volume-To-Capacity Ratios
             05/08 • JN 10-104660
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        EXHIBIT CIR-3

                                                                       BOLSA
                                                                                                                                                       CHICA                                  RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BLACKMER             ST
         05/08 • JN 10-104660
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        VALLEY                                     VIEW                   ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GARDEN
                                                                      SPRINGDALE
                                                                                                                                                                                            AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LAMPSON              CHAPMAN                                       KATELLA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  HOLDER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ORANGEWOOD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AVE
                                                                                                    McFADDEN
                                                                                                                                                                       WESTMINSTER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GROVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     KNOTT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AVE
                                                                                                    AVE
                                                                                                                                              HAZARD                                              TRASK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 WESTERN                                                            AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BEACH                                                             BLVD
                                                                                                                      BEACH           BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AVE               AVE                   AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AVE
                                                                                                                              BOLSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                  AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DALE                                                                                   AVE
                                                                                                                                                                       AVE
                                                                       NEWLAND                                                                              ST
                                                                       MAGNOLIA                                                                         AVE
                                                                                                                                             AVE                                                   GILBERT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ST
                                                                      BUSHARD                                                                                    ST
                                                                      BROOKHURST                                                      AVE
                                                                                                                              AVE                                                                                            NUTWOOD                    ST
                                                                                                                                                                  ST                                                                                                      PALMWOOD                      ST
                                                                       WARD                                                           ST     BOWEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                  BENTON       ST
                                                                                                                                                                                     TAFT          ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                           CE
                                                                                                                                                                                                             NT
                                                                       EUCLID
                                                                                                                                                                                                               UR
                                                                                                                                        ST                                                                       Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                          BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NINTH                                                                              ST
                                                                      NEWHOPE                                                                          ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            WEST                                                                                ST
                                                                       HARBOR                                                                           BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                         CLINTON ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HASTER                                                              ST
                                                                      FAIRVIEW                                                                         ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LEWIS                                                                ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                STATE                   COLLEGE
                                                                        SOURCE: ITERIS, May 2008.
                                                                                                       NOT TO SCALE                                                                                                                                                       LEGEND
                                Master Plan of Streets and Highways
EXHIBIT CIR-4

                                                                                BOLSA
                                                                                                                                                               CHICA                                  RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BLACKMER             ST
         05/08 • JN 10-104660
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VALLEY                                     VIEW                   ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              GARDEN
                                                                               SPRINGDALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                    AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LAMPSON              CHAPMAN                                       KATELLA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          HOLDER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ORANGEWOOD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AVE
                                                                                                             McFADDEN
                                                                                                                                                                               WESTMINSTER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             GROVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             KNOTT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AVE
                                                                                                             AVE
                                                                                                                                                      HAZARD                                              TRASK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WESTERN                                                            AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BEACH                                                             BLVD
                                                                                                                              BEACH           BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AVE               AVE                   AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AVE
                                                                                                                                      BOLSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                          AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DALE                                                                                   AVE
                                                                                                                                                                               AVE
                                                                                NEWLAND                                                                             ST
                                                                                MAGNOLIA                                                                        AVE
                                                                                                                                                     AVE                                                   GILBERT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ST
                                                                               BUSHARD                                                                                   ST
                                                                               BROOKHURST                                                     AVE
                                                                                                                                      AVE                                                                                            NUTWOOD                    ST
                                                                                                                                                                          ST                                                                                                      PALMWOOD                      ST
                                                                                WARD                                                          ST     BOWEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                          BENTON       ST
                                                                                                                                                                                             TAFT          ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NT
                                                                                EUCLID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       UR
                                                                                                                                                ST                                                                       Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NINTH                                                                              ST
                                                                               NEWHOPE                                                                         ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    WEST                                                                                ST
                                                                                HARBOR                                                                          BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       HASTER                                                              ST
                                                                               FAIRVIEW                                                                        ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LEWIS                                                                ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        STATE                   COLLEGE
                                                                                 SOURCE: ITERIS, May 2008.
                                                                                                               NOT TO SCALE                                                                                                                                                       LEGEND
                                City of Garden Grove Designated Truck Routes
EXHIBIT CIR-5

                        83
                                                     LEGEND
                        147
                               454
                     47
                                                      NOT TO SCALE
                                   SOURCE: ITERIS, May 2008.
                            Existing Transit Routes
05/08 • JN 10-104660
                                                                  EXHIBIT CIR-6

                                                                     BOLSA
                                                                                                                                                   CHICA                                  RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BLACKMER             ST
         05/08 • JN 10-104660
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VALLEY                                    VIEW                   ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GARDEN
                                                                    SPRINGDALE
                                                                                                                                                                                        AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LAMPSON              CHAPMAN                                       KATELLA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HOLDER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ORANGEWOOD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AVE
                                                                                                  McFADDEN
                                                                                                                                                                   WESTMINSTER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GROVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 KNOTT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AVE
                                                                                                  AVE
                                                                                                                                          HAZARD                                              TRASK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             WESTERN                                                            AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BEACH                                                             BLVD
                                                                                                                  BEACH           BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AVE               AVE                   AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AVE
                                                                                                                          BOLSA
                                                                                                                                                                                              AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             DALE                                                                                   AVE
                                                                                                                                                                   AVE
                                                                     NEWLAND                                                                            ST
                                                                     MAGNOLIA                                                                       AVE
                                                                                                                                         AVE                                                   GILBERT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ST
                                                                    BUSHARD                                                                                  ST
                                                                    BROOKHURST                                                    AVE
                                                                                                                          AVE                                                                                            NUTWOOD                    ST
                                                                                                                                                              ST                                                                                                      PALMWOOD                      ST
                                                                     WARD                                                         ST     BOWEN
                                                                                                                                                                                              BENTON       ST
                                                                                                                                                                                 TAFT          ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                       CE
                                                                                                                                                                                                         NT
                                                                     EUCLID
                                                                                                                                                                                                           UR
                                                                                                                                    ST                                                                       Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                      BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NINTH                                                                              ST
                                                                    NEWHOPE                                                                        ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        WEST                                                                                ST
                                                                     HARBOR                                                                         BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           HASTER                                                              ST
                                                                    FAIRVIEW                                                                       ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LEWIS                                                                ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            STATE                   COLLEGE
                                                                      SOURCE: ITERIS, May 2008.
                                                                                                   NOT TO SCALE                                                                                                                                                       LEGEND
EXHIBIT CIR-7
                                Master Plan of Bikeway Facilities

G                               Chapter 6
       G
General P
          l an 2 0 30
                      Infrastructure Element
Chapter 6
INFRASTRUCTURE
ELEMENT
6.1 INTRODUCTION
Public infrastructure is an important support network
for the City.           Well-designed and maintained
infrastructure systems are critical to the community’s
overall goals, as they enhance the quality of
neighborhoods and developments, and ensure the
health and safety of the community and its residents
and businesses. Infrastructure such as water and
sewer lines, and storm drain systems must be sufficient to
accommodate both the present and future needs of the
community. As infrastructure ages or growth outpaces capacity,
there is the potential of isolated system failures. The Infrastructure
Element addresses the following support infrastructure systems:
Water, Sewer, and Storm Drain. In addition, the Element address
Storm Water and Urban Water Runoff. Background and existing
information for the Element can be found in the General Plan EIR.
6.2 AUTHORITY FOR THE ELEMENT
The State of California Government Code Section 65302 (b)
requires that the General Plan include “local public utilities and
facilities, all correlated with the land use element of the plan.”
6.3 KEY THEMES AND VISION FOR
         GENERAL PLAN
The water, sewer, and storm drain systems are the lifelines of the
City. The City of Garden Grove must plan for the reliability and
accessibility of infrastructure to adequately serve both the
existing and future users. As infill development continues to
occur, the capacity and proper planning of the City’s
infrastructure systems become increasingly important. Several
key questions as the City looks to the future include:
         How can the City upgrade deficient systems and expand
         existing systems for future users?
         How can adequately planned facilities contribute to
         growth patterns?
         How can development fees best contribute to facility
         planning in future growth areas?
                                                                       6-1

WATER SYSTEM
Garden Grove's water supply comes from two sources: imported water from Metropolitan Water
District of Southern California (MET), and local groundwater. The primary water supplier within
the City is the Garden Grove Water Services Division, serving an area of about 17.8 square miles.
The Division serves most of the incorporated City and two small unincorporated neighborhoods:
one near Chapman Avenue and Dale Street, and the other near Lampson Avenue and Beach
Street. A small area inside the City boundaries is served Golden State Water Company (formerly
known as Southern California Water Company).
The City’s Water Services Division has been operating 11 active wells with a total capacity of
26,940 gallons per minute (GPM) and four imported water connections. A new well was
completed in April 2008, which increases the total well system capacity to 29,330 GPM. In
addition, the City also operates eight storage and distribution reservoirs at five sites with a
combined volume of 53 million gallons (MG), allowing backup during periods of fireflow
demand, peak demands, and/or temporary outages. The storage system is supported by 17
booster pumps that have a total capacity of 41,000 GPM, which will keep the system pressurized
under peak flow conditions. The City also maintains nine emergency interconnections with
neighboring water systems.
Water infrastructure within the City is vital to the well-being of a community, and must be
maintained and improved to meet the needs of residents and the business community alike. As
the City ages, the Water Services Division will continue replacing aging infrastructure in certain
areas of the City. To this end, the City is currently updating its Water Systems Master Plan to
assess the need for replacement and expansion of water facilities.
In addition to water demands placed on the system for domestic and commercial use, the
system must be capable of providing adequate pressures for fire-fighting purposes. Since fires
can occur at any time, the water system must be ready at all times to provide the required flow.
Although Garden Grove does not currently have a reclaimed water system, the City should work
with MET and the Orange County Water District to develop new water sources from the upper
non-potable aquifer for treatment and for other non-potable use.
WASTEWATER SYSTEM
The Garden Grove Sanitary District (GGSD) provides sewer service to the City of Garden Grove.
The wastewater system consists of over 312 miles of gravity sewer pipes constructed between
1923 to the present, 9,700 manholes, and four lift stations. The gravity pipes collect wastewater
from the service area and convey it to the Orange County Sanitation District’s (OCSD) trunk
sewers. The trunk sewers further convey the wastewater to OCSD’s two treatments facilities in
Fountain Valley and Huntington Beach.
As the population continues to grow, infrastructure facilities, including wastewater will receive
additional pressure to serve the community. Many resources are limited, and increasing their
availability will present new challenges and require creative techniques to effectively serve the
residents, businesses, and other facilities within the City. In 2005, the Garden Grove Sanitary
District adopted a Sewer System Management Plan to replace deficient sewers within a 10-year
timeframe. The following are the priorities developed in the Sewer System Management Plan for
recommended capital improvements:
6-2

     1. Facilities that are in severe condition1 including structural defects of deformed pipes,
          holes in pipes, broken pipes, and large joint offsets.
     2. Facilities that are in major condition2 including pipes with structural defects of multiple
          fractures, medium joint offsets, and major sags. Pipes with a large number of cracks are
          also included.
     3. Facilities in moderate condition3 including pipes with fractures, cracks, small and medium
          joint offsets, and sags.
     4. Facilities in minor condition4 including pipes with slight sags, cracks, and small joint offsets.
STORM DRAIN SYSTEM
The City of Garden Grove Public Works Department is responsible for constructing and
maintaining flood control channels and storm drains within the City. The system is designed to
control the movement of rainwater to a safe location where it can re-charge our natural and
man-made water supplies. Most of the collected rainwater is directed to a flood control
channel where it flows to the ocean.
Two important planning considerations in regards to storm drain planning include: 1) ensuring
adequate capacity to collect and carry storm water is available, and 2) working to reduce
pollutants in storm water.
The City of Garden Grove has in the past been subjected to extensive street flooding and
occasional property damage, particularly during the 1960s and earlier. Major floods occurred in
1938, 1969, 1978, and 1983, affecting various parts of the City. During peak winter storms,
localized flooding damages properties and hinders travel along certain arterial streets. To
accommodate new growth and revitalization, the City should continue to maintain and replace
aging storm drain systems and minimize the adverse effects of urbanization upon drainage and
flood control facilities. Additional information regarding flooding can be found in Chapter 11,
Safety Element.
When it rains, pollutants such as trash, litter, silt, automotive chemicals, animal waste, and other
contaminants are washed into the storm drains. The Federal Pollution Control Act prohibits the
discharge of any pollutant into navigable waters from a point source unless the discharge is
authorized by a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit. The City of
          1 Severe condition. This category primarily includes structural defects of deformed pipe, hole in
pipe, broken pipe, and large joint offsets. Source: Garden Grove Sanitary District Sewer System
Rehabilitation Plan, submitted to California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region,
September 27, 2005; page 14.
          2 Major condition. This category primarily includes structural defects of multiple fractures, medium
joint offsets and major sags. Pipes with a large number of cracks are also included. Source: Garden Grove
Sanitary District Sewer System Rehabilitation Plan, submitted to California Regional Water Quality Control
Board, Santa Ana Region, September 27, 2005; page 14.
          3 Moderate condition.    Pipes in this category have fractures, cracks, small and medium joint
offsets, and sags. Source: Garden Grove Sanitary District Sewer System Rehabilitation Plan, submitted to
California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region, September 27, 2005; page 14.
          4 Minor condition. Pipes in this category have slight sags, cracks, and small joint offsets. Source:
Garden Grove Sanitary District Sewer System Rehabilitation Plan, submitted to California Regional Water
Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region, September 27, 2005; page 14.
                                                                                                           6-3
Garden Grove participants in the NPDES permit program through a partnership with County of
Orange, all cities within Orange County, and the County Flood Control District.
STORM WATER AND URBAN WATER RUNOFF
In accordance with the Clean Water Act, a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permit is required for certain municipal separate storm sewer discharges into surface
waters. The City of Garden Grove is within the region originally covered by Order No. 90-71
issued July 13, 1990. The first permit provided an opportunity for Garden Grove and all other
local Orange County municipalities to establish a program customized to its special local
conditions. The second permit, issued in 1996, was intended to improve water quality
incrementally over time. The third permit, issued in 2002, requires implementation of a program
to reduce pollutants in storm water discharges from commercial, industrial, and residential areas
to the “maximum extent practical.”
This Element provides a basis for implementing a comprehensive program for improving water
quality through a combination of methods that will reduce the level of urban water runoff and
pollutants emanating from both private and public properties; thus, enhancing the quality of
water discharged from the municipal storm sewer system within the City. The City looks to
continue to strengthen its efforts to meet or exceed the requirements of the City’s municipal
permit and the related Orange County Drainage Area Management Plan (DAMP).
A guiding principle related to storm and urban water runoff is to improve the quality of local
coastal waters, harbors, lakes, and other urban waterways in order to:
        Protect public health and safety.
        Protect and enhance the beneficial uses, such as recreation, aesthetics, economics,
        and habitat value of the local aquatic systems.
        Reduce pollutants in urban runoff flows.
        Comply with Federal and State regulations.
        Increase public awareness and education.
        Integrate water quality and drainage planning activities.
6.4 GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
This Element is organized into goals, policies, and implementation programs. A description of
each is provided in Chapter 1, Introduction. It is important to note that the implementation
programs are specific actions to carry out all of the preceding goals and policies.
WATER SYSTEM
  Goal INFR-1       Water systems shall meet the needs of the Garden Grove community.
Policy INFR-1.1     Continue to maintain, improve, and replace aging water systems to ensure
                    the provision of these services to all areas of the community.
Policy INFR-1.2     New development and redevelopment projects shall ensure that water
                    infrastructure systems are adequate to serve the development.
Policy INFR-1.3     Improve water services in a way that respects the natural environment.
INFR-IMP-1A         Update the City’s Water Systems Master Plan, as needed.
6-4

INFR-IMP-1B     Design and implement a development monitoring system to evaluate the
                individual and cumulative impact of proposed development on the service
                capacity of water facilities. Use this system in the review of development
                projects and to require mitigation and/or necessary improvements.
INFR-IMP-1C     Make use of specific plans, development agreements, or mechanisms that
                specify the nature, timing, cost, and financing mechanisms to be used to
                fund water improvements and services.
INFR-IMP-1D     Utilize, where appropriate, public financing mechanisms, such as special
                assessment or community facilities districts to fund water improvement and
                service costs.
INFR-IMP-1E     Review and revise planning and building codes to provide for new
                technologies (i.e., low flow fixtures, low flow commodes, drought tolerant
                landscaping, etc.).
INFR-IMP-1F     Promote incentive regulations to increase the efficiency of the water system.
INFR-IMP-1G     Develop new source of non-potable water for treatment and other non-
                potable uses.
WASTEWATER SYSTEM
 Goal INFR-2    Adequate wastewater facilities shall be provided to serve new and existing
                development within the City.
Policy INFR-2.1 Continue to maintain, improve and replace aging wastewater systems to
                ensure the provision of these services to all areas of the community.
Policy INFR-2.2 Continue to coordinate with the Garden Grove Sanitary District (GGSD) and
                Orange County Sanitation District (OCSD) to ensure existing wastewater
                systems are maintained and upgraded and new wastewater facilities are
                constructed, as needed.
Policy INFR-2.3 Support sustainable wastewater services that respect and improve the
                natural environment.
INFR-IMP-2A     Update the City’s Sewer Master Plan and Sewer System Management Plan, as
                necessary.
INFR-IMP-2B     Update development fee and assessment district fee structures, as necessary,
                to require all new development to pay its fair share of the cost of all essential
                wastewater improvements.
INFR-IMP-2C     Make use of specific plans, development agreements, or mechanisms that
                specify the nature, timing, cost, and financing mechanisms to be used to
                fund wastewater improvements and services.
INFR-IMP-2D     Promote incentive regulations and new technologies to increase the
                efficiency of the wastewater treatment system.
                                                                                             6-5

INFR-IMP-2E      Coordinate with the Orange County Sanitation District in the Fats, Oils, and
                 Grease (FOG) Program and other educational programs to eliminate the
                 improper disposal of waste into the wastewater system.
STORM DRAIN SYSTEM
 Goal INFR-3     Storm drain service levels shall be maintained and/or improved throughout
                 the City.
Policy INFR 3.1  Cooperate with local, State, and Federal flood control agencies to reduce
                 the potential for flood damage in the City.
Policy INFR 3.2  Continue to maintain and replace aging storm drain systems to ensure the
                 provision of these services to all areas of the community.
Policy INFR 3.3  Minimize the adverse effects of urbanization upon drainage and flood control
                 facilities.
Policy INFR 3.4  Improve the storm drain system in a way that respects the environment.
INFR-IMP-3A      Continue to participate in the NPDES permit program.
INFR-IMP-3B      Require new development and redevelopment projects (greater than one
                 acre) to provide a Water Quality Management Plan.
INFR-IMP-3C      Use natural features such as bioswales, wildlife ponds, and wetlands for flood
                 control and water quality treatment when feasible.
INFR-IMP-3D      Continue to require the implementation of adequate erosion control
                 measures for development or redevelopment projects in order to minimize
                 sedimentation damage to drainage facilities.
INFR-IMP-3E      Utilize development fees, redevelopment funds, drainage fees and other
                 funding sources to assure that development of drainage facilities corresponds
                 with development within the City.
INFR-IMP-3F      Identify and improve areas experiencing localized storm drainage problems
                 for storm drain improvements.
INFR-IMP-3G      Update the City’s Master Plan of Drainage, as necessary.
Related Goals and Policies: Refer to the Conservation Element, Goal CON-2.
STORM AND URBAN WATER RUNOFF
 Goal INFR-4     The City is committed to improved water quality resulting from storm and
                 urban water runoff from existing and future development.
Policy INFR-4.1  Provide sufficient levels of storm drainage service to protect the community
                 from flood hazards and minimize the discharge of materials into the storm
                 drain system that are toxic or which would obstruct flows.
6-6

Policy INFR-4.2 Fund and undertake storm drain improvement projects as identified in the
                City of Garden Grove Capital Improvement Plan.
Policy INFR-4.3 Cooperate in regional programs to implement the National Pollutant
                Discharge Elimination System program.
Policy INFR-4.4 Develop an industrial/commercial inspection program to comply with the
                requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System program.
Policy INFR-4.5 Conduct routine preventative maintenance activities related to municipal
                activities that are considered effective Best Management Practices (BMP) for
                pollutant control.
Policy INFR-4.6 Work with other agencies to develop a program for Model Maintenance
                Procedures for Public Agency Activities to address municipal activities’
                pollution prevention and treatment.
Policy INFR-4.7 Perform drainage facility and infrastructure maintenance activities to comply
                with the requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
                program.
Policy INFR-4.8 Consider structural measures or source control programs for the following
                drainage areas that would provide enhanced water quality benefits beyond
                what can be achieved through routine measures employed to meet NPDES
                permit requirements:
                    Wintersburg Channel Drainage Area
                    Anaheim Barber Channel Drainage Area
                    Bolsa Chica Drainage Area
Policy INFR-4.9 Identify key properties throughout the City with substantial land area that may
                be subject to future development or redevelopment that could incorporate
                water quality features.
INFR-IMP-4A     Continue to participate in education and public information activities to
                present a consistent message on storm water pollution prevention. The
                education should inform public and municipal staff about the origins and
                causes of storm water pollution and promote behavioral changes to control
                pollutants at the source. Outreach can include, but is not limited to:
                    Public service announcements through its
                    cable television productions
                    Community newsletters
                    Recycling and water pollution brochures
                    Utility bill inserts
                    City-sponsored events with litter and debris
                    clean-up
                    24-hour water pollution reporting hotline
                    City website postings or educational
                    materials
                                                                                             6-7

INFR-IMP-4B Continue to participate with other agencies on public education and
            outreach materials for countywide distribution to focus on public education
            and business activities with the potential to pollute.             Distribute Best
            Management Practices (BMP) guidance for business activities, including but
            not limited to, mobile detailing, pool maintenance, restaurant cleaning
            operations, and automotive service centers.
INFR-IMP-4C Consider implementing targeted local public information and outreach
            efforts for restaurant operations, landscape and concrete construction
            contractors, and school outreach programs.
INFR-IMP-4D Continue to implement the City’s residential informational and outreach
            program by providing homeowners with Best Management Practices (BMP) to
            address high threat activities, such as, but not limited to:
                Disposal of garden waste
                Disposal of household hazardous waste
                Disposal of pet waste
                Garden care and maintenance
                Vehicular repair and maintenance
                Vehicular washing
INFR-IMP-4E Prepare informational brochures that explain the best methods to reduce
            runoff containing pollutants from residential areas. Distribute the brochures to
            existing residents, homeowner associations and new residential
            developments.
INFR-IMP-4F Consider whether the industrial/commercial inspection should be an
            expansion of the existing inspection program or the development of a new
            inspection process. The inspection program shall include, but not be limited
            to:
                Inventory and develop database of industrial facilities based on filed
                business permits
                Inventory and develop database of commercial facilities, such as
                automobile repair stations, mobile washing operations, pool maintenance
                operations, landscapers, painting, etc.
                Prioritize and inspect industrial and commercial facilities based on high-,
                medium-, or low-threat to water quality
                Conduct inspections to ensure compliance with ordinances and NPDES
                permit requirements
                Provide informational brochures explaining Best Management Practices
                (BMP) for the industrial/commercial facility inspectors to distribute
INFR-IMP-4G Continue to annually report the City’s activities as part of its submittal to the
            Santa Ana Region Water Quality Control Board. Activities the City should
            report on include, but are not limited to:
                Litter Control
                Solid Waste Collection/Recycling
                Drainage Facility Maintenance
                Catch Basin Stenciling
                Street Sweeping
6-8

                Household Hazardous Waste Collection
                Emergency Spill Response
                Fertilizer and Pesticide Maintenance
                Fixed-Facility Inspections
                Sewer System Operation and Maintenance
INFR-IMP-4H Continue to review and update procedures, activities, and staff training to
            comply with the Model Maintenance Procedures for Public Agency Activities
            program, as necessary.
INFR-IMP-4I Review and update the litter control program, as necessary, and consider the
            findings and recommendations of the Orange County PRFD.
INFR-IMP-4J Continue to implement the City’s illegal discharge and illicit connection
            elimination program.
INFR-IMP-4K Consider the potential opportunities for the Wintersburg Channel Drainage
            Area:
                Address sentiment buildup downstream from Twin Lakes Park
                Increase size and effectiveness of the water quality feature in Twin Lakes
                Park
                Potential significant opportunities for incorporating water quality features
                into future development along the Harbor Corridor area/International
                West Focus Area
                Clean-up and protect channel in vicinity of area schools to reduce trash
                and debris accumulation
                Consider school fields and park sites for detention and/or retarding basins
INFR-IMP-4L Consider the potential opportunities for the Anaheim Barber Channel
            Drainage Area:
                Improve/restore channels to enhance aesthetics and treatment potential
                Potential significant opportunities for incorporating water quality features
                into future development in the area
                Clean-up and protect channel in vicinity of area schools to reduce trash
                and debris accumulation
                Consider school fields and park sites for detention and/or retarding basins
INFR-IMP-4M Consider the potential opportunities for the Bolsa Chica Channel Drainage
            Area:
                Improve/restore channels to enhance aesthetics and treatment potential
                Potential significant opportunities for incorporating water quality features
                into future development in the area
                Clean-up and protect channel in vicinity of area schools to reduce trash
                and debris accumulation
                Consider school fields and park sites for detention and/or retarding basins
INFR-IMP-4N Consider incorporating water quality features into new or redevelopment
            projects with sufficient land area. These features could address both project-
            specific and other local impacts.
                                                                                          6-9

CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM
 Goal INFR-5    A satisfactory Seven-Year Capital Improvement Program.
Policy INFR-5.1 Ensure that the Seven-Year Capital Improvement Program (CIP) meets the
                City’s needs.
Policy INFR-5.2 Ensure that the Seven-Year Capital Improvement Program (CIP) meets
                Measure M requirements.
INFR-IMP-5A     Amend as necessary and adopt a Seven-Year Capital Improvement
                Program.
6-10

G                      Chapter 7
       G
General P
          l an 2 0 30
                      Noise Element
Chapter 7
NOISE ELEMENT
7.1 INTRODUCTION
The Noise Element of the General Plan
examines noise sources in the City to identify
and appraise the potential for noise conflicts
and problems, and to identify ways to reduce
existing and potential noise impacts. Existing
and future noise environments and the
compatibility of land uses are considered in the
Element, as well as sensitive receptors and generators of
stationary noise. The Element identifies projected noise levels,
and contains policies and programs to achieve and maintain
noise levels compatible with various types of land uses, as well as
prevent high noise levels in sensitive areas. It is important to note
that the Element addresses noise that affects the community at
large, rather than noise associated with site-specific conditions.
The regulatory framework, background information, and existing
and future conditions can be found in the General Plan EIR.
7.2 AUTHORITY FOR ELEMENT
Government Code Section 65302(f) requires that a General Plan
include:
    “... a noise element which shall identify and appraise
    noise problems in the community. The Noise Element
    shall recognize the guidelines established by the Office of
    Noise Control in the State Department of Health Services
    and shall analyze and quantify…current and projected
    noise levels for all of the following sources: (1) highways
    and freeways; (2) primary arterials and major local
    streets; (3) passenger and freight on-line railroad
    operations and ground rapid transit systems; (4)
    commercial, general aviation, heliport, and military
    airport operations, aircraft overflights, jet engine test
    stands, and all other ground facilities and maintenance
    functions related to airport operation; (5) local industrial
    plants, including but not limited to, railroad classification
    yards; (6) other ground stationary noise sources identified
    by local agencies as contributing to the community noise
    environment.”
7.3 NOISE DEFINITIONS
Noise often is defined as annoying or unwanted sound. Health
studies have shown that excessive noise can cause adverse
psychological or physiological effects on human beings.
                                                                      7-1

 Defining noise problems and establishing a regulatory scheme to deal with noise that is both fair
 and effective requires an understanding of some of the basic characteristics of sound and how
 it affects people and their activities. While sound levels can be easily measured, the variability in
 subjective and physical responses to sound complicates the analysis of its impact on people.
 Sound is created when an object vibrates and radiates part of its energy as acoustic pressure
 waves through a medium such as air, water, or a solid. The ear, the hearing mechanism of
 humans and most animals, receives these sound pressure waves and converts them to
 neurological impulses which are transmitted to the brain for interpretation. The interpretation by
 the auditory system and the brain depends on the characteristics of the sound and on the
 characteristics of the person hearing it.
 STANDARD UNIT OF MEASUREMENT
 Sound is described in terms of the loudness (amplitude) of the sound and frequency (pitch) of
 the sound. The standard unit of measurement of the loudness of sound is the decibel (dB).
 Since the human ear is not equally sensitive to sound at all frequencies, a special frequency-
 dependent rating scale has been devised to relate noise to human sensitivity. The A-weighted
 decibel scale (dBA) performs this compensation by differentiating among frequencies in a
 manner approximating the sensitivity of the human ear.
 Decibels are based on the logarithmic scale. The logarithmic scale compresses the wide range
 in sound pressure levels to a more usable range of numbers in a manner similar to the Richter
 scale used to measure earthquakes. In terms of human response to noise, a sound ten dBA
 higher than another is perceived to be twice as loud, and 20 dBA higher is perceived to be four
 times as loud, and so forth. Everyday sounds normally range from 30 dBA (very quiet) to 100 dBA
 (very loud). Various methods have been developed for evaluating community noise to account
 for, among other things:
         The variation of noise levels over time;
         The influence of periodic individual loud events; and
         The community response to changes in the community noise environment.
 NOISE SCALES AND DEFINITIONS
 Sound pressure level is a measure of the sound pressure of a given noise source relative to a
 standard reference value. The reference pressure is typical of the quietest sound that a young
 person with good hearing is able to detect. Sound pressure levels are measured in decibels
 (dB). Decibels are logarithmic quantities, relating the sound pressure level of a noise source to
 the reference pressure level.
 An important characteristic of sound is frequency. This is the rate of repetition of sound pressure
 oscillations (waves) as they reach our ears; frequency is expressed in hertz (Hz). When analyzing
 the total noise of any source, the frequency components are sometimes analyzed to determine
 the relative amounts of low-frequency, middle-frequency, and high-frequency noise. This
 breakdown is important for two reasons:
          Our ear is better equipped to hear mid- and high-range frequencies than lower
          frequencies. Thus, we find mid- and high-frequency noise to be more annoying. High-
          frequency noise is also more capable of producing hearing loss.
          Engineering solutions to a noise problem are different for different frequency ranges.
          Low-frequency noise is generally harder to control.
7-2
The normal frequency range of hearing for most people extends from a low frequency of about
20 Hz to a high frequency of about 10,000 to 15,000 Hz. People respond to sound most readily
when the predominant frequency is in the range of normal conversation, typically around 1,000
to 2,000 Hz. Several filters have been developed that match the sensitivity of our ear and thus
help us to judge the relative loudness of various sounds made up of many different frequencies.
The so-called “A” filter is the best measure for most environmental noise sources. Sound pressure
levels measured through this filter are referred to as A-weighted levels, and are measured in A-
weighted decibels or (dBA).
The A-weighted filter significantly de-emphasizes those parts of the total noise that occur at
lower frequencies (those below about 500 Hz) and also those at very high frequencies (above
10,000 Hz) the frequencies that we do not hear as well. The filter has very little effect, or is nearly
“flat,” in the middle range of frequencies (between 500 and 10,000 Hz), where our ears are most
sensitive. Because this filter generally matches our ears’ sensitivity, sounds having a higher A-
weighted sound level are usually judged to be louder than those with lower A-weighted sound
levels, a relationship that otherwise might not be true.
Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL)
Cumulative noise metrics were developed to assess community response to noise. They are
useful because they attempt to take into account the loudness and duration of the noise, the
total number of noise events, and the time of day these events occur in one single-number
rating scale. They are designed to account for the known health effects of noise on people.
The community noise equivalent level (CNEL) is a 24-hour, time-weighted energy-average noise
level based on dBA that measures the overall noise during an entire day. Noise that occurs
during certain sensitive time periods is penalized for occurring at these times (by adding decibels
to its Leq measurement). On the CNEL scale, noise between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. is
penalized by approximately five dB, to account for the greater potential for noise to interfere
during these hours, as well as the typically lower ambient (background) noise levels during these
hours. Noise during the night (from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.) is penalized by 10 dB to attempt to
account for our higher sensitivity to noise in the nighttime and the expected further decrease in
ambient noise levels that typically occur in the night.
Equivalent Noise Level (LEQ)
The equivalent sound level, abbreviated Leq, is a measure of the exposure resulting from the
accumulation of A-weighted sound levels over a particular time period (e.g., 1 hour, 8 hour, a
school day, nighttime, or a full 24-hour day). However, because the length of the period can be
different depending on the time frame of interest, the applicable period should always be
identified or clearly understood when discussing the metric. Such durations are often identified
through a subscript, for example, “Leq (24)”.
Conceptually, Leq may be thought of as a constant sound level over the period of interest that
contains as much sound energy as the actual time-varying sound level with its normal peaks and
valleys. It is important to realize, however, that the two signals (the constant one and the time-
varying one) would sound very different from each other if compared in real life. Variations in
the “average” sound level suggested by Leq is not an arithmetic value, but a logarithmic
(“energy-averaged”) sound level. Thus, loud events clearly dominate any noise environment
described by the metric.
                                                                                                   7-3

 Day Night Average (Ldn)
 Another commonly used noise metric is the day/night average noise level (Ldn). The Ldn is a
 measure of the 24-hour average noise level at a given location. It was adopted by the EPA for
 developing criteria to evaluate community noise exposure. Ldn is based on a measure of the
 average noise level over a given time period. The Ldn is calculated by averaging the Leq for
 each hour of the day at a given location after penalizing the sleeping hours (from 10:00 p.m. to
 7:00 a.m.) by 10 dBA to take into account the increased sensitivity of people to noises that occur
 at night. The sound level exceeded over a specified time frame can be expressed as Ln (i.e.,
 L90, L50, L10, etc.). L50 equals the level exceeded 50 percent of the time; L10, 10 percent of the
 time; etc.
 Other Noise Matrices
 As previously mentioned, people tend to respond to changes in sound pressure in a logarithmic
 manner. In general, a 1 dBA change in the sound pressure levels of a given sound is detectable
 only under laboratory conditions. A 3 dBA change in sound pressure level is considered a
 detectable difference in most situations. A 5 dBA change is readily noticeable and a 10 dBA
 change is considered a doubling (or halving) of the subjective loudness. It should be noted that
 a 3 dBA increase or decrease in the average traffic noise level is realized by a doubling or
 halving of the traffic volume; or by about a 7 mile per hour (mph) increase or decrease in
 speed.
 For each doubling of distance from a point noise source, the sound level will decrease by 6 dBA.
 In other words, if a person is 100 feet from a machine, and moves to 200 feet from that source,
 sound levels will drop approximately 6 dBA. For each doubling of distance from a line source,
 like a roadway, noise levels are reduced by 3 to 5 decibels, depending on the ground cover
 between the source and the receiver.
 Noise barriers can provide approximately a 5 dBA CNEL noise reduction (additional reduction
 may be provided with a barrier of appropriate height, material, location and length). A row of
 buildings provides up to 5 dBA CNEL noise reduction with a 1.5 dBA CNEL reduction for each
 additional row up to a maximum reduction of approximately 10 dBA. The exact degree of noise
 attenuation depends on the nature and orientation of the structure and intervening barriers.
 7.4 KEY THEMES AND VISION FOR GENERAL PLAN
 It is the general objective of the City to regulate and control unnecessary, excessive, and
 annoying sounds emanating from uses and activities within the City, and to prohibit such sounds
 that are detrimental to the public health, welfare, and safety of its residents. With the objective,
 the City is focused on maintaining or improving the quality of life for both existing and future
 residents. The Land Use Element proposes a variety of mixed use development types along
 major arterials in the City. The Noise Element will ensure that the residential and non-residential
 uses within the mixed use development meet established noise standards.
 AMBIENT NOISE
 Ambient noise is described as the all-encompassing background noise associated with a given
 environment, usually being a composite of sounds from many sources near and far.
 Garden Grove’s noise environment is dominated by vehicular traffic noise along State Route 22
 (SR-22) as well as major and primary arterials. The major arterials that serve the City are Valley
 View Street, Brookhurst Street, Harbor Boulevard, Bolsa Avenue, Westminster Avenue, Fairview
7-4

Road, and Knott Avenue. The primary arterials that serve the City are Magnolia Street, Euclid
Street, Haster Street, Chapman Avenue, Garden Grove Boulevard, and Westminster Boulevard,.
In addition, Katella Avenue, Harbor Boulevard, Bolsa Avenue, and Valley View Streets are
designated as Smart Streets.
NOISE SENSITIVE RECEPTORS
Human response to noise varies widely depending on the type of noise, time of day, and
sensitivity of the receptor. The effects of noise on humans can range from temporary or
permanent hearing loss to mild stress and annoyance due to such things as speech interference
and sleep deprivation. Prolonged stress, regardless of the cause, is known to contribute to a
variety of health disorders. The sensitive receptors located within the City are listed in Appendix
D, Air Quality Data, of the General Plan EIR.1
NOISE AND LAND USE COMPATIBLITY MATRIX
The State of California Office of Planning and Research (OPR) Noise Element Guidelines include
recommended interior and exterior level standards for local jurisdictions to identify and prevent
the creation of incompatible land uses due to noise. The OPR Guidelines describe the
compatibility of various land uses with a range of environmental noise levels in terms of dBA
CNEL (Community Noise Equivalent Level).
A noise environment of 50 dBA CNEL to 60 dBA CNEL is considered to be “normally acceptable”
for residential uses. The State indicates that locating residential units, parks, and institutions (such
as churches, schools, libraries, and hospitals) in areas where exterior ambient noise levels exceed
65 dBA CNEL is undesirable. The OPR recommendations also note that, under certain conditions,
more restrictive standards than the maximum levels cited may be appropriate. As an example,
the standards for quiet suburban and rural communities may be reduced by 5 to 10 dB to reflect
their lower existing outdoor noise levels in comparison with urban environments.
In addition, Title 25, Section 1092 of the California Code of Regulations, sets forth requirements
for the insulation of multiple-family residential dwelling units from excessive and potentially
harmful noise. Whenever multiple-family residential dwelling units are proposed in areas with
excessive noise exposure, the developer must incorporate construction features into the
building’s design that reduce interior noise levels to 45 dBA CNEL.
Table 7-1, Noise and Land Use Compatibility Matrix, illustrates the State guidelines established by
the State Department of Health Services for acceptable noise levels for each county and city.
These standards and criteria are incorporated into the land use planning process to reduce
future noise and land use incompatibilities. This table is the primary tool that allows the City to
ensure integrated planning for compatibility between land uses and outdoor noise.
CITY OF GARDEN GROVE NOISE STANDARDS
The City of Garden Grove maintains a comprehensive Noise Ordinance within its Municipal
Code that establishes citywide interior and exterior noise level standards. The City has adopted
a number of policies that are directed at controlling or mitigating environmental noise effects.
The City’s Noise Ordinance (Municipal Code Section 8.47, Noise Control,) establishes daytime
and nighttime noise standards; refer to Table 7-2, Garden Grove Noise Ordinance Standards.
The ordinance is designed to control unnecessary, excessive and annoying sounds generated
           1  Similar uses are sensitive to both air quality and noise impacts. Therefore, the sensitive receptor
list for both issue areas is the same.
                                                                                                             7-5

 from a stationary source impacting an adjacent property.                                             It differentiates between
 environmental and nuisance noise. Environmental noise is measured under a time average
 period while nuisance noise cannot exceed the established Noise Ordinance levels at any time.
 At the boundary line between a residential property and a commercial and manufacturing
 property, the noise level of the quieter zone is required to be used.
                                                                      Table 7-1
                                              Noise and Land Use Compatibility Matrix
                                                                                   Community Noise Exposure (Ldn or CNEL, dBA)
                          Land Use Category
                                                                           Normally     Conditionally       Normally             Clearly
                                                                          Acceptable     Acceptable      Unacceptable        Unacceptable
  Residential - Low Density, Single-Family, Duplex, Mobile Homes            50 - 60         55 - 70            70-75              75-85
  Residential - Multiple Family                                             50 - 65         60 - 70           70 - 75            70 – 85
  Transient Lodging - Motel, Hotels                                         50 - 65         60 - 70           70 - 80            80 – 85
  Schools, Libraries, Churches, Hospitals, Nursing Homes                    50 - 70         60 - 70           70 - 80            80 – 85
  Auditoriums, Concert Halls, Amphitheaters                                   NA            50 - 70             NA               65 – 85
  Sports Arenas, Outdoor Spectator Sports                                     NA            50 - 75             NA               70 – 85
  Playgrounds, Neighborhood Parks                                           50 - 70           NA            67.5 - 75           72.5 – 85
  Golf Courses, Riding Stables, Water Recreation, Cemeteries                50 - 70           NA              70 - 80            80 – 85
  Office Buildings, Business Commercial and Professional                    50 - 70      67.5 - 77.5          75 - 85              NA
  Industrial, Manufacturing, Utilities, Agriculture                         50 - 75         70 - 80           75 - 85              NA
  NA: Not Applicable
  Source: Office of Planning and Research, California, General Plan Guidelines, October 2003.
  Normally Acceptable – Specified land use is satisfactory, based upon the assumption that any buildings involved are of normal conventional
  construction, without any special noise insulation requirements.
  Conditionally Acceptable – New construction or development should be undertaken only after a detailed analysis of the noise reduction
  requirements is made and needed noise insulation features included in the design. Conventional construction, but with closed windows and
  fresh air supply systems or air conditioning, will normally suffice.
  Normally Unacceptable – New construction or development should be discouraged. If new construction or development does proceed, a
  detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements must be made and needed noise insulation features included in the design.
  Clearly Unacceptable – New construction or development should generally not be undertaken.
                                                                      Table 7-2
                                             Garden Grove Noise Ordinance Standards
                                                                                          Ambient Base
                                   Land Use Designation                                                               Time Of Day
                                                                                            Noise Level
                                                                                               55 dBA             7:00 AM – 10:00 PM
      Sensitive Uses                             Residential Use
                                                                                               50 dBA             10:00 PM – 7:00 AM
                                                 Institutional Use                             65 dBA                   Any Time
      Conditionally Sensitive Uses               Office-Professional Use                       65 dBA                   Any Time
                                                 Hotels and Motels                             65 dBA                   Any Time
                                                 Commercial Uses                               70 dBA                   Any Time
                                                 Commercial/Industrial Uses within             65 dBA             7:00 AM – 10:00 PM
      Non-Sensitive Uses
                                                 150 feet of Residential Uses                  50 dBA             10:00 PM – 7:00 AM
                                                 Industrial Uses                               70 dBA                   Any Time
      Source: City of Garden Grove, Municipal Code, Section 8.47, Noise Control, 2005.
7-6

Municipal Code Section 8.47.060, Special Noise Sources, also includes the following provisions for
construction and maintenance activities:
     (d) Construction of Buildings and Projects. It shall be unlawful for any person within a
         residential area, or within a radius of 500 feet there from, to operate equipment or
         perform any outside construction or repair work on buildings, structures, or projects, or
         to operate any pile driver, power shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, power hoist, or
         any other construction type device between the hour of 10:00 p.m. of one day and
         7:00 a.m. of the next day in such a manner that a person of normal sensitiveness, as
         determined utilizing the criteria established in Section 8.47.050(a), is caused
         discomfort or annoyance unless such operations are of an emergency nature.
MINIMIZE COMMUNITY EXPOSURE TO NOISE
The primary goal with regard to community noise is to minimize the exposure of new residential
development, schools, hospitals and similar noise-sensitive uses to excessive or unhealthy noise
levels to the greatest extent possible. Toward this end, this Element establishes the noise/land
use compatibility guidelines set forth in Table 7-1 for outdoor noise. The compatibility guidelines
recognize and respond to the many different noise environments in Garden Grove.
The City supports new residential development within already urbanized areas where ambient
noise levels may be higher than those experienced in neighborhoods located on the urban
periphery. This is in an effort to promote “smart growth,” mixed use development, making more
efficient use of land and resources.
Interior noise levels for new residential development, regardless of location within the City will be
required to comply with standards set forth in Title 24 of the State Health and Safety Code. New
construction may need to incorporate special insulation, windows, and sealants in order to
ensure that interior noise levels meet Title 24 standards.
The City will utilize the noise/land use compatibility guidelines outlined in Table 7-1 and Table 7-2
in making land use decisions. These compatibility guidelines show a range of noise standards for
various land use categories.          Depending on the ambient environment of a particular
community, these basic guidelines may be tailored to reflect existing noise and land use
characteristics. The matrix defines noise in terms of Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL)
and expressed in dB that measure sound intensity. Noise levels occurring during nighttime hours
are weighted more heavily than during the daytime.
7.5 GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
This Element is organized into goals, policies, and implementation programs. A description of
each is provided in Chapter 1, Introduction. It is important to note that the implementation
programs are specific actions to carry out all of the preceding goals and policies.
  Goal N-1            Noise considerations must be incorporated into land use planning decisions.
Policy N-1.1          Require all new residential construction in areas with an exterior noise level
                      greater than 55 dBA to include sound attenuation measures.
Policy N-1.2          Incorporate a noise assessment study into the environmental review process,
                      when needed for a specific project for the purposes of identifying potential
                      noise impacts and noise abatement procedures.
                                                                                                   7-7

 Policy N-1.3 Require noise reduction techniques in site planning, architectural design, and
              construction, where noise reduction is necessary consistent with the standards
              in Tables 7-1 and 7-2, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, and
              Section 8.47 of the Municipal Code.
 Policy N-1.4 Ensure acceptable noise levels are maintained near schools, hospitals,
              convalescent homes, churches, and other noise sensitive areas.
 Policy N-1.5 Require the design of mixed use structures to incorporate techniques to
              prevent the transfer of noise and vibration from the commercial to residential
              use.
 Policy N-1.6 Encourage commercial uses in mixed use developments that are not noise
              intensive.
 Policy N-1.7 Avoid locating noise-sensitive land use in existing and noise-impacted areas.
 N-IMP-1A     Maintain a technical resource for builders, developers, and operators of
              construction equipment that discusses a variety of sound attenuation
              measures (e.g., temporary noise attenuation fences, preferential location of
              equipment, use of current technology and types of noise suppression
              equipment), the amount of noise reduction each produces, and how to
              combine them to meet City requirements.
 N-IMP-1B     Require that new commercial, industrial, any redevelopment project, or any
              proposed development near existing residential land use demonstrate
              compliance with the City’s Noise Ordinance prior to approval of the project.
 N-IMP-1C     Implement noise mitigation by placing conditions of approval on
              development projects, and require a clear description of mitigation on
              subdivision maps, site plans, and building plans for inspection purposes.
 N-IMP-1D     Require construction activity to comply with the limits established in the City’s
              Noise Ordinance.
 N-IMP-1E     Require buffers or appropriate mitigation of potential noise sources on noise
              sensitive areas.
 N-IMP-1F     Require that vehicle access to commercial properties that are located
              adjacent to residential parcels or other noise sensitive uses be located at the
              maximum practical distance from these uses.
 N-IMP-1G     Encourage truck deliveries to commercial or industrial properties abutting
              residential or noise sensitive uses after 7:00 AM and before 10:00 PM.
 N-IMP-1H     Orient residential units away from major noise sources, particularly in mixed use
              projects.
 N-IMP-1I     Encourage the location of balconies and operable windows of residential
              units in mixed use projects away from arterials and other major noise sources.
7-8

N-IMP-1J     Review the noise performance standards in the Zoning Code to determine if
             additional or modified standards are necessary to address mixed use
             development, particularly along major arterial roadways, or address and
             mitigate noise-generating land uses.
N-IMP-1K     Enforce the Noise Ordinance to ensure that stationary noise and noise
             emanating from construction activities, private development, and/or special
             events are minimized.
N-IMP-1L     Continue to enforce noise abatement and control measures.
 Goal N-2    Maximized efficiency in noise abatement efforts through clear and effective
             policies and ordinances.
Policy N-2.1 Incorporate noise considerations into land use planning decisions by
             establishing acceptable limits of noise for various land uses throughout the
             community.
Policy N-2.2 Fully integrate noise considerations into land use planning decisions to prevent
             new noise/land use conflicts.
Policy N-2.3 Incorporate noise reduction features for items such as but not limited to
             parking and loading areas, ingress/egress point, and refuse collection areas,
             during site planning to mitigate anticipated noise impacts on affected noise
             sensitive land uses.
Policy N-2.4 Permit only those new development or redevelopment projects that have
             incorporated appropriate mitigation measures, so that standards contained in
             the Noise Element or adopted ordinance are met.
Policy N-2.5 Ensure the effective enforcement of City, State, and Federal noise levels by all
             appropriate City Divisions.
N-IMP-2A     Require a noise impact evaluation for projects, if determined necessary
             through the environmental review process. Should noise abatement be
             necessary, the City shall require the implementation of mitigation measures
             based on a technical study prepared by a qualified acoustical professional.
N-IMP-2B     Consider establishing a periodic noise monitoring program to identify progress
             in achieving noise abatement and to perform necessary updating of the
             Noise Element and community noise standards.
N-IMP-2C     Amend, and combine if deemed appropriate, ordinances and policies
             relating to noise control. The amended ordinance(s) shall more clearly
             address mitigation of noise conflicts between adjacent uses, construction
             noise, noise associated with maintenance equipment (e.g., leaf blowers,
             street sweepers, etc), hours of operation of construction or maintenance
             equipment, noise standards, abatement, enforcement, procedures, and other
             like issues.
                                                                                          7-9
 N-IMP-2D     Use code enforcement to enforce the appropriate noise standards in the
              City’s noise ordinance(s).
 N-IMP-2E     Use the Police unit to enforce the appropriate noise standards in the State’s
              motor vehicle code.
 N-IMP-2F     Require that new equipment purchased by the City of Garden Grove comply
              with noise performance standards.
 N-IMP-2G     Disseminate information to the public regarding City noise regulations and
              programs, the health effects of high noise levels, means of mitigating such
              levels, as well as abatement and enforcement procedures.
 N-IMP-2H     Coordinate with California Occupational Safety and Health Administration
              (Cal-OSHA) to provide information on occupational noise requirements within
              the City.
 N-IMP-2I     Examine the potential to establish a Violators Fee for persons requiring a
              second call/visit for violating the noise ordinance(s).
  Goal N-3    Minimized noise impacts from freeways, ensuring that City and State interior
              and exterior noise standards are not exceeded.
 Policy N-3.1 Encourage Caltrans to meet the State standard of 65 dBA CNEL for exterior
              noise levels for the Garden Grove Freeway (SR-22) and the San Diego
              Freeway (I-405).
 Policy N-3.2 Encourage Caltrans to keep the interior residential noise levels below the State
              standard of 45 dBA CNEL, where appropriate and feasible.
 N-IMP-3A     Continue to work with Caltrans to ensure that similar soundwalls or other
              appropriate mitigations to those installed along the Garden Grove Freeway
              (SR-22) be provided where the San Diego Freeway (I-405) abuts residential
              areas or areas with sensitive receptors within the City.
 N-IMP-3B     Encourage Caltrans to develop a range of sound attenuation alternatives to
              mitigate noise impacts from the San Diego Freeway (I-405).
  Goal N-4    Minimize noise impacts for residential uses and noise sensitive receptors along
              the City’s arterial streets, ensuring that City and State interior and exterior noise
              levels are not exceeded.
 Policy N-4.1 Examine the feasibility of implementing sound attenuation measures along the
              City’s arterial streets. Prioritize the areas in need of sound attenuation based
              on degree of sensitivity, excess of maximum allowable standards, length of
              time the noise impact has existed, and the number or residential uses or
              sensitive receptors impacted.
 Policy N-4.2 Minimize potential transportation noise through proper design of street
              circulation, coordination of routing, and other traffic control measures (e.g.,
              shifting travel lanes away from impacted units, adding bike ways, etc.)
7-10

Policy N-4.3 Discourage through traffic on residential local streets to reduce noise.
N-IMP-4A     Install sound attenuation measures, including but not limited to, retrofitting
             existing residential units or sensitive receptors with double-glazed windows and
             sound insulation; construction of sound walls and landscaping, use of low walls
             and landscaped berms, enclose courtyards, rubberized asphalt, or relocation
             of driveways.
N-IMP-4B     Develop a streamlined process to expedite approval of noise reducing
             techniques identified in the noise ordinance(s).
N-IMP-4C     Ensure the inclusion of noise mitigation measures in the design of new
             roadway projects in the City of Garden Grove.
N-IMP-4D     Provide for continued evaluation of truck movements and routes in the City to
             provide effective separation from residential or other noise sensitive land uses.
N-IMP-4E     Conduct periodic noise monitoring and abatement to identify sound levels on
             residential local streets that may be affected by increased traffic volumes and
             speed limits.
 Goal N-5    Minimize noise impacts on residential areas from rail and/or transit operations.
Policy N-5.1 Continue to encourage the Southern Pacific Transportation Company to
             schedule trains during the daylight hours, when possible.
Policy N-5.2 Require noise attenuation measures for residential construction in areas
             affected by the 65 dBA CNEL railroad noise contour. Sound attenuation
             measures shall reduce interior noise to a maximum of 45 dBA CNEL. These
             measures shall be applicable to all residential construction in a railroad noise
             impact area, both for new structures and for renovations, remodels, and
             building additions.
Policy N-5.3 Work with the Orange County Transit Authority (OCTA) in the development of
             the OCTA right-of-way or other rail/transit lines to ensure that noise attenuation
             measures are addressed in the selection of the rail or vehicle technology for
             use along the right-of-way or rail/transit line, and in the siting, design, and
             construction of stations.
N-IMP-5A     Require the Orange County Transit Authority (OCTA) to comprehensively
             analyze and mitigate the noise impacts associated with transit development
             of the OCTA right-of-way or other rail/transit lines.
 Goal N-6    Maintain or work to reduce noise levels associated with the Joint Forces
             Training Base (JFTB) Los Alamitos.
Policy N-6.1 Coordinate with the Airport Land Use Commission to monitor any expansion
             plans and/or increased activities at the Joint Forces Training Base (JFTB) Los
             Alamitos.
                                                                                            7-11
 N-IMP-6A Support development at the Joint Forces Training Base (JFTB) Los Alamitos that
          adheres to the Airport Environs Land Use Plan (AELUP) and the City of Garden
          Grove and State noise requirements or ordinances.
7-12
                                                     LEGEND
                                    SOURCE: RBF Consulting, May 2008.
                     Existing Noise Contours • West
05/08 • JN 10-104660
                                                                      EXHIBIT N-1A

                                                    LEGEND
                                   SOURCE: RBF Consulting.
                     Existing Noise Contours • East
05/08 • JN 10-104660
                                                           EXHIBIT N-1B

                                                   LEGEND
                                  SOURCE: RBF Consulting, May 2008.
                     Future Noise Contours • West
05/08 • JN 10-104660
                                                                    EXHIBIT N-2A

                                                  LEGEND
                                 SOURCE: RBF Consulting.
                     Future Noise Contours • East
05/08 • JN 10-104660
                                                         EXHIBIT N-2B

G                           Chapter 8
       G
General P
          l an 2 0 30
                      Air quality Element
Chapter 8
AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
8.1 INTRODUCTION
The Air Quality Element is intended to protect the
public’s health and welfare by implementing
measures that allow the South Coast Air Basin to attain
Federal and State air quality standards. To achieve
this goal, the Element sets forth a number of programs
to reduce current pollution emissions and to require
new development to include measures to comply with
air quality standards. In addition, this Element contains
provisions to address new air quality requirements. The
regulatory framework, background information, and
existing and future conditions can be found in the
General Plan EIR.
The South Coast Air Quality Management District
(SCAQMD) is the lead agency in charge of
developing the regional air quality plan, with input from the
Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG). The
SCAQMD is responsible for the overall development and
implementation of the air quality management plan (AQMP),
which covers the South Coast Air Basin and other areas within
SCAQMD's jurisdiction. To facilitate monitoring of air pollution
levels and to work toward achieving standards, the SCAQMD has
divided the Basin into 32 monitoring areas. Garden Grove is
located within the Coastal Orange County Source Receptor
Area, with the monitoring station located in Anaheim. According
to SCAQMD data, State standards are rarely exceeded for CO
and NOx, yet frequently exceeded for O3.
8.2 AUTHORITY FOR ELEMENT
The State of California Government Code Section 65302(d),
which provides the statutory requirements for the Conservation
Element, also serves as the applicable Government Code
section for the Air Quality Element. Further guidance is provided
in the 2003 General Plan Guidelines regarding the assessment of
air quality impacts in General Plans. Other relevant sections of
the Government Code that are applicable to the Air Quality
Element include Section 65303, which allows cities to include any
other element or address any other subjects that may relate to
the physical development of the city.
                                                                  8-1

 8.3 KEY THEMES AND VISION FOR GENERAL PLAN
 PROACTIVE APPROACH TO IMPROVING AIR QUALITY
 Garden Grove recognizes the importance of air quality not only to public health and safety, but
 also to the City’s and the region’s economic well being. The City will identify the role it can play
 in helping the South Coast Air Basin attain the goal of meeting Federal and State air quality
 standards, as well as the function the City has in protecting its own residents and businesses from
 the impacts of harmful air contaminants.
 This Element explains the role Garden Grove plays in helping the South Coast Air Basin attain the
 goal of meeting Federal and State air quality standards, as well as the function the City has in
 protecting its own residents and businesses from the impacts of harmful air contaminants. This
 Element includes goals and policies that will assist in the attainment of State and Federal air
 quality standards, as well as in the achievement of improved land use decisions as they relate to
 air quality. The City, through the Land Use Element and General Plan Land Use Diagram, is
 committed to both the preservation of existing residential areas and the expansion of mixed use
 development along major arterial corridors that will assist the City in working towards clean air
 while at the same time, permitting reasonable and planned growth.
 8.4 GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
 This Element is organized into goals, policies, and implementation programs. A description of
 each is provided in Chapter 1, Introduction. It is important to note that the implementation
 programs are specific actions to carry out all of the preceding goals and policies.
   Goal AQ-1         Air quality that meets the standards set by the State and Federal governments.
 Policy AQ-1.1       Coordinate with other agencies in the region, particularly the South Coast Air
                     Quality Management District (SCAQMD) and the Southern California
                     Association of Governments (SCAG) to implement the provisions of the
                     region’s Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP), as amended.
 Policy AQ-1.2       Strive to achieve conformance with the state-mandated congestion
                     management plans (CMPs), transportation demand management (TDM)
                     plans, or other like State or Federally required pollution reduction plans.
 AQ-IMP-1A           Continue to participate, where possible, in committees involved in the
                     development and implementation of a countywide air quality
                     implementation plan.
 AQ-IMP-1B           Encourage and assist employers in developing and implementing work trip
                     reduction plans, employee ride sharing, modified work schedules, preferential
                     carpool and vanpool parking, or any other trip reduction approach that is
                     consistent with the Air Quality Management Plan for the South Coast Air Basin.
 AQ-IMP-1C           Continue to implement a TDM ordinance.
8-2

 Goal AQ-2    Increased awareness and participation throughout the community in efforts to
              reduce air pollution and enhance air quality.
Policy AQ-2.1 Increase public information activities regarding air quality issues.
Policy AQ-2.2 Promote and encourage ride sharing activities within the community.
Policy AQ-2.3 Continue to improve existing sidewalks, bicycle trails, and parkways, and
              require sidewalk and bicycle trail improvements and parkways for new
              development or redevelopment projects.
Policy AQ-2.4 Relieve congestion on major arterials and reduce emissions.
Policy AQ-2.5 Separate, buffer, and protect sensitive receptors from significant sources of
              pollution to the greatest extent possible.
AQ-IMP-2A     Establish additional park-and-ride facilities for work and non-work trip
              reductions.
AQ-IMP-2B     Require new development or redevelopment projects to provide pedestrian
              and bicycle trails access to nearby shopping and employment centers.
AQ-IMP-2C     Encourage companies that ship or receive high volumes of goods by
              commercial truck to limit operations to non-peak traffic periods.
AQ-IMP-2D     Continue preventive maintenance and repair of City vehicles and equipment.
              Investigate the possibility of converting the existing vehicle fleet to clean fuel
              vehicles.
AQ-IMP-2E     Encourage, publicly recognize, and reward innovative approaches that
              improve air quality.
 Goal AQ-3    A diverse and energy efficient transportation system incorporating all feasible
              modes of transportation for the reduction of pollutants.
Policy AQ-3.1 Cooperate and participate with regional and local efforts to develop an
              efficient transportation system that reduces vehicle trips and vehicle miles
              traveled.
Policy AQ-3.2 Cooperate in efforts to expand and promote the use of bus, rail, and other
              forms of transit within the region in order to further reduce pollutants.
AQ-IMP-3A     Continue to work closely with the Orange County Transit Authority (OCTA) and
              adjacent cities to establish an alternative transportation system along the
              OCTA right-of-way, such as the “Go Local” program on the right-of-way
              between Garden Grove and Santa Ana.
AQ-IMP-3B     Support public transit providers to increase funding for alternative modes of
              travel.
                                                                                             8-3

 AQ-IMP-3C     Participate with public transit providers serving the City and Orange County in
               a cooperative program to further increase transit services.
 AQ-IMP-3D     Develop the bicycle routes identified in the Parks, Recreation, and Open
               Space Element to support the use of bicycles as an alternate mode of
               transportation.
 AQ-IMP-3E     Allow or encourage programs for priority parking or free parking in City
               parking lots for alternative fuel vehicles, especially zero and super ultra low
               emission vehicles (ZEVs and SULEVs).
 AQ-IMP-3F     Support the development of alternative fuel infrastructure that is publicly
               accessible.
  Goal AQ-4    Efficient development that promotes alternative modes of transportation, while
               ensuring that economic development goals are not sacrificed.
 Policy AQ-4.1 Review site developments to ensure pedestrian safety and promote non-
               automotive users.
 Policy AQ-4.2 Encourage neighborhood parks and community centers near concentrations
               of residential areas and include pedestrian walkways and bicycle paths to
               encourage non-motorized travel.
 Policy AQ-4.3 Encourage “walkable” neighborhoods with pedestrian walkways and bicycle
               paths in residential and other types of developments to encourage pedestrian
               rather than vehicular travel.
 AQ-IMP-4A     Periodically review parking requirements and revise as necessary with market
               demands in relation to air quality guidelines.
 AQ-IMP-4B     Investigate short- and long-term parking strategies at civic and private
               facilities.
 AQ-IMP-4C     Require sidewalks through parking lots, bicycle racks near building entrances
               and other provisions for the safety and convenience of pedestrian and
               bicycle riders at all commercial, mixed use, and production facilities.
  Goal AQ-5    An improved balance of residential, commercial, industrial, recreational, and
               institutional uses to satisfy the needs of the social and economic segments of
               the population. Work towards clean air while still permitting reasonable
               planned growth.
 Policy AQ-5.1 Support mixed use developments.
 Policy AQ-5.2 Encourage infill development projects within urbanized areas that include jobs
               centers and transportation nodes.
 Policy AQ-5.3 Promote mixed use development that allows the integration of retail, office,
               industrial, institutional, and residential uses for the purposes of reducing costs
               of infrastructure construction and maximizing the use of land.
8-4

Policy AQ-5.4 Encourage employment centers that are non-polluting or low polluting and
              do not draw large number of vehicles in proximity to residential uses.
Policy AQ-5.5 Avoid locating multiple-family developments close to areas that emit harmful
              air contaminants.
Policy AQ-5.6 Increase residential and commercial densities around bus and/or rail transit
              stations, and along major arterial corridors.
Policy AQ-5.7 Preserve transportation corridors with the potential of high demand or of
              regional significance for future expansion to meet project demand.
AQ-IMP-5A     Encourage mixed use developments that combine residential and
              commercial or industrial business locations, thereby improving convenience
              and reducing trip generation.
 Goal AQ-6    Increased energy efficiency and conservation.
Policy AQ-6.1 Develop incentives and/or regulations regarding energy conservation
              requirements for private and public developments.
Policy AQ-6.2 Promote energy conservation and disseminate information throughout the
              community about energy conservation measures.
AQ-IMP-6A     Remove barriers for the use of solar energy for residential, commercial,
              industrial, or institutional uses.
AQ-IMP-6B     Research and secure financial assistance and other means to support,
              provide, and address energy efficient applications such as solar panels, cool
              roofs, wind energy, building modifications, etc.
AQ-IMP-6C     Continue to promote overall energy efficiency at local public facilities and
              continue preventative maintenance programs.
AQ-IMP-6D     Require new development to comply with the energy use guidelines in Title 24
              of the California Administrative Code).
AQ-IMP-6E     Consider the development and implementation of a residential shade tree
              program that would provide trees to residents to reduce energy consumption.
AQ-IMP-6F     Consider the development and implementation of an urban forest plan to
              plant additional trees citywide.
AQ-IMP-6G     Develop incentives and/or regulations regarding energy conservation
              requirements for private and public developments.
AQ-IMP-6H     Monitor energy conservation or renewable energy generation programs
              proposed by the State or Federal government, such as California Energy
              Commission’s New Solar Homes Partnership to determine this applicability to
              new development or redevelopment projects in the City.
                                                                                        8-5

  Goal AQ-7    Reduced particulate emissions from paved and unpaved roads, parking lots,
               and building construction.
 Policy AQ-7.1 Promote green, open spaces on undeveloped properties.
 Policy AQ-7.2 Continue to work towards the reduction of particulate emission from grading,
               construction, street cleaning, demolition, debris hauling, street cleaning, utility
               maintenance, railroad rights-of-way, and off-road vehicles, to the extent
               possible, to assist the region in meeting State and Federal standards.
 Policy AQ-7.3 Support programs that reduce emissions from building materials and methods
               that generate excessive pollutants through incentives and/or regulations.
 Policy AQ-7.4 Continue to enforce procedures that control dust from building demolition,
               grading, and construction activities.
 Policy AQ-7.5 Reduce reactive organic compounds and particulate emissions.
 AQ-IMP-7A     Review existing street cleaning policies and equipment, and evaluate
               modifications to reduce surface sanitation pollution.
 AQ-IMP-7B     Continue to enforce rules and measures of the South Coast Air Quality
               Management District.
8-6
G                                                  Chapter 9
       G
General P
          l an 2 0 30
                      Parks, Recreation, and Open Space Element
Chapter 9
PARKS, RECREATION, AND
OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
9.1 INTRODUCTION
The City of Garden Grove has included
a Parks, Recreation, and Open Space
Element to its General Plan because
providing        adequate        parkland,
recreation        opportunities,        and
management and conservation of
limited open space resources is a priority
to the urbanized City. Garden Grove is
committed to fostering and sustaining a
strong and diverse community that
embraces health and wellness, creates
opportunities to develop character,
provides safe places to gather, and
promotes life long learning.
9.2 AUTHORITY FOR ELEMENT
California State Government Code             Section  65560(b)(3)
stipulates that the General Plan address
    “…Open space for outdoor recreation, including but not
    limited to, areas of outstanding scenic, historical and
    cultural value; areas particularly suited for park and
                                                                  “Parks are one of the most
    recreation purposes, including access to lakes shores,
                                                                     effective methods to
    beaches, and rivers, and streams; and areas which
                                                                   change the character and
    serve as links between major recreation and open                improve the image of a
    space reservations, including utility easements, banks of            community.”
    rivers and streams, trails, and scenic highway                              ~Mark Francis
    corridors…”
The City has expanded the Open Space Element to include the
Parks and Recreation Element because these two issues are
interconnected and vital to the health and well being of the
community. There is a significant difference between the two;
Open Space includes a much broader category of open areas
within the City while parkland is limited to the 19 park sites
described in this Element. Open Space includes the city parks,
all school district properties, Orange County Transit Authority
(OCTA) rights-of-way, flood control facilities (retention basins,
channels, etc.), utility easements and water well sites and
reservoirs.
                                                                               9-1

 9.3 KEY THEMES AND VISION FOR GENERAL PLAN
 PARKLAND
 The City currently owns 14 park properties and uses 5 public schools as additional park facilities
 through joint-use agreements with the School District. This parkland totals 157.1 acres; refer to
 Exhibit PRK-1, Existing Parks. Parks within the City are categorized into three types that provide a
 range of passive and active recreation facilities. The three types of parks are community parks,
 neighborhood parks, and mini parks.
 The National Recreation and Parks Association (NRPA) typically                      While the Civic
 classify parks by their size (acreage), with larger parks serving a               Center Park offers
 wider community by providing more amenities.                The NRPA             passive recreation,
 classifications are community parks (10 to 40 acres), neighborhood                the Senior Center
 parks (1 to 10 acres), and mini parks (less than 1 acre).                          and Community
                                                                                  Meeting center are
 Garden Grove optimizes the use of its available park space and                   also at this location.
 provides amenities, activities and programs where they can best
 be located. For example, Eastgate Park, while only 4.5 acres, has a pool facility (Gary Hall pool)
 and basketball courts. It also hosts regional summer concerts and is the site for the
 Spring/Summer and Fall Aquatics Program. Such amenities and activities would typically be
 found in a park with more acreage.
 Garden Grove chooses to classify parks based on amenities provided rather than the amount of
 land. Community parks are equipped with facilities that provide active and passive recreation
 opportunities for the entire community and range from 3 to 40 acres in size. Neighborhood parks
 provide more flexible and passive recreation amenities that serve the local neighborhood and
 range from 1 to 10 acres in size. A mini park provides a small oasis for relaxation and limited
 activities and is less than one acre.
 The 1995 General Plan established a desired ratio
 for both open space and parkland as 5.0 acres
 per 1,000 persons. While the overall open space
 area met this goal, parkland did not and as of
 2008, there is 0.91 acres per 1,000 persons. The
 1995 ratio was not a realistic goal and looking
 toward the future, there is limited opportunity for
 the acquisition of large parcels for additional
 parks given the built-out nature of the City and
 the high cost of property in Orange County.
                                                               Existing Play Equipment at Edgar Park
 The City of Garden Grove is part of the larger
 fabric of Southern California, where cities are
 barely distinguishable from each other as they extend across the entire region. While Garden
 Grove has its own parkland that is calculated separately, it also is ideally located to take
 advantage of numerous regional recreation areas and facilities in other cities. The beaches of
 Southern California are renowned attractions that provide recreation within driving distance of
 the City, a fact acknowledged in the name of arterials such as Harbor Boulevard and Beach
 Boulevard. There is Mile Square Park in Fountain Valley, the Santa Ana River bike trail, and golf
 courses abutting Garden Grove in several cities. Other county recreational venues include
 Disneyland and California Adventure (Anaheim), Knott’s Berry Farm (Buena Park) and
 professional sports arenas. Improvements to the transit system would make these regional
 recreation opportunities more accessible.
9-2

Still, providing parks that are community places for recreation and relaxation within the City
remains a high priority and will continue to be important with the anticipated population growth.
Exhibit PRK-2, Parkland Service Area, identifies park services area in the City and neighborhoods
that are not currently located within reasonable distance from a park (one-half mile radius from
a community or neighborhood park, one-forth mile from a mini park).
The General Plan 2030 establishes the goal of a desired ratio of 2.0 acres of parkland per 1,000
persons. The Community Services Department is actively pursuing innovative ways to increase
both active and passive new parkland. There are opportunities for new parkland in the creation
of smaller and more frequent neighborhood parks and pocket parks, community gathering
areas such as urban plazas and gardens, and urban trails including the use of the OCTA right-of-
way. These smaller parks, plazas and trails should link to each other and connect with existing
parks. A network of links between park areas expands their impact and the opportunities for
recreation.
Another opportunity to add recreational facilities is to enter into additional joint-use agreements
with School Districts. The joint-use of school facilities allows the community the use of these
existing recreational spaces and benefits the school district by sharing maintenance costs with
the City. The City has identified several key school facilities in areas where recreation space is
needed, illustrated on Exhibit PRK-3, Priority Future Joint-Use School/Park Locations.
PARK FACILITIES AND RECREATIONAL PROGRAMS
Parks provide places for people to connect and interact in a shared environment and
recreation amenities foster a healthy and active community. The recreation amenities available
at each park are summarized in Table 9-1, Recreation Facilities. In addition to the facilities in the
Table 9-1, the City also has use through an annually renewed agreement of an additional
swimming pool facility at Pacifica High School. Primary recreation facilities include a new
gymnasium recently built near Atlantis Play Center in Garden Grove Park and the Community
Meeting Center and Senior Center in Civic Center Park. Over the last decade, the City has
optimized park space to provide a variety of amenities, activities, and programs while still
providing space for passive recreation.
The City of Garden Grove takes pride in its services and understands that well designed and
maintained facilities, along with high quality programs, encourage use that fosters an active
and healthy community.            Recreational programs offered by the Community Services
Department play an important role in creating a healthy community through diverse and
innovative recreational programming. The Community Services Department provides space to:
              Foster human development, focusing on children, youth, and seniors
              Increase cultural unity
              Promote healthy and wellness
              Provide recreational experiences
              Strengthen community image and sense of place
              Support economic development
              Strengthen safety and security
The programs and activities offered by the Community Service Department provide essential
community benefits, including:
              Healthier residents
              Sense of well-being in the community
              Safer neighborhoods
                                                                                                  9-3
               A higher quality of life
               Opportunities for children, youth, and seniors
               Partnership opportunities with community organizations
               Cultural expression and unity
The challenge for the future will be to continue to meet the facility needs of a growing and
diverse population and continue to provide quality programs and activities with increasing
demands on facility space.
                                                                           Table 9-1
                                                                      Recreation Facilities
                                      Joint-Use School Park                                                                                                                                  Multi-Purpose Building
           Recreation
                                                                       Swimming Pool                                                                    Play Equipment
            Facility
                                                                                       Multi-Purpose
                                                                                       Field/Soccer    Ball fields   Basketball   Volleyball   Tennis                    Handball   Hockey                            Arena Soccer   Badminton
                                                              Acres
Community Parks
Chapman Sports Complex                    •        11.0            7       1        2                                                           6                          6         2
Civic Center                                        6.0
Eastgate Park                                       4.5    1                        2                                                                       1
Garden Grove/Atlantis Play
                                                   40.0            2        3       4                                                7                      1                                      1                     2             6
Center/Gymnasium
Hare School Park                          •       14.0¹            2        4
Lake School Park                          •        10.0                     4       4
Magnolia Park                                       5.9    1                        1                                                           2           1              3                       1
West Grove Park                                     6.6            1                1                                                                       1                                      1
Woodbury Park                                       3.3    1                        1                                                                       1
Twin Lakes Park                                   23.0²                                                                                                     1
Village Green                                       6.3            1                                                                                        1                                      1
Neighborhood Parks
Edgar School Park                         •         6.0            1                                                                                        1                                      1
Faylane Park                                        2.9                                                                                                     1
Gutosky Park                                        2.1                                                                                                     1
West Haven Park                                    10.0            1                                                                                        1                                      1
Pioneer Park                              •         4.0                                                                                                     1                        1
Mini Parks
Spirit of 76                                        0.5
Jardin de los Niños                                 0.7                             ½                                                                     1
Shelley/Kensington                                  0.3                             ½                                                                     1
Total                                            157.1     3      15       12      15.5                                              7          8        14                9         3             6                     2             6
1 - Acreage does not include Library Facility.
2 - A portion of this land is in joint use with the County Flood Control District.
9-4

OPEN SPACE
Open space within the City consists of parks, school district properties, Orange County Transit
Authority (OCTA) right-of-way, flood control facilities (retention basins, channels etc.), utility
easements, and water well sites and reservoirs; refer to Table 9-2, Open Space. Public schools
consist of the largest proportion of open space in the City. Exhibit PRK-4, Existing School Sites,
identifies the locations and size of public schools in Garden Grove.
                                                       Table 9-2
                                                     Open Space
                                        Open Space                                      Acreage
                City Owned Parks1                                                         112.1
                Joint-Use Parks                                                            45.0
                Schools²                                                                  667.2
                OCTA Right-of-Way                                                          61.0
                Flood Control Facilties3                                                   60.0
                SCE Easements                                                              28.0
                Water Wells and Reservoirs                                                  6.0
                TOTAL                                                                     979.3
                1 - Includes 13.0 acres of water retention facility at Twin Lakes Park in joint-use with the
                     County Flood Control District.
                2 - Includes public schools not currently under joint-use agreement.
                3 - Does not include water retention facility at Twin Lakes Park.
Open space in Garden Grove is preserved for public
health and safety, flood control, preservation of natural
resources, and outdoor recreation.                  Historically, open
space was dedicated to agricultural production; however,
farming operations have almost entirely ceased but are an
important part of Garden Grove’s heritage. Open space is
valued by the community and is an asset that will continue
to experience increased pressure as the City grows.
Similar to parkland, the 1995 General Plan included a
                                                                                  Above: Yoga Class at Senior Center
desired open space ratio of 5.0 acres per 1,000 persons. As
of 2008, the City has approximately 5.66 acres of open
                                                                                  Below: Youth sports hosted at the
space per 1,000 persons, therefore meeting the desired                            Garden Grove Sports and Recreation
ratio. According to anticipated population projections, in                        Center
2030, the City would have approximately 4.98 acres of
open space per 1,000 persons. A realistic goal for the City
will be to maintain the ratio of 5.0 acres per 1,000 persons
and therefore the ratio will not be modified in this Element.
Acquiring large amounts of additional open space is
unrealistic due to the built out nature of the City and high
cost of property in Orange County; however, the addition
of smaller areas, preservation, and enhancements to
existing open space amenities will works towards creating
a healthy and beautiful community.
                                                                                                                     9-5

 TRAILS
 Recreational or multi-use trails support
 healthy activities in an urban area. Trails can
 be located in an existing park or within public
 rights-of-way       and      can      connect
 neighborhoods to parks and commercial or
 employment areas. Currently, there are no
 dedicated recreational trail facilities in
 Garden Grove. One possibility is for the City
 to partner with private developers to
 incorporate trails into development projects
 on sites where such facilities would be
 feasible. Through such a partnership, the
 private landscape setback and the public                     Existing sidewalks provided at City Parks
 right-of-way could be combined into a wider
 area to accommodate a trail along with
 ample landscaping, greater separation from the roadway and space for amenities along the
 route.
                                               The following
                                               provide
                                               separation
                                               from the
                                               roadway and
                                               space for
                                               fitness along
                                               public right-of-
                                               way.
                                                      Utility easements/right-of-ways are an excellent
                                                      opportunity for development of linear parks and
                                                      multi use trails.
9-6
                                                                                        Before (above)
                                                                                        and after (left)
                                                                                        sketch of
                                                                                        potential linear
                                                                                        park and multi-
                                                                                        use path in
                                                                                        OCTA right-of
                                                                                        way
BIKEWAYS
A well-developed bikeway network provides connections and access not offered by the existing
roadway, reduces congestion and promotes health and wellness in a community. Currently,
Garden Grove has limited bicycle facilities and amenities (refer to Exhibit CIR-7, in the Circulation
Element). The Community Services Department will work with Public Works to develop future
bikeways, promote bikeway connections, and encourage multi-use trails where appropriate.
CULTURAL ARTS, EVENTS AND DIVERSITY
Garden Grove is proud to support a variety of
cultural opportunities offered each year for both
local and regional residents. Through these options,
residents have a chance to become more involved
in the community and enjoy all the diversity it has to
offer. From live theater productions and fun filled
summer concerts, to unique cultural festivals and
special themed events, there is something for
everyone in Garden Grove.
Both of the City’s live theaters are located at the
Village Green Park. The Gem Theater is a 172-seat
venue featuring plays, comedies, musicals, youth
theater, and special events.             The Festival        Events take place at Civic Center Park
Amphitheater is a 550-seat outdoor facility that hosts
a wide variety of performance-based activities. The Garden Grove Historical Society’s Stanley
Ranch Museum is a two-acre site containing some of Garden Grove’s oldest homes and
businesses buildings. The Historical Society also promotes education and activities around the
heritage of Garden Grove at this site.
Since 1998, the Garden Grove Community Foundation sponsors annual events featuring
educational programs, the Summer Concert Series, and the Food for Thought Luncheon. These
quality events are funded through private donations raised each year. Other annual civic
events include the Garden Grove Pride and the Mayor’s Prayer Breakfast.
                                                                                                         9-7

 Garden Grove also hosts four cultural festivals all
 organized by non-profit organizations. Each features
 vendors, foods, rides, and a variety of different cultural
 programs and activities. The Tet Festival is held at Garden
 Grove Park to celebrate the lunar new year.               The
 Strawberry Festival and Parade is one of the largest
 community-sponsored events in the region. The Arab-
 American Festival is held at the Village Green Park each
 September. The Korean Festival has been a celebration
 of Korean history, traditions, and culture in Garden Grove
 for over 25 years.
 The community recognizes the importance of cultural arts
 and has a goal to integrate ethnic groups in community-
 wide events. As seen in the four cultural festivals, there
 are opportunities to intermix the experices of cultural arts
 with the diverse foods, products, unique history, and
 friendship between the wide variety of ethnic groups that
 reside in Garden Grove. Such actions create a positive
 impacts on the community, increase business activity, and
 foster improved communication and understanding                      Heritage Park promotes education
 among all residents. Similar opportunities can be found in          and activities around the heritage of
 recreational activities, events, public art, gardens, and                       Garden Grove
 facility.
 9.4 GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
 This Element is organized into goals, policies, and implementation programs. A description of
 each is provided in Chapter 1, Introduction. It is important to note that the implementation
 programs are specific actions to carry out all of the preceding goals and policies.
 PARKLAND
   Goal PRK-1        The City seeks to achieve a ratio of 2.0 acres of Parkland (which includes city-
                     owned parks and joint-use school facilities) to every 1,000 persons to meet
                     the needs of existing and future residents and employees.
 Policy PRK-1.1     Explore the land acquisition feasibility of vacant land, empty housing lots, or
                    abandoned properties for neighborhood park, mini or pocket parks, or tot lot
                    purposes, in order to provide all existing neighborhoods with accessible
                    parkland.
 Policy PRK-1.2     Acquire additional lands for parks, as feasible.
 Policy PRK-1.3     Allow for a variety of active and passive space for recreation and leisure use.
 Policy PRK-1.4     Encourage the provision of parks and recreation space in new development
                    and redevelopment projects.
 Policy PRK-1.5     Encourage the development of linear parks along easements or rights-of-way,
                    including but not limited to utility easements and the Orange County (OCTA)
                    right-of-way.
9-8
Policy PRK-1.6 Encourage the development of additional Mini Parks to provide urban open
               space at a very small scale. Functions of Mini Parks shall vary as appropriate
               within each location and immediate neighborhood.
Policy PRK-1.7 Encourage the cooperation and coordination between City departments
               and public agencies, to provide recreation and leisure space through new
               development and as redevelopment occurs within Garden Grove.
Policy PRK-1.8 Continue to work with school districts or other agencies to maintain and,
               wherever feasible, expand the joint use facilities within the City.
Policy PRK-1.9 Continue to work with Orange County Flood Control District (OCFCD) and
               Orange County Transit Authority (OCTA) to lease and use right-of-way for
               passive recreation and trails.
PRK-IMP-1A     Develop a priority list to identify where additional parks and types of facilities
               are needed and seek community participation.
PRK-IMP-1B     Create a land feasibility plan to understand what land is available in the City
               for the creation of new parkland.
PRK-IMP-1C     When and where possible, consider the potential for additional parks or
               recreation facilities on public or private sites that can support a recreational
               activity such as vacant large buildings, undeveloped industrial properties,
               and/or existing underutilized parcels.
PRK-IMP-1D     Pursue available resources to fund facilities and parkland acquisition and
               development including Federal, State and local funding grants, or donations.
PRK-IMP-1E     Encourage coordination between the Community Services Department and
               the Community Development, Public Works, and Economic Development
               Departments to understand parkland and bikeway priorities, and secure
               available funding for new bikeways, parkland, and leisure spaces.
PRK-IMP-1F     Identify and focus funding resources on obtaining joint-use agreements with
               schools located in park deficient areas of the City.
PRK-IMP-1G     Coordinate with OCTA regarding the lease of land that will not preclude
               potential future development of rail.
PRK-IMP-1H     Coordinate with public agencies and utilities to acquire use of right-of-ways
               for restricted use by the public.
PARK FACILITIES AND RECREATIONAL PROGRAMS
 Goal PRK-2     Community members desire a wide range of recreational amenities and
                programs that are reflective of the diverse needs of the community and that
                will accommodate future growth.
Policy PRK-2.1 Continue to prepare a Strategic Plan every five years to identify and prioritize
               community needs in regard to facilities and programs and available funding
               sources.
                                                                                             9-9
 Policy PRK-2.2       Consider the needs of the disabled when providing recreation programs and
                      designing park improvements including access points, path surfaces, play
                      equipment and other facility improvements.
 Policy PRK-2.3       Use the City’s recreation facilities and programs to increase cross-cultural
                      experiences and promote learning.
 Policy PRK-2.4       Continue to administer and, wherever feasible, expand upon the programs
                      designed to meet the recreational, social, physical, and economic needs of
                      target populations such as senior citizens, young adults, and children.
 Policy PRK-2.5       Research and secure public and private funding for recreation facilities in the
                      City.
 PRK-IMP-2A           Maintain compliance with the requirements identified in the Americans with
                      Disabilities Act (ADA).
 PRK-IMP-2B           Provide recreation programs that cater to all ages and ethnicities in Garden
                      Grove.
 MAINTAIN PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES
  Goal PRK-3           Well-maintained and improved recreational parkland and facilities, both
                       indoor and outdoor, provide the community with increased facility usage,
                       along with encouraging healthy lifestyles and a sense of community pride in
                       citywide facilities.
 Policy PRK-3.1       Inventory existing parks and recreation facilities to determine rehabilitation
                      needs through a periodic monitoring program, and establish the priority list for
                      facility maintenance and/or rehabilitation.
 Policy PRK-3.2       Encourage volunteerism and create a greater sense of stewardship for parks
                      within each neighborhood and community through active public involvement
                      programs.
 PRK-IMP-3A           Use fiscally responsible rehabilitation and maintenance strategies to maintain
                      and improve parks and facilities in need.
 PRK-IMP-3B           Continue to utilize, and explore additional financing mechanisms for the
                      operation and maintenance of existing facilities.
 PRK-IMP-3C           Promote volunteer opportunities through various City media, including the
                      City’s website, cable channel and City publications.
 Related Goals and Policies: Refer to the Safety Element for goals and policies related to safety
 at public facilities, including parks.
9-10

OPEN SPACE
 Goal PRK-4           The City seeks to achieve a ratio of 5.0 acres of Open Space1 to every 1,000
                      persons to meet the needs of existing and future residents and employees.
Policy PRK-4.1       Preserve and enhance open space resources in Garden Grove.
Policy PRK-4.2       Continue to expand open space resources in Garden Grove.
Policy PRK-4.3       Promote visually appealing landscaped corridors, which contribute to a sense
                     of spaciousness throughout the community.
Policy PRK-4.4       Encourage green spaces planted with a diverse plant palette in order to
                     promote natural variety, ecosystem services, and enhance the well-being of
                     community residents.
Policy PRK-4.5       Foster community participation and public participation programs regarding
                     open space resources.
PRK-IMP-4A           Pursue available resources to fund open space acquisition including Federal,
                     State and local funding grants, or donations.
PRK-IMP-4B           Encourage public volunteer programs that contribute to the preservation and
                     maintenance of open space areas (such as Eagle Scouts).
PRK-IMP-4C           Partner with schools and colleges to foster an understanding and
                     appreciation of open space among all age levels.
PRK-IMP-4D           Coordinate with OTCA to negotiate a lease of right-of-way lands and pursue
                     available funding resource to create linear park through portions of the City.
Related Goals and Policies: Refer to the Community Design Element for goals and policies
related to streetscapes and landscaped corridors.
 Goal PRK-5           Public plazas or green spaces provide additional open space opportunities
                      for existing and future residents and employees.
Policy PRK-5.1       Continue to require that adequate, usable, and permanent private open
                     space is provided in residential developments.
Policy PRK-5.2       Encourage new and existing commercial, office, and industrial development
                     to provide outdoor green spaces that may be used by employees.
Policy PRK-5.3       Encourage new development and redevelopment projects to incorporate
                     gardens and green spaces with various cultural influences throughout the
                     community to bridge cultures and provide education opportunities.
           1 Open Space includes city-parks, school district properties, Orange County Transit Authority
(OCTA) right-of-way, flood control facilities (retention basins, channels etc.), utility easements, and water
well sites and reservoirs).
                                                                                                         9-11
 PRK-IMP-5A     Review and modify as necessary, open space requirements for different types
                of development projects.
 PEDESTRIAN TRAILS
  Goal PRK-6     Safe, attractive, and accessible pedestrian trails provide additional
                 recreational opportunities for Garden Grove residents and employees.
 Policy PRK-6.1 Encourage pedestrian-oriented trails and amenities within and linkage to
                parks, new development and redevelopment projects, and commercial
                centers.
 Policy PRK-6.2 Encourage the planning and development for on- and off-street pedestrian
                trails throughout the community by the Community Services Department.
 Policy PRK-6.3 Explore public and private funding sources to provide additional pedestrian
                facilities within the City.
 PRK-IMP-6A     Work with adjacent property owners to create an interconnected trail that
                extends along the public right-of-way. A path will benefit business by
                increasing exposure and access, and benefit the community through
                encouraging fitness, improved access, and a connected community.
 PRK-IMP-6B     Coordinate with OCTA to provide trails within the right-of-way.
 PRK-IMP-6C     Design pedestrian trails/paths with multiple access points to maximize
                accessibility and minimize concentrating access.
 PRK-IMP-6D     Seek to create links between trails or new urban trails along the public right-of-
                way. Coordinate with City departments to create a method for modifying
                existing corridors to incorporate pedestrian trails along roadways.
 PRK-IMP-6E     Create design standards for trail development that includes distance markers
                (1/4, 1/2, and 1 mile), standardized signage, identifiable logo, street furniture,
                drinking fountain, and identifiable plant palette.
 BIKEWAYS
  Goal PRK-7     A safe, appealing, and comprehensive bicycle network provides additional
                 recreational opportunities for Garden Grove residents and employees.
 Policy PRK-7.1 Continue to implement an updated Master Plan of Bikeways and its
                amendments.
 Policy PRK-7.2 Coordinate with the Traffic Engineer/ Public Works Department to link
                bikeways to create a larger connected network.
 Policy PRK-7.3 Continue to work with OCTA to lease or purchase the right-of-way and create
                a bike trail through this area.
9-12
Policy PRK-7.4 Encourage existing major traffic generators, and new major traffic generators
               to incorporate innovative solution for safe bicycle crossings, and include
               bicycle facilities, such as bicycle racks and showers, into the development.
Policy PRK-7.5 Continue to pursue and monitor funding sources for bikeway facilities.
Policy PRK-7.6 Sponsor bicycle safety and education programs.
PRK-IMP-7A     Encourage the Public Works Department to consider bikeways in their
               prioritization of re-paving, and street sweeping.
PRK-IMP-7B     Provide incentives        to   developers    who   incorporate      bikeways  into
               developments.
PRK-IMP-7C     Update the existing Master Plan of Bikeways to comply with Caltrans standards
               in order to qualify for funding of new bikeway facilities.
PRK-IMP-7E     Promote the Public Works program for the Safe Routes to schools to qualify for
               funding.
PRK-IMP-7F     Maintain awareness of Orange County Transit Authority (OCTA) grant
               opportunities.
PRK-IMP-7G     Encourage bicycle safety awareness classes at community centers or parks
               where facilities are currently located.
PRK-IMP-7H     Encourage the placement of signage that educates and informs automobiles
               and bicyclists that use the facility.
CULTURAL ARTS, EVENTS, AND DIVERSITY
 Goal PRK-8     Diversity and culture is celebrated and maximized through the City’s arts,
                cultural arts, and history.
Policy PRK-8.1 Use the Parks, Recreation, and Arts committees, to aid and assist in the
               coordination and communication of cultural arts programs in the City.
Policy PRK-8.2 Examine the potential to re-establish the Courtyard Center.
Policy PRK-8.3  Promote local and regional participation in the City’s cultural and social
               activities (i.e., musical and theatrical productions, art exhibitions, etc.).
PRK-IMP-8A     Continue to provide the opportunity for cultural groups to conduct events in
               the community (i.e. the Strawberry, Arab-American, Korean, and Tet Festivals).
PRK-IMP-8B     Increase the availability of public information (in multiple languages) and
               advertising regarding these cultural and social activities on the City’s website
               and in City publications.
PRK-IMP-8C     Encourage and promote the use of the Gem Theater and the Festival
               Amphitheater.
                                                                                              9-13

 Related Goals and Policies: Refer to the Community Design Element for goals and policies
 related to public art.
  Goal PRK-9         The City values and seeks to strengthen cultural unity through community art,
                     activities, events, and other recreational experiences.
 Policy PRK-9.1     Provide ways for citizens and visitors to express, enjoy, and experience cultural
                    diversity and community heritage through activities and visual arts.
 Policy PRK-9.2     Promote and enhance the existing farmer’s market held on Main Street.
 Policy PRK-9.3     Coordinate with the Garden Grove Unified School District or other school
                    districts to provide programs that promote cultural activities and learning.
 PRK-IMP-9A         Continue to support the annual Festivals (Strawberry, Arab-American, Korean,
                    and Tet), which celebrate the heritage and diversity of the community.
 PRK-IMP-9B         Continue to support the Sister City relationship with Anyang, Korea and
                    Garden Grove.
 PRK-IMP-9C         Advertise City programs, activities, and events in the newspapers published in
                    the languages of the City’s ethnic populations.
  Goal PRK-10        A City that consists of individuals, organizations and agencies who provide
                     invaluable social and civic aid and assistance within the community.
 Policy PRK-10.1    Continue to support the efforts of Garden Grove’s civic and social service
                    organizations.
 Policy PRK-10.2    Continue to increase the ethnic diversity of citizens participating in local
                    government.
 PRK-IMP-10A        Recognize the individuals, organizations and agencies that have made a
                    contribution to community life in Garden Grove.
 PRK-IMP-10B        Promote the opportunities to participate in civic activities and social
                    organizations on the City’s website, cable channel, and in City publications.
9-14

                                                 LEGEND
                                SOURCE: RBF Consulting, 2008.
                     Existing Parks and Facilities
05/08 • JN 10-104660
                                                              EXHIBIT PRK-1

                                           LEGEND
                          SOURCE: RBF Consulting, 2008.
                     Parkland Service Area
05/08 • JN 10-104660
                                                        EXHIBIT PRK-2

                                                                      LEGEND
                                                     SOURCE: RBF Consulting, 2008.
                     Priority Future Joint-Use School/Park Locations
05/08 • JN 10-104660
                                                                                   EXHIBIT PRK-3

                                          LEGEND
                         SOURCE: RBF Consulting, 2008.
                     Existing School Sites
05/08 • JN 10-104660
                                                       EXHIBIT PRK-4

G                           Chapter 10
       G
General P
          l an 2 0 30
                      Conservation Element
Chapter 10
CONSERVATION ELEMENT
10.1 INTRODUCTION
The purpose of the Conservation Element is to
provide direction regarding the conservation,
development, and utilization of natural, historical,
and cultural resources. It serves as a guide for the
City of Garden Grove, its residents, and businesses
to understand what natural or other resources
exist in the City, how development impacts these
resources and the methods to maintain, preserve
or conserve these resources. The Conservation
Element will look at the following resources: water,
energy, solid waste, biological, green building,
and cultural/historical. The topic of the City’s
water system is discussed in more detail in
Chapter 6, Infrastructure Element. Background
and existing information for the Element can be
found in the General Plan EIR.
10.2 AUTHORITY FOR THE ELEMENT
The State of California Government Code Section 65302 (d)
requires “that a General Plan include a conservation element for
the conservation, development, and utilization of natural
resources including water and its hydraulic force, forests, soils,
rivers and other waters, harbors, fisheries, wildlife, minerals and
other natural resources.”
10.3 KEY THEMES AND VISION FOR
         GENERAL PLAN
Conservation and sustainability go hand in hand, and both strive
to use existing natural resources in a way that ensures future
generations may also meet their needs and retain a high quality
of life. Conservation and sustainable practices also allow a city
to become self-sufficient and reduce long-term costs associated
with the purchase of water, energy, and waste disposal. These
practices also improve the condition of the natural environment
and reduce environmental health hazards, which both
contribute to a high quality of life for residents and visitors. Key
themes found to be present in the City and that were identified
by the community include:
         How can the City manage and protect the quantity and
         quality of local groundwater supplies?
                                                                     10-1

          How can sustainable building methods and smart growth techniques be incorporated
          and utilized city-wide?
          How can the City preserve historic resources and also utilize them to enhance
          community character and sense of place?
 WATER RESOURCES
 Water is a precious resource in Southern California, a region that would return to its natural semi-
 arid condition without the importation, careful management, storage, and reuse of its water
 supply. Haster/West Haven are County basins designed to prevent flooding in the City.
 Currently, over half of the City’s water supply comes from local groundwater wells accessing the
 Santa Ana River groundwater basin, and the remaining is imported. Water conservation through
 reduced use, efficiency, reclaimed water, and the control and treatment of runoff pollution is
 critically important not only for Garden Grove, but the entire region. Reduced water
 consumption lessens reliance on potentially unreliable foreign water supplies and, locally, leaves
 more water in natural systems to benefit the local environment. Maintaining and improving
 water quality is essential to protect public health, wildlife, and the local watershed. Water
 conservation and pollution prevention can be dramatically improved through proactive efforts
 of residents and through City policies. Additional information on water quality requirements,
 including the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) can be found in the
 General Plan EIR.
 SOLID WASTE
 Garden Grove achieved requirements set forth by Assembly Bill 939 by diverting over 50 percent
 of its waste stream from landfills by 2000. Efforts to continue to divert solid waste from landfills by
 reduction reuse, and recycling programs remains a priority in the City.
 The Garden Grove Sanitary District‘s Recycle Garden Grove combines automated trash
 collection with a broad recycling and yard waste collection operation available to residences
 and businesses. In a joint effort by the Sanitary District and Garden Grove Disposal, Recycle
 Garden Grove is designed to reduce the volume of waste dumped in local landfills and to
 conserve natural resources. In 2005, approximately 199,737 tons of waste produced by the City
 was disposed in a landfill while 64 tons were burned at a waste-to-energy facility. Of this,
 household disposal consisted of 52 percent of waste disposal while business disposal consisted of
 48 percent.
 Efforts by local residents and businesses afford a great opportunity in waste reduction to lessen
 demands on natural resources and insure adequate landfill space is available for future
 generations.
 ENERGY RESOURCES
 Energy resources determine a City’s ability to support future development within the
 Community. Conservation of energy resources through community design and innovative
 building systems that capture efficient technologies such as cogeneration, solar heating, use of
 photovoltaic, daylight, energy management and control systems, and thermal energy storage
 all have the potential to reduce dependency on traditional energy resources that are currently
 used in the City. Given the area’s warm climate, the most important alternative and renewable
 energy resource in Garden Grove is solar energy, which has considerable potential to be
 developed to substitute for oil, gas, and other energy suppliers. Southern California Edison (SCE)
10-2

is the primary supplier of electricity and natural gas for the City of Garden Grove. SCE has a
total service area of 50,000 square-miles throughout central, coastal, and southern California.
Garden Grove represents a small share of the total energy market.
GREEN BUILDING
Buildings fundamentally impact people’s lives and the health of the planet through their design,
construction, and long-term operation. By encouraging buildings that are environmentally
responsible, profitable, and healthy places to live and work, Garden Grove is inherently
reducing air pollution, water pollution, sold waste, the depletion of finite resources, and the
destruction of natural areas, habitats and biodiversity. Green buildings and High Performance
Buildings create healthier and safer indoor and outdoor environments for users and provide
optimal building performance and efficiency that lowers long-term operation costs.
The construction (materials, waste, transportation) and lifecycle (energy, water) of buildings are
one of the largest sources of waste and long-term energy consumption within a city. As Garden
Grove looks to the future, the creation of a green building incentive program is one potential
method that would achieve significant water and energy conservation while reducing the
amount of waste placed in landfills.
BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES
Biological resources in Garden Grove are almost
non-existent due to the urban nature of the City
and surrounding area. However, incorporation of
natural and altered biotic habitats, as well as
associated flora and fauna, is important in
providing a high quality of life for residents. Parks,
vegetated         streetscapes,   large    trees,  and
neighborhoods support plant life and are home to
small animals and birds.
                                                              Stone Pines located on the south side of
CULTURAL AND HISTORICAL                                   Chapman, west of Harbor Boulevard are a valued
RESOURCES                                                        biological asset to the community.
Cultural and historic resources, sites, and districts have a valuable physical component to the
community’s heritage. One prehistoric site has been identified within Garden Grove’s municipal
boundaries, and an additional twelve historic archaeological sites dating from the early 1900s
have been found. The prehistoric site is located under a residential development and consists of
shellfish remains from food debris, stone tools and stone flakes from manufacturing stone tools.1
Archaeological sites are primarily locations of historic trash in association with residences and
commercial structure dating from the 1900s.2
A 1986 historic and architectural inventory documented 132 buildings as locally-significant
resources. Three structures, the Stanley or Ware House within Heritage Park, the Harry A. Lake
House, and the Reyburn House are candidates for nomination to the National Register of Historic
Places. The Stanley House is designated as Orange County Historical Site No. 13. The
preservation of these locally significant resources will be considered as the City continues to
urbanize and as the past traditions merge with future growth. Refer to the General Plan EIR for
additional information and listings.
          1 Site CA-ORA-392
          2 Sites CA-ORA-1260H through -1270H and CA-ORA-1307.
                                                                                                       10-3

                            Locally-significant historic homes in Garden Grove
 10.4 GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
 This Element is organized into goals, policies, and implementation programs. A description of
 each is provided in Chapter 1, Introduction. It is important to note that the implementation
 programs are specific actions to carry out all of the preceding goals and policies.
 WATER RESOURCES
  Goal CON-1        Garden Grove’s water resources shall be conserved to ensure equitable
                    amounts of clean water for all users.
 Policy CON-1.1     Continue to work with Federal, State, and regional governments and
                    agencies to ensure that adequate quantity of regional supplies and local
                    groundwater resources remain available to the City.
 Policy CON-1.2     Reduce the waste of potable water through efficient technologies,
                    conservation efforts, and design and management practices, and by better
                    matching the source and quality of water to the user’s needs.
 Policy CON-1.3     Promote water conservation in new development or redevelopment project
                    design, construction, and operations.
 Policy CON-1.4     Continue to implement a Water Conservation Program.
 Policy CON-1.5     Develop model water             demand      management     programs using best
                    management practices.
 Policy CON-1.6     Continue to educate citizens in water conservation and encourage its
                    practice.
10-4

CON-IMP-1A     Assist the efforts of the water districts to reduce waste and increase reuse of
               water and wastewater through integrated planning of programs and
               complementary land use and building regulations.
CON-IMP-1B     Require on-site infiltration whenever feasible for new development or
               redevelopment projects.
CON-IMP-1C     Promote site appropriate, low-water-use, and drought tolerant native plants
               city-wide.
CON-IMP-1D     Restore and promote native plant use at the Civic Center and the
               development of similar landscaping for all public facilities.
CON-IMP-1E     Develop a landscape palette for use by developers, homeowners, etc., that
               specifies drought tolerant planting and water saving irrigation systems.
CON-IMP-1F     Promote cost-saving conservation measures such as low-flow fixtures,
               waterless urinals, and other techniques that extend scarce supplies for all
               homes and businesses.
CON-IMP-1G     Assess and remove barriers to integrated water planning and sustainable
               water technologies for new development or redevelopment projects.
CON-IMP-1H     Provide incentives to new development or redevelopment projects that
               incorporate water efficient design and technologies.
CON-IMP-1I     Explore available funding opportunities for existing homeowners and business
               owners who would like to upgrade to water efficient technologies.
CON-IMP-1J     Encourage water conservation for new development or redevelopment
               projects through business rebates, or plumbing maintenance programs.
CON-IMP-1K     Encourage water agencies to conduct irrigation training workshops for
               homeowners and professionals.
 Goal CON-2    Protect and improve water quality.
Policy CON-2.1 Enhance water infiltration throughout watersheds by decreasing accelerated
               runoff rates and enhancing groundwater recharge. Whenever possible,
               maintain or increase a site’s pre-development infiltration to reduce
               downstream erosion and flooding.
Policy CON-2.2 Encourage practices that enable water to percolate into the surrounding soil,
               instead of letting sediment, metals, pesticides and chemicals runoff directly
               into the storm drain system, creeks, or regional flood control facilities.
Policy CON-2.3 Educate the public about water quality and engage the public and agencies
               to improve water quality.
Policy CON-2.4 Continue to comply with Federal, State, and regional governments and
               agencies to protect and improve the quality of local and regional
               groundwater resources available to the City.
                                                                                          10-5

 Policy CON-2.5 Utilize available resources to monitor land uses draining into water sources and
                water recharge areas, to prevent potential contamination from hazardous or
                toxic substances such as pesticides from homes, and golf courses, cleaning
                agents, swimming pool chemicals, and road oil.
 Policy CON-2.6 Design, construct, and maintain City buildings, landscaped areas, roads,
                bridges, drainages, and other facilities to minimize the volume of toxics,
                nutrients, sediment, and other pollutants in stormwater flows, and continue to
                improve road maintenance methods to reduce erosion and sedimentation
                potential.
 CON-IMP-2A     Support programs to maintain pathogen and nutrient levels at or below target
                levels set by the Regional Water Quality Control Board, including the efforts of
                agencies, and community groups to address pathogen, sediment, and
                nutrient management in the urban watershed.
 CON-IMP-2B     Utilize Integrated Pest Management (IPM) practices for City facilities. Develop
                a maintenance program for all City facilities that specifies least toxic methods.
                Minimize the need for toxic materials by designing and constructing facilities
                and landscaping to be durable, easily maintained, and pest resistant.
 CON-IMP-2C     Research the potential to expand the use of alternative waste disposal
                methods such as gray water systems, composting toilets, waterless urinals, and
                other techniques — and community systems to help reduce the potential for
                contaminants to pollute water bodies and create human health hazards.
 CON-IMP-2D     Minimize impervious services for new development, and incorporate
                technologies such as pervious paving, landscaped roofs, planter boxes, and
                rainwater capture and reuse.
 CON-IMP-2E     Support local storm water and community watershed group efforts to inform
                the public about practices and programs to minimize water pollution.
 CON-IMP-2F     Provide programs that encourage public participation, education, and
                appropriately designed development to curb water pollution in the City.
 SOLID WASTE
  Goal CON-3    Reduce total waste diverted to treatment or disposal at the waste source and
                through re-use and recycling.
 Policy CON-3.1 Update as appropriate and continue to implement the Source Reduction and
                Recycling Element (SRRE) for the City.
 Policy CON-3.2 Investigate a Citywide recycling program and hazardous waste drop-offs to
                provide optimal recycling opportunities for homeowners and businesses.
 Policy CON-3.3 Encourage business material reuse through waste exchange.
 Policy CON-3.4 Encourage the use of materials with minimal impacts to the environment for
                new development or redevelopment projects in the City.
10-6

Policy CON-3.5 Continue to maintain and enhance the public education program
               developed by Garden Grove Sanitation District that addresses waste
               management and proper household waste sorting and handling.
CON-IMP-3A     Establish targets for materials reduction.
CON-IMP-3B     Encourage materials recycling during renovation or demolition of old
               buildings.
CON-IMP-3C     Encourage participation in the CalMAX program, which is a free service
               offered by the Integrated Waste Management Board.               The program
               conserves energy, resources, and landfill space by helping businesses and
               organizations find alternatives to the disposal of valuable materials or wastes
               through waste exchange.
CON-IMP-3D     Encourage the use of recycled or rapidly renewable materials, and building
               reuse and renovation over new construction, where feasible.
CON-IMP-3E     Research funding opportunities for new development or redevelopment
               projects that incorporate building reuse and use of recycled materials.
ENERGY
 Goal CON-4    Reduce per-capita non-renewable energy waste and city-wide peak
               electricity demand through energy efficiency and conservation.
Policy CON-4.1 Integrate energy efficiency and conservation requirements that exceed State
               standards into the development review and building permit processes.
Policy CON-4.2 Create incentives such as expedited permit processing, technical assistance,
               and other methods that will encourage energy efficiency technology and
               practices.
Policy CON-4.3 Integrate energy efficiency and conservation technologies and practices into
               new City facilities and, where feasible, existing buildings as well as City
               functions.
Policy CON-4.4 Provide public information, marketing, and education to support energy
               efficiency and energy conservation.
CON-IMP-4A     Adopt Energy Efficiency Standards for new and remodeled buildings that
               exceed Title 24 building standards.
CON-IMP-4B     Create a tree-planting program that provides for the planting of appropriate,
               water efficient trees in residential, commercial, and civic areas that will
               reduce city-wide energy needs the heat-island effect through natural cooling.
 Goal CON-5    Reduce dependency on non-renewable energy resources through the use of
               local and imported alternative energy sources.
                                                                                          10-7
 Policy CON-5.1 Integrate technically and financially feasible renewable energy resources
                requirements into development and building standards through adopted
                Renewable Energy Building Standards.
 Policy CON-5.2 Promote renewable energy use through regulations, incentives, and available
                funding opportunities.
 Policy CON-5.3 Create opportunities for the purchase and development of local renewable
                energy resources.
 CON-IMP-5A     Work with local electric providers to allow purchase and sale of renewable
                energy.
 CON-IMP-5B     Continue to identify and remove regulatory or procedural barriers to
                producing renewable energy in building and development codes, design
                guidelines, and zoning ordinances.
 CON-IMP-5C     Work with related agencies such as fire, water, and health that may impact
                the use of alternative technologies.
 CON-IMP-5D     Develop protocols for alternative energy storage such as biodiesel, hydrogen,
                and/or compressed air.
 CON-IMP-5E     Continue to allow passive or active solar design elements and systems and
                protection from shading by neighboring structures and trees.
 CON-IMP-5F     Ensure all new and remodeled City facilities incorporate Renewable Energy
                building Standards into the facilities.
 CON-IMP-5G     Encourage renewable technologies through streamlined planning and
                development rules, codes, and processes.
 CON-IMP-5H      Provide incentives such as expedited processing for facilities that use
                renewable sources for energy production.
 CON-IMP-5I     Work with State and federal agencies to inform the public of, and possibly
                secure tax exemptions, tax rebates, or other financial incentives for new
                facilities.
 CON-IMP-5J     Develop and utilize renewable energy and clean generation technologies
                such as solar, wind, biogas, tidal, cogeneration, and fuel cells to power City
                facilities using tax-free low-interest loans and other available financial options.
 GREEN BUILDING
  Goal CON-6    Green Building programs achieve water and energy efficiency, minimize raw
                resource consumption, and reduce the amount of waste placed in landfills
                while improving human health and quality of life in the City.
 Policy CON-6.1 The City shall promote improvement in the health and productivity of new
                buildings, by understanding and training building personnel in new
10-8
               construction practices and the use of alternative or recycled building
               materials.
Policy CON-6.2 Provide information, marketing, training, and education to the public to
               support green building activities.
CON-IMP-6A     Seek out educational or other training opportunities for planning and building
               personnel to learn new construction practices, including the use of alternative
               building materials.
CON-IMP-6B     Develop educational materials that can be made available to the public
               regarding green building activities, new construction practices, and/or
               alternative building materials.
CULTURAL AND HISTORICAL RESOURCES
 Goal CON-7    Significant historical, architectural, archeological, and cultural value resources
               shall be preserved and protected.
Policy CON-7.1 Preserve and protect Garden Grove’s significant historical, archaeological
               and cultural value resources.
Policy CON-7.2 Preserve Garden Grove’s significant historic resources to promote community
               identity, stability, and aesthetic character.
Policy CON-7.3 Encourage private and public preservation activities for the education and
               enjoyment of present and future generations.
CON-IMP-7A     Preserve significant archeological sites in conformance with Public Resources
               Code Section 21083.2 or Section 21084.1, as applicable.
CON-IMP-7B     Determine appropriate zoning and land development guidelines in order to
               protect historic resources from incompatible development.
CON-IMP-7C     Develop a process for the preservation of historic buildings with clear data by
               property regarding its historic significance. Look for innovative ways to
               preserve these buildings by possibly creating an historic area in which to
               relocate the buildings.
CON-IMP-7D     Review proposals for the development of properties abutting historic resources
               to ensure that land use or new construction does not detract from the
               architectural characteristics and environmental setting of the historic
               resource.
CON-IMP-7E     Encourage the restoration of historic properties through financial incentives
               and public and private loan and grant funding programs.
CON-IMP-7F     Encourage new commercial development or renovations to existing
               commercial structures in historic areas to be compatible with existing historic
               architectural character.
CON-IMP-7G     Design public facilities to minimize adverse impacts on historic resources.
                                                                                             10-9

 CON-IMP-7H Preserve significant trees such as the Stone Pines that were saved as part of
            the hotel development on the south side of Chapman, west of Harbor
            Boulevard.
10-10
G                     Chapter 11
       G
General P
          l an 2 0 30
                      Safety Element
Chapter 11
SAFETY ELEMENT
11.1 INTRODUCTION
The purpose of the Safety Element is to
reduce the potential risk of death, injuries,
property damage, and the economic and
social dislocation resulting from hazards such
as fires, floods, earthquakes, landslides and
other hazards. The General Plan provides
policies and standards for the type, location,
intensity, and design of development in
areas of potential hazards. The intent of this
element is to understand and minimize risks
associated with each specific type of hazard
so the City government and public may
make informed decisions about land use
and development throughout the City. The
Element includes goals and policies for both
                                                  The Garden Grove Fire Department responds to fire
the Police and Fire Departments that serve
                                                       emergencies, release of hazardous toxic
the City of Garden Grove. Background and
                                                        substances, and medical emergencies.
existing information for the Element can be
found in the General Plan EIR.
11.2 AUTHORITY FOR ELEMENT
The State of California Government Code Section 65302(g)
requires that a General Plan include
    “…a safety element for the protection of the community
    from any unreasonable risk associated with the effects of
    seismically induced surface ruptures, ground shaking,
    ground failure, tsunami, seiche, and dam failure; slope
    instability leading to mudslides and landslides;
    subsidence, liquefaction and other seismic hazards
    identified pursuant to chapter 7.8 (commencing with
    §2690) of the Public Resources Code, and other geologic
    hazards known to the legislative body; flooding and wild
    land and urban fires.”
Policies and information for this Element are contained in the
Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act (Public Resources
Code Section 2621, et seq.), the Seismic Hazards Mapping Act
(Public Resources Code Section 2690, et seq.) and the
Unreinforced Masonry Law (Government Code Section 8875, et
seq.).
                                                                                    11-1

 11.3 KEY THEMES AND VISION FOR GENERAL PLAN
 CRIME REDUCTION AND SAFE NEIGHBORHOODS
 City leaders have adopted a community value that Garden Grove shall be a place where
 residents feel safe in their neighborhoods and community. Community residents are particularly
 interested in reducing crime, eliminating drugs and gang activities, and enhancing property
 conditions through property maintenance.
 While citywide crime has increased as the population has grown over the last decade,
 incidences of violent crime reduced approximately seven percent from 2006 to 2007 and non-
 violent crime reduced over one percent during that same period.1 According to the Police
 Department Captain, Garden Grove saw a decrease in Part 1 crimes2 until early 2007, at which
 time the number of crimes began to level out.3 Citizen participation in community policing and
 youth programs provides additional opportunities to improve safety citywide.                       Existing
 community policing efforts involve residents in crime prevention through neighborhood watch
 groups, and other cooperative ventures with local law enforcement. Despite the minor drop in
 crime instances from 2006 to 2007, and existing community efforts, crime prevention in Garden
 Grove remains a high priority and continued community participation and programs are vital to
 improving safety. The challenge for the future is maintaining adequate Garden Grove Police
 Department staffing to accommodate increased densities and population growth.
 Enhancing property conditions within neighborhoods are not only aesthetically appealing, but it
 has also shown to reduce crime and improve neighborhood safety. Basic deferred property
 conditions such as high weeds, run-down structures, broken windows, and graffiti, are more
 inviting to criminals, and give the appearance that no one is paying attention to the area.
 Conversely, a nice, neat, compliant neighborhood conveys a message that eyes are on the
 street, residents care, and activities within the neighborhood are also being observed. The most
 basic form of property maintenance is achieved through the City’s code enforcement.
 Identifying and remedying minor violations improves the condition of the area and, therefore,
 the neighborhood’s safety.
 ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARDS AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS
 Natural and man-induced disasters such as floods, earthquakes, terrorists’ attacks, and release
 of hazardous waste can occur with little or no warning, and can set into motion a number of
 other disasters, including widespread fire, releases of hazardous materials, and disruption of utility
 services. It is essential to have an understanding of potential disasters/emergencies and be
 properly prepared to have the most efficient disaster preparedness, emergency response, and
 disaster recovery. With proper planning, there are resources available to handle short-term
 response, there are procedures in place to handle larger disasters and there are plans for
 recovery.
 The City of Garden Grove has a detailed Emergency Operations Plan (EOP), which provides the
 basis for the City’s emergency planning, identifies the Emergency Operations Centers, and
          1 Violent Crimes consist of homicide, robbery, assault, forced rape; non-violent crime consists of
 burglary, larceny, and auto theft. Garden Grove Police Department, Helena Elsousou, April 24, 2008.
          2 Homicide, rape, robbery, aggravated assault, burglary, larceny/theft, auto theft, and arson are
 considered Part 1 crimes
          3 Captain Mike Handfield, Garden Grove Police Department, telephone conversation, May 1,
 2008.
11-2

indicates the personnel responsible for managing the emergency operations systems.4 Garden
Grove is part of the Operational Area of Orange County.
The Garden Grove Fire Department responds to fire emergencies, release of hazardous toxic
substances, and medical emergencies from their seven local Fire Stations. Exhibit SAF-1, Fire
Stations, shows the locations of fire stations throughout Garden Grove. As the type of built
environment has changed in the City of Garden Grove, the Fire Department has reviewed and
adapted is operation. With the increase in taller, higher residential density or mixed use projects,
the Fire Department has developed new requirements for the building floor plans and
determined areas in the City where an increase in facilities and support are needed. The Fire
department also faces the challenge of maintaining adequate staffing levels to accommodate
future growth. Fire Stations No. 6 and No. 7 are currently temporary stations and have less
staffing and resources than the City’s other five stations. These facilities will require replacement
and expansion to accommodate anticipated future growth.5
Seismic threats of particular concern in Garden Grove are liquefaction and dynamic settlement
of underlying soils. A majority of the City is subject to liquefaction; refer to Exhibit SAF-2,
Liquefaction Zone. With respect to dynamic settlement, the City has areas of moderate and
high dynamic settlement potential; refer to Exhibit SAF-3, Dynamic Settlement. The areas of
moderate potential are located in the northwest and eastern portions of the City, while the
areas of high potential are located in the central portion of the City, generally near Euclid Street.
Structural vulnerabilities in older buildings that are less earthquake resistant are most likely to
contribute to the largest source of injury and economic loss as a result of an earthquake.
Garden Grove is also susceptible to storm flooding which poses a primary hazard to the eastern
third of the City (refer to Exhibit SAF-4, Flood Zones).
Hazardous or extremely hazardous materials pose a threat to citizens and visitors. Materials are
used, stored, and manufactured by households and businesses in the City, transported across
the City’s highways, streets and railways, and travel through pipeline distribution systems
transecting the City. In addition to preparation provided in the Emergency Operations Plan, the
Garden Grove Fire Department maintains a Hazardous Materials Area Plan, which is in the
process of being updated. Additional information is provided in the General Plan EIR.
11.4 GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
This Element is organized into goals, policies, and implementation programs. A description of
each is provided in Chapter 1, Introduction. It is important to note that the implementation
programs are specific actions to carry out all of the preceding goals and policies.
CRIME REDUCTION: SAFE NEIGHBORHOODS
  Goal SAF-1          Ongoing collaborative efforts between the community and the Garden Grove
                      Police Department will assist in reducing and preventing crime in the City.
Policy SAF-1.1        Provide opportunities for community involvement in crime prevention and
                      control through community policing and other public participation programs.
         4 City of Garden Grove, Emergency Operations Plan, November 2003.
         5 David Barlag, Deputy Chief, Garden Grove Fire Department, electronic mail, April 30, 2008.
                                                                                                      11-3

 Policy SAF-1.2 Provide regular opportunities for communications between the Police
                Department and community members.
 Policy SAF-1.3 Promote police outreach efforts to the diverse cultural communities, church
                leaders, Neighborhood Advisory Networks, homeowner associations, and
                apartment management associations.
 Policy SAF-1.4 Provide public education about Community Enforcement Techniques.
 Policy SAF-1.5 Continue to build community confidence in neighborhood police personnel.
 SAF-IMP-1A     Continue Police Department programs such as the Community Policing
                Strategy.
 SAF-IMP-1B     Continue and encourage Neighborhood Watch programs community-wide.
 SAF-IMP-1C     Encourage community members to accompany police on regular patrols in
                their neighborhood and throughout the City.
 SAF-IMP-1D     Work with criminal justice agencies and community groups to support
                programs that offer information about community policing, reporting of child
                and adult abuse and neglect, and other crime prevention techniques.
                Information should be provided in the languages understood by members of
                the most affected community or by a majority of the community of the
                affected community members.
 SAF-IMP-1E     The Police Department will continue to conduct annual needs assessments of
                police facilities, equipment and personnel to plan and ensure that future
                growth of Garden Grove Police Department is commensurate with future
                development in the City.
 SAF-IMP-1F     Encourage the Police Department to conduct outreach                 efforts   in
                neighborhoods and ethnic communities throughout the City.
 CRIME REDUCTION: INFRASTRUCTURE AND DESIGN
  Goal SAF-2     Crime reduction can be achieved through public facility and infrastructure
                 improvements and the use of crime reducing design techniques.
 Policy SAF-2.1 Remedy problems with existing public facilities that have the potential to
                encourage criminal activity
 Policy SAF-2.2 Encourage Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED)
                techniques; design that discourages crime and promotes pedestrian safety,
                for all new development and redevelopment projects.
 Policy SAF-2.3 Identify specific high crime areas in the City and encourage and, when
                feasible, create plans/strategies to improve these areas.
 Policy SAF-2.4 Work with law enforcement agencies and community groups to promote litter
                pick-up, graffiti removal, basic repairs, and other neighborhood beautification
                efforts.
11-4
SAF-IMP-2A     Encourage site design using the following: increased pedestrian-level lighting,
               pedestrian routes that avoid blind corners and provide escape route choices,
               low fences or well-placed landscaping, and building entrances visible from
               public streets.
SAF-IMP-2B     Encourage mixed use development throughout the City in order to decrease
               commercial areas that are left vacant during nighttime hours.
SAF-IMP-2C     Involve law enforcement agencies in the design and planning phases of ABC
               licensed establishments to reduce design elements that conceal or
               encourage criminal activity.
SAF-IMP-2D     Ensure that signage and street markings at crosswalks provide for pedestrian
               safety.
SAF-IMP-2E     Involve law enforcement agencies in the design review of new and
               rehabilitated buildings to ensure basic safety measures and surveillance
               access are achieved.
SAF-IMP-2F     Continue to locate police sub-stations in those areas of the City particularly
               vulnerable to crime.
SAF-IMP-2G     Explore the use of new surveillance technologies that provide additional ways
               for the Police Department to monitor and more quickly respond to crime.
SAF-IMP-2H     Develop, where necessary and feasible, a parking program for on-street
               parking in high crime residential neighborhoods.
CRIME REDUCTION: YOUTH AND GANG-RELATED ACTIVITIES
 Goal SAF-3     The City seeks to reduce the number of gang-related, violent or criminal acts
                perpetrated, with specific emphasis on youth.
Policy SAF-3.1 Encourage programs and efforts to discourage youth from participating in
               gang-related activities.
Policy SAF-3.2 Provide immediate consequences for minor criminal behavior.
Policy SAF-3.3 Support citywide support programs and social services that address domestic
               abuse, addictions, and family services.
SAF-IMP-3A     Continue to use the graffiti removal programs, restitution programs, or other
               effective programs.
SAF-IMP-3B     Continue the implementation of a comprehensive Youth Violence Reduction
               Program incorporating education, intervention, and enforcement strategies.
SAF-IMP-3C     Develop and provide jobs programs for youth in both the public and private
               sector in order to help reduce crime.
                                                                                         11-5
 SAF-IMP-3D     Enhance School Programs by working with schools to support and expand
                after-school recreation, youth mentoring, conflict resolution, team building,
                self-awareness, and community involvement programs.
 SAF-IMP-3E     Create effective recreation and mentoring programs that engage all
                ethnicities.
 ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARDS AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS
  Goal SAF-4     Community members must be made aware of potential environmental
                 hazards, how they should prepare for these instances, and how they should
                 respond.
 Policy SAF-4.1 Advise and provide information to the public regarding the availability of local
                area environmental studies, sources of hazard information, and public
                services.
 Policy SAF-4.2 Continue and expand the public awareness programs conducted by the Fire
                Department, and other agencies as appropriate.
 Policy SAF-4.3 Provide the public with information identifying accessible evacuation routes
                for fire, geologic, and other hazards.
 SAF-IMP-4A     Keep the public informed as to the location of important emergency facilities,
                such as the Emergency Operations Centers (EOCs).
 SAF-IMP-4B     Continue to develop and conduct public education and awareness
                programs and seminars, which promote individual fire prevention and safety.
 SAF-IMP-4C     Identify and promote locations where information on public safety is available
                to the public.
 SAF-IMP-4D     Provide and inform the public of available educational guides promoting
                structural and nonstructural earthquake safety. This includes natural gas
                safety, water heater bracing, and installation of automatic natural gas shut-off
                valves in buildings; and retrofitting of older buildings and securing
                nonstructural elements of a building to prevent the falling or throwing of
                objects.
 FIRE HAZARDS AND PUBLIC HEALTH
  Goal SAF-5     Public harm from fire and health emergencies shall be minimized.
 Policy SAF-5-1 Continue to develop and enforce construction and design standards related
                to fire prevention.
 Policy SAF-5.2 Ensure that the City has adequate resources to respond to health and fire
                emergencies, such as Fire Stations, personnel, and equipment.
11-6
SAF-IMP-5A     Continue to require installation of automatic fire sprinkler systems in all new
               structures and existing structures undergoing substantial remodeling, and
               provide incentives for sprinkler installation in all other habitable structures.
SAF-IMP-5B     Require street addresses on commercial buildings to more readily facilitate
               emergency response.
SAF-IMP-5C     Continue to refer land development and building permit applications to the
               local fire district for review, and incorporate their recommendations as
               conditions of approval as necessary to ensure public safety.
SAF-IMP-5D     Continue to require compliance with all provisions of the most recently
               adopted version of the California Fire Code (with local amendments).
SAF-IMP-5E     Provide an adequate number of trained and certified emergency and
               medical technicians to address the increased medical demands due to an
               increase in residential density.
SAF-IMP-5F     Continue to provide adequate staffing of fire response personnel based upon
               changing conditions, density, and development type.
SAF-IMP-5G     Continue the Water Services Department’s maintenance program dedicated
               to maintaining the quality of the City’s water storage and distribution system,
               as well as to increase the water supply capacity.
SAF-IMP-5H     Continue to participate in cooperative agreements with the County and
               appropriate cities to provide fire and medical services in an effective manner,
               and continue to explore opportunities to expand the programs provided
               through these agreements.
SAF-IMP-5I     Adopt standards that set the number of personnel per response and response
               times (NFPA-1710).
SAF-IMP-5J     Continue to implement and update, as necessary, the Fire Department’s long-
               range plan and budget.
SEISMIC AND GEOLOGIC HAZARDS
 Goal SAF-6     Risk associated with seismic activity and geologic conditions to people and
                property shall be minimized.
Policy SAF-6.1 Avoid or minimize to the greatest extent feasible, hazards resulting from
               development on unstable ground conditions.
Policy SAF-6.2 Encourage rehabilitation or elimination of structures susceptible to collapse or
               failure in an earthquake. Historic buildings shall be treated with special
               consideration in order to ensure their preservation.
Policy SAF-6.3 Ensure that new structures are seismically safe through the proper design and
               construction. The minimum level of design necessary would be in accordance
               with seismic provisions and criteria contained in the most recent version of the
                                                                                                11-7

                State and County Codes. Construction shall require effective oversight and
                enforcement to ensure adherence to the earthquake design criteria.
 SAF-IMP-6A     Protect public health and safety through the appropriate identification and
                rehabilitation of public facilities.
 SAF-IMP-6B     Adopt the most current versions of State or County building, or other relevant,
                codes.
 SAF-IMP-6C     All new development with the exception of detached single-family homes,
                shall be subject to the preparation and submittal of a site specific geology
                report prepared by a registered geologist or soils engineer to the City Building
                Services Division for approval.
 FLOOD HAZARDS
  Goal SAF-7     Minimize injury and loss of life, damage to public and private property and
                 infrastructure, and economic and social disruption caused by inundation and
                 flood hazards.
 Policy SAF-7.1 Continue to implement adopted flood control programs and regulations.
 Policy SAF-7.2 Improve defensive measures against 100-year, or other State-defined
                scenario, flood conditions through land use and design, such as increased
                pervious surfaces, on-site water capture and re-use, minimized building
                footprints, etc.
 Policy SAF-7.3 Continue to monitor regional flood hazard improvements in the Santa Ana
                River Basin area to understand impacts to the 100-year storms within the City.
 Policy SAF-7.4 Encourage methods that place limits on land use activities in flood hazard
                areas and timely repair and maintenance of necessary flood control
                structures.
 SAF-IMP-7A     Continue to update, as appropriate, and enforce provisions in the City of
                Garden Grove Flood Management Ordinance, regarding development in
                flood prone areas.
 SAF-IMP-7B     Encourage use of Low Impact Development (LID) methods that capture and
                treat water on-site, therefore, reducing flows to storm drain system.
 SAF-IMP-7C     Maintain and improve capacity levels of storm drainage service, where
                appropriate.
 SAF-IMP-7D     Update the City’s Master Plan of Drainage.
 DISASTER PREPAREDNESS
  Goal SAF-8     The social and economic impacts that natural and urban disasters have on
                 the community shall be minimized through effective emergency and disaster
                 preparedness.
11-8

Policy SAF-8.1 Maintain and update the City’s Disaster Preparedness Plan.
Policy SAF-8.2 Provide self-sufficiency practices necessary after a major disaster, such as
               alternative water sources, food storage, first aid, family disaster plans, etc.
Policy SAF-8.3 Continue with and improve upon disaster preparedness collaboration efforts
               city- and county-wide.
Policy SAF-8.4 Ensure that adequately trained staff are available to provide essential
               emergency public services.
SAF-IMP-8A     Require that the Disaster Preparedness Plan identifies methods to prepare for
               and respond to local and regional man-made threats such as terrorist attacks.
SAF-IMP-8B     Continue to participate in cooperative agreements with the County and
               appropriate cities to provide emergency services in an effective manner, and
               explore opportunities to expand the programs provided through these
               agreements.
SAF-IMP-8C     Work with public safety and health and human services agencies within the
               city and county to maintain interagency and public communications systems
               that will provide mutual aid and be reliable during and following an
               emergency.
SAF-IMP-8D     Assist in shelter, relief, and first-aid operations.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
 Goal SAF-9     The threat to the public health and safety, and to the environment posed by a
                release of hazardous materials, shall be minimized.
Policy SAF-9.1 Continue to strictly enforce Federal, State, and local laws and regulations
               related to the use, storage, and transportation of toxic, explosive, and other
               hazardous and extremely hazardous materials to prevent unauthorized
               discharges.
Policy SAF-9.2 Develop an educational awareness program for residents and businesses
               about the dangers of hazardous materials that urges the minimum use, proper
               storage and management of, and accurate disposal of hazardous materials.
SAF-IMP-9A     Provide information on available non-hazardous product alternatives, proper
               storage, management, and disposal of hazardous wastes on the City’s
               website, and at City Hall and other public facilities, as necessary.
SAF-IMP-9B     Continue to publicize and conduct semi-annual household hazardous waste
               round-ups.
SAF-IMP-9C     Encourage government agencies to purchase and use non-toxic cleaning
               materials.
                                                                                               11-9

 This page intentionally left blank.
11-10
                                      LEGEND
                     SOURCE: RBF Consulting, 2008.
                                Fire Stations
05/08 • JN 10-104660
                                                   EXHIBIT SAF-1

                                        LEGEND
                       SOURCE: RBF Consulting, 2008.
                     Liquefaction Zones
05/08 • JN 10-104660
                                                     EXHIBIT SAF-2

                                          LEGEND
                       SOURCE: Leighton and Associates; Sherburne and Others,
                               1981; and the City of Garden Grove.
                     Dynamic Settlement
05/08 • JN 10-104660
                                                           EXHIBIT SAF-3

                                      LEGEND
                     SOURCE: RBF Consulting, 2008.
                                  Flood Zones
05/08 • JN 10-104660
                                                   EXHIBIT SAF-4

