·!~==:::::;!· ECONOMIC
                      DEVELOPMENT
  =======-=-=~·       ELEMENT
                      El      Cent r o Genera l   P l an
                          NOVEMBER 20 1 1
 Prepared By:
  2140 Shattuck Avenue, #2239
   Berkeley, CA 94704
  Tel S I 0.684.6253
  Fax S I 0.898.1778                     Wahlstrom
  www.locaJeconomicgroup.com              (f[;fssoczates

                                     ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTELEMENf                                            _____..
                      TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION                                                                                                                   PAGE
National and State Economic Setting ...... .. ...... .. ............... .. ...... ... .. ED-1
Purpose of the Economic Development Element . ..... .... ....... . ..... .... .. ED-1
Economic Development Goals, Policies, and Actions ....................... ED-2
  3.1: Attract Employers That Pay Higher Wages .................................. .................. ........ ED-5
  3.2: Encourage Entrepreneurship ............................................................. ............ ........ ED-5
  3.3: Encourage Sustainable Development Practices ..................................................... ED-6
  3.4: Create More Shovel Ready Industrial Sites ............................................................ ED-7
  3.5 : Continue to Attract Shoppers From Mexica li and Neighboring Communities .......... ED-8
  3.6: Improve Community Amenities That Make El Centro a Better Place to Visit
        and Reside ........................................................................................................... ED-8
  3.7: Transform Downtown El Centro Into a Mixed-Use N eighborhood .......................... ED-9
  3.8: Reduce the Inventory of Vacant Commercial Space ............................................ ED-1 0
  3.9: Encourage More Intensive Development at Underutilized Shopping Center Sites .. ED-1 0
  3.1 0: Upgrade the Appearance of Abandoned and Underutilized Commercial Properties
         Until They are Revitalized .............................................. ................................... ED-11
  3.1 1: Convert a Portion of Vacant Industrial Land Into Business Park or General
         Commercial Uses ............................................................................................. ED-11
  3.12: Complete the Development of the Imperial Valley Commons Site ...................... ED-12
Goals, Policies and Actions for Targeted Opportunity Areas . ... ...... ED-12
  Imperial Avenue Corridor
  4. 1 Valley Plaza Shopping Center .............................................................................. ED- 18
  4.2: Former Heilig Meyers Center .. .......................................................... .................. ED-18
  4.3 : Bowling Alley Site ................... ............ .............................................. .................. ED-18
  4.4: Valley Centerpoint Plaza (Former El Centro Shopping Cent er) ............................. ED-18
  4.5: Former Wai-Mart Store Site ................................................................................ ED-18
  4.6: El Centro Town Center Phase II ........................................................ .................. ED-18
                                                             ED·i

                                   ECONOMIC D EVELOPMENTELEMENf                                            _____..
SECTION                                                                                                                 PAGE
  Center City District............................................................................................... ED-18
  4.7: Adams Avenue Corridor ................................................................... ............ ...... ED-18
  4.8: Downtown Main Street Corridor ........................................................ .................. ED- 19
  4.9: Highway 86 Railroad Properties .......... .............................................. .................. ED-19
  Industrial Areas .................................................................................................... ED-19
  4.10: 8'h Street Industrial Park Subdivision ................................................................. ED- 19
  4.11: Denenberg Industrial Area ............................................................................... ED-19
  4 .12: South of El Centro Industrial Park ..................................................................... ED-19
  4. 13: Abatti Property (South of Centerpoint Business Park) ......................................... ED- 19
  New Shopping Areas Along South Dogwood Avenue ......................... ED-20
  4. 14: Plaza@ Imperial Valley .......................................................... ......................... ED-20
  4. 15: Imperial Volley Mall and Surrounding Pads ....................................................... ED-20
  4 . 16: Imperial Volley Commons ................................................................................. ED-20
                                    LIST OF TABLES
TABLE                                                                                                                   PAGE
ED- 1 T itl e Economic Development Goals, Policies and Actions ........... ................. ED-3
ED-2 T itl e Opportu nity Area Goals and Poli cies ..................................... ED-13
                                 LIST OF FIGURES
FIGURE . . . ....... ..... . . ....... . . ..... . . ....... . . . . . . ... . . . . ..... . . .... .......... . .... . pAGE
ED-1 El Cent ro's Key Econom ic Development Opportu nity Sites ................ ED-17
                                                       •••
                                                          ED·ii

                              ECON OMIC D EVELOPMENTELEMENf                     _____..
                       ECONOMIC
                       DEVELOPMENT
                       ELEMENT
                      E I    Centro           Genera               P I a n
NATIONAL AND STATE ECONOMIC SETTING
 The Lehman Brothers collapse in September 2008 caused a chain of events that led the
 United States into the great recession and a reset of the national economy. A number of
 the nation's most important financial institutions became insolvent and were bailed out
 by Congress and the Federal Reserve. Since that time, housing prices have dramatically
 declined; 5.8 million private sector jobs disappeared; trillions of dollars of household net
 worth were lost; up to 30 percent of homeowners ore under water; and housing
 foreclosures became a significant economic and social problem since 2008. These
 events have reduced consumer demand for goods and services as households cut costs
 to reduce debt, causing a decline of state and local govemment retail tax receipts.
 Despite the national and state economic constraints, the City has included an Economic
 Development Element of the General Plan in order to strengthen local economy that
 provides needed services and employment opportunities for local residents. This Element
 focuses on promoting a healthy local economy that allows for a fiscally balanced
 community with a high quality of life. The Economic Development Element outlines the
 approach that the City will continue to implement, maintain, and build upon the
 community's strengths.
PURPOSE OF THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
ELEMENT
 T he General Plan Economic Development Element update provides an opportunity for El
 Centro to strategically position the City to resume growth by taking advantage of the
 larger globalization forces that are shaping the economy of Southern California and the
 US Mexico border area. T he challenge will be to establish land uses that support the
 start-up and recruitment of businesses that will pay higher wages and reverse the
 declining incomes among households.
 This Economic Development Element update, which replaces the 2004 ED Element, will
 help the City adjust to the changing economy with a strategy to reuse or redevelop the
 underutilized industrial and commercial sites, and to improve downtown by encouraging
                                               ED·1

                                   ECON OMIC D EVELOPMENTELEMENf                                _____..
    new investment and a mix of commercial, residential and office uses. 1 The other General
     Plan elements will also be replaced as funds become available in future years.
    The goals, policies and actions described below are an outcome of more than one year
    of work to prepare an Economic Development Strategy that includes an ED Element.
     Readers who want more thorough information about the analysis and background
    information should download the Economic Development Strategy from the City's
    website.
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT GOALS, POLICIES,
AND ACTIONS
    The economic development goals describe the outcomes that the City seeks the
     Economic Development Element to accomplish with its economic development
    initiatives. The policies and actions present various approaches towards achieving the
    goals (Table ED-1 ). Note that the policy and action numbers do not correspond with any
    type of prioritization.
                                     [This space intentionally left blank]
1
  The economic Development Element is an optional element under California law , rather than a mandatory element
of the General Plan.
                                                       ED·2

                                                                                                     ECONOMIC D EVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                                                                                                              •
                                                                                 TABL E ED·1
                                         ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT GOALS , POLICIES AND ACTIONS
     ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT                                                    POLICIES AND ACTIONS                                                   GEOGRAPHIC FOCUS
                GOALS
                                        1.1 Collaborate with the regional business attraction efforts led by the lmperial Valley EDC
I. Attract employers th.a t pay
                                        1.2 Assign staff or a consultant to be El Centro's business att raction lead point of contact  Entire City with no geographic focus
    higher wages
                                        1.3 Continue to fund the IVEDC and participate in the Board meetings
                                       2. 1 Improve access to small business financing and technical assistance
                                       2.2 Assure that El Centro can offer the full range of telecommunication services and support
2. Encourage entrepreneurship               infra structme                                                                             Entire City with no geographic focus
                                       2.3 Support the development of home businesses provided they do not adversely impact the
                                            surrounding neighborhood
                                       3. 1 Partner with the IVEDC, Imperial CoWlty and other regional partners to attract renewable
                                            energy investment to El Centro
3. Encourage sustainable
                                                                                                                                       Enti re City with no geographic focus
   development practices               3.2 Evaluate the potential to attract green technology firms
                                       3.3 C reate incentives to encourage property owners to adopt renewable energy technologies
                                       4.1 Use tax increment financing and the Ci ty's Capital lmprovement f und
                                            to partner with industri al property land owners and developers to finance infrastmcture
4. Create more shovel ready industrial      improvements needed to create shovel ready sites                                           Goal app lies to undeveloped sites that are zoned
   and business park sites                                                                                                             for industrial or business par k uses.
                                       4.2 Seek federal and state grants to fund the infrastructure improvements needed to create
                                            shovel-ready industrial sites
                                                                                                                                       Goal applies to shopping centers with
                                       5.1 Partner with magnet retailers and the Chamber to promote El Centro as a regional            destination stores that attract shoppers from
5. Continue to attract shoppers from
                                            shopping destination                                                                       Mexicali and the neighboring commun ities.
   Mexicali and neighboring
                                                                                                                                       Destinations include the Plaza @ Imperial
   communities                         5.2 Establish a business retention program to track and monitor shopping patterns               Valley, the Imperial Valley Mall, IV Commons,
                                                                                                                                       and the big box stores along Imperial Avenue
6. Improve community amenities that    6.1 Attract othe r tourism support businesses such as resorts, lodging facilities, restaurants,
   make El Centro a better place to         and recreational faci lities such as golf courses and water parks                          Entire City with no geographic focus
   live and visit                      6.2 Upgrade and maintain City parks and recreational facilities such as Stark field
                                                                        ED-3

                                                                                                            ECONOMIC D EVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                                                                                                                   •
                                                                                       Table ED-1 (continued)
                                                                      Economic Development Goals, Policies and Actions
   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT GOALS                                                      POLICIES AND ACTIONS                                                      GEOGRAPHIC FOCUS
                                           7.1 Encourage the development of new housing and live/work space that will be attractive to
                                                 people who may not have previously considered living downtown.
  7. Transform Downtown El Centro into a
     mixed use neighborhood that attracts  7.2 Continue lo invest in downtown urban design and streetscape improvements                      Goal applies to the Main Street Corridor between
     people to live, work and play in the  7.3 Encourage a mix of different sizes and types of downtown businesses.                          41h and 8111, and Broadway and State Street
     area
                                           7.4 Provide financial support in the fonn of reduced rents to attract artists and non-traditional
                                                  uses to occupy vacant space
                                           8.1 Encourage and allow vacant and underutilized shopping centers to be transitioned into a mix   Goal applies to the vacant and underutilized
                                                 of commercial retail, office and/o r residential uses in the downtown area                  commercial sites at the Valley Plaza Shopping
  8. Reduce the inventory of vacant
                                           8.2 Encourage in fill development and the redevelopment of underutilized s ites along the         Center, the El Centro Shopping Center, the fom1er
     commercial space
                                                 Adams Avenue corridor                                                                       \Val-Mart site, the Adams Avenue corridor and
                                             8.3 Encourage the planned redevelopment of the Highway 86 railroad properties                   the Highway 86 Railroad property site
                                                                                                                                             Goal applies to underutilized shopping center sites
                                           9. 1 Collaborate with property owners to attract new uses with more building space and            along Imperial Avenue including the Valley Plaza
  9. Encourage more intensive                     reduced parking
     development at underutilized shopping                                                                                                   Shopping Center, the former Heilig Meyers
     center sites                           9.2 Collaborate with the property owners to transition underutilized shopping center sites into  Center, the El Centro Shopping Center and the
                                                  pedestrian-friendly areas                                                                  fonner Wal-Mart store site
                                           l 0.1 Expand code enforcement and require property owners to maintain the sites
I 0. Upgrade the appearance and                                                                                                               Goal applies to underutilized shopping center
                                            10.2 Encourage property owners to improve the appearance ofboarded up buildings by
     maintenance of abandoned and                                                                                                             s ites along Imperial A venue including the fom1er
                                                   collaborating with local artists
     underutil ized commercial properties                                                                                                     Heilig Meyers Center, the El Centro Shopping
     until they are revitalized             I 0.3 Collaborate with property owners to attract temporary uses to the acres of unused parking   Center and the fonner Wal-Mart store site
                                                   fronting Imperial Avenue
                                            11.1 Encourage and allow some industrially zoned vacant land to be developed for general
                                                                                                                                             Goal applies to the vacant industrial land on the
II. Convert a portion of industrial land           commercial or business park uses
                                                                                                                                             Abatti Property and at the El Centro Town Center
     into business park or general          11 .2 Proposals to convert industrially zoned land to residential uses should be discouraged,    Phase II. The goal also guides the redevelo pment
     commercial uses                               recognizing that the opportunity areas have some residentially-zoned land that has yet    of the Highway 86 railroad properties
                                                   to be developed
                                           ·12.1 Encourage and allow the site to be developed for a mix of commercial retail and
12. Complete the development of the                business park uses
                                                                                                                                             Goal applies to the Imperial Valley Commons s ite
     Imperial Valley Commons site           12.2 Partner with the property owner to complete tbe infrastructure improvements required for
                                                   site build out
                                                                             ED-4

                                 ECONOMIC D EVELOPMENTELEMENf                    _____..
Ed Goal 3. 1: Attract Employers That Pay Higher Wages
   El Centro's economic development efforts should attempt to reverse the steep decline of
   household incomes caused by a job mix that is dominated by low wage paying retail
   trade, leisure, and personal service business establishments. T he income decline has
   occurred despite El Centro's very strong job growth rates relative t o the region and State.
   The City's inventory of undeveloped industrial land and vacant shopping centers should
   be promoted as available business sites. A good promotional effort may require on
   improved website and trade show booth, w ith information about the available business
   sites and a description of ava ilable business incentives.
Policies and Actions
ED Policy/Action 3. 1 . 1 : Collaborate with the regional business attraction efforts led by
the Imperial Volley EDC
   T he IVEDC has on ongoing effort to attract new investors and business prospects to
   Imperial County. However, it is up to El Centro to compete with neighboring
   communities for IVEDC-generoted leads. The City shou ld assign a single staff person to
   collaborate with the Imperial Volley Economic Development Corporation (IVEDC) at
   trade shows and other business recruitment tasks in order to strengthen its partnership
   with the IVEDC.
ED Policy/Action 3. 1.2: Assign staff or a consultant to be El Centro's primary point of
contact for business attraction leads
   A single person should be assigned to lead El Centro's business attraction efforts. El
   Centro's single point of business contact wou ld also respond to leads generated by the
   IVEDC.
ED Policy/Action 3. 1.3: Continue to fund IVEDC and participate in its Boord of Director
Actions
   The City of El Centro should continue its financial support of IVEDC pending the
   availability of sufficient revenues. T he funding should be expanded if fiscally viable.
   Funding the IVEDC should provide El Centro with a seat on the Board of Directors and a
   say in the direction of the regional business attraction efforts.
Geographic Focus
   Economic Development Goal # 1 and the policies apply to the entire City and o re not
   limited to any specific opportunity site.
ED Goal 3.2: Encourage Entrepreneurship
   Efforts to expand small businesses and support new business startups ore a proven
   strategy that con reduce unemployment and increase incomes. The City currently
   operates a small business loon fund, but improved access to technical assistance con
   also help El Centro expand employment opportunities that increase household incomes.
                                                 ED·S

                                       ECONOMIC DEVEL OPMENTELEMENf                                 _____..
 Policies and Actions
 ED Policy/Action 3.2. 1 : Improve access to small business financing and technical
assistance
     A staff person or a consultant should be assigned to inform self-employed entrepreneu rs
     and small businesses about available financing from private banks; Imperial Valley
     SBDC, the SBA, the City's revolving loan fund, and other small business lenders.
 ED Policy/Action 3.2.2 : El Centro should offer the full range of telecommunication
services for business and households
     El Centro should have the necessary infrastructure to allow for high quality broadband
     service for business and residents. A citywide wi-fi service would make a positive
     contribution to the City's image and its attractiveness to new business investment.
 ED Policy/Action 3 .2. 3: Support the development of home businesses, provided they do
not adversely impact the surrounding neighborhood
     Supporting the establishment of small home-based business encourages entrepreneurs
     to generate their own income sources. Firms with fewer than 20 employees accounted
     for 18 percent of private sector jobs in 2006, and nearly 25 percent of net employment
     growth from 1992 to 2005. 2
 Geographic Focus
     Economic development goal #2 and the policies apply to the entire City and are not
     limited to any specific opportunity site.
 ED Goal-3.3: Encourage sustainable Development practices
     El Centro must comply with California's greenhouse gas reduction legislation that will
     affect land use, transportation, buildings and energy, waste reduction, water
     conservation, and green infrastructure (AB 32 and SB 375). The State's climate change
     requirements create an opportunity for El Centro to capitalize on recent investments in
     geothermal energy plants and solar energy farms. The General Plan update can
     encourage energy efficient systems, waste and water saving technologies, more compact
     land-use patterns, and other sustainable practices that will create new jobs.
 Policies and Actions
 ED Policy/Action 3.3. 1 : Partner with the IVEDC, Imperial County and other regional
partners to attract renewable energy investment to El Centro
     El Centro can benefit from investment in geothermal power plants, as well as wind and
     solar power facilities. The construction activities can generate new jobs and a
     sustainable sou rce of energy for business activities. Operating and maintaining the
     renewable energy facilities can create long term, permanent jobs.
2
  See President's Council of Economic Advisors, The Economic Effects of Health Care Reform on Small Business.
July 25, 2009
                                                          ED·6

                                  ECON OMIC D EVELOPMENTELEMENf                  _____..
ED Po licy/Action 3. 3 .2 : Evaluate the potential to attract "green" technology firms to
El Centro, explore particular niches in the industry that El Centro may be able to attract,
and formulate a strategy to attract new green tech firms.
    Many southern California cities are aggressively pursuing green technology companies.
    The City should develop and implement a strategic plan that examines industry trends,
    catalogs existing green technology companies in Imperial County, and identifies the
    particular type of firms that El Centro would best serve with its ample industrial land.
    Competition from other jurisdictions should also be considered.
ED Po licy/Acti o n 3. 3 .3: Create incentives to encourage residentia l and commercial
property owners to retrofit existing buildings with energy efficient and renewable energy
technologies
    Other southern California cities have adopted programs to encourage property owners to
    retrofit their buildings, and require renewable energy technologies be incorporated into
    new commercial and residential buildings. The City should identify examples of
    successful programs adopted elsewhere, and replicate other communities' successful
    case studies.
Geographic Focus
    Economic Development Goal #3 and the policies apply to the entire City and are not
    limited to any geographical area.
ED Goal 3.4: Create more shovel ready industrial sites
    El Centro has a large inventory of undeveloped industrially zoned land, but very few
    improved industrial lots with streetlights, sidewalks, landscaping, and other amenities.
    T he Centerpoint Business Park is an example of an improved industrial area that has
    successfully attracted businesses and allowed El Centro to compete with the cities of
    Imperial and Calexico.
ED Po licy/Action 3 .4 . 1 : Utilize public/private partnerships to help finance the
infrastructure improvements needed to create shovel ready business sites
    It is often not feasible for property owners to privately finance water, sewer and other
    infrastructure improvements that are needed to create shovel ready industrial sites.
    Public/private partnerships can leverage addit ional investment that may be needed to
    implement industrial improvement projects. The Centerpoint Industrial Park is an
    example of a public private partnership that financed a successful industrial park.
ED Policy/Action 3.4.2 : Apply for federal and state grants and loans t o fund the
infrastructure improvements
    Despite severe Federal and State fiscal constraints, a few grants and lending sources
    remain to help finance inf rastructure improvements. T he Economic Development
    Administration (EDA) offers grants to fund infrastructure improvements, but require
    applicants to demonstrate a commitment from a business to locate on the site. State
    CDBG offers grants with similar requirements.
                                                  ED·7

                                   ECONOMIC D EVELOPMENTELEMENf                     _____..
Geographic Focus
   Economic development goal #4 and the associated policies applies to vacant industrially
   zoned land at the El Centro Town Center Phose II, 8th Street Industrial Pork Subdivision,
   Denenberg Industrial Site, South of El Centro Industrial Park, and the Abatti Property.
ED Goal 3.5: Continue to attract shoppers from Mexicali and
    neighboring communities
   The City should initiate a promotional effort that continues to attract thousands of
   Mexicali shoppers to El Centro every day. The number of Mexicali shopping visitors may
   be expanded by a coordinated effort to promote the regional shopping center and El
   Centro's other retail stores.
Policies and Actions
ED Policy/Action 3.5. 1 : Partner with anchor store retailers and the Chamber to promote
El Centro as a regional shopping destination
   The City should explore ways to expand promotional opportunities that attract shoppers
   from neighboring Imperial County communities and Mexicali. Continuation of El
   Centro's role as a regional sho pping destination is critical to the City's fiscal health.
ED Po licy/Action 3.5.2: Establish a business retention program to track and monitor
shopping patterns
   The City should establish a direct line of communication with the major retailers and
   shopping center owners regarding their business expansion and retention needs.
   Improved communications could facilitate City assistance with business expansion and
   retention issues such as traffic flow, const ruction management, signage, and other
   urban design topics.
Geographic Focus
   Economic Development Goal #5 focuses on the dest ination retailers and shopping
   centers that include the Im perial Valley Mall, the Plaza at Imperial Valley, and the big
   box destination stores along Imperial Avenue. Smaller shopping centers and downtown
   El Centro are not regional shopping attractions.
ED Goal 3.6: Improve community amenities that make El Centro a
   better place to visit and reside
   El Centro can become a more attractive visitor destination by improving the City's
   physical attractiveness and upgrading community amenities
Policies and Actions
ED Policy/ Action 3.6. 1 : Attract tourism support to businesses such as resorts, lodging
facilities, restaurants, golf courses, water parks, and other recreational facilities
   El Centro can attract businesses that support snowbirds and other visitors who enjoy the
   area's desert climate and natural and recreational resources. Resorts, lodging facilities,
                                                   ED·8

                                   ECONOMIC D EVELOPMENTELEMENf                  _____..
    restaurants, golf courses and water parks are examples of tourism-support businesses
    that could locate in El Centro. However, competition with higher-end, more attractive
    visitor support facilities in Yuma and the Coachella Valley have constrained El Centro's
    ability to attract new tourism support facilities.
ED Policy/Action 3 .6 .2 : Upgrade and maintain City parks and recreational facilities
    Continued maintenance and improvements of the public parks and sports fields {i.e.
    Stark Field) makes El Centro a better place to live and a more attractive community to
    visit.
Geographic Focus
    Economic Development Goal #6 and the policies apply to the entire City and are not
    focused on any specific opportunity site.
ED Goal 3 .7: Transform downtown El Centro into a
     mixed-use neighborhood
    Downtown El Centro should be transitioned into a high-density neighborhood with a mix
    of retail, general commercial, office, and residential uses that attract people to live, work
    and play in the area. The former goal of revitalizing downtown as a retail-shopping
    destination should be abandoned.
Policies and Actions
ED Policy/Acti on 3. 7.1 : Encourage the development of new housing and live/work
space that will attract people who may not have previously considered living downtown.
    Market rate and affordable housing should be developed on vacant infill sites.
    Underutilized buildings should be redeveloped with a mix of residential and commercial
    uses. Space could be converted into live/work studios in order to attract people who may
    not have previously considered living downtown .
ED Policy/Action 3.7.2: Continue to invest in downtown urban design and
streetscope improvements
    T he urban design and streetscape improvements that were started during the 1990s
    should be resumed with new investments to make the area more attractive.
ED Policy/Action 3.7.3: Encourage a mixofdifferentsizesandtypesof
downtown businesses
    Attracting people and businesses back into the downtown will require flexibility and
    creativity. T he City should encourage a variety of businesses that may need different
    types of spaces. Flexible zoning rules should be adopted to attract business and residents
    into the vacant downtown spaces.
ED Policy/Action 3. 7 .4 : Provide financial support in the form of reduced rents to attract
artists and non-traditional uses to occupy vacant space
    T he City could acquire some vacant downtown space, and lease it out to artists for a
    very low lease rates.
                                                    ED·9

                                  ECONOMIC D EVELOPMENTELEMENf                    _____..
Geographic Focus
    Economic Development Goal #7 and the policies are focused on the Main Street
    corridor between 8 th and 4th Street, and between Broadway and State.
ED Goal 3.8: Reduce the inventory of vacant commercial space
    El Centro should reduce the inventory of vacant shopping centers and other commercial
    space.
Policies and Actions
ED Po licy/Acti on 3.8. 1 : Encourage and allow vacant and underutilized shopping
centers to be transitioned into a mix of commercial retail, office, and/ or other business uses
    The City should encourage and consider proposals to redevelop the vacant shopping
    centers into alternative uses.
ED Policy/Action 3.8 .2: Encourage mixed use infill development and the redevelopment
of underutilized sites along t he Adams Avenue corridor
    The City should encourage vacant and underutilized infill sites to be developed or
    redeveloped with a mix of uses.
ED Po licy/Action 3.8.3 : Encourage the planned redevelopment of the Highway 86
railroad properties
    The City should collaborate with the property owner to redevelop the abandoned rail
    yard buildings for general commercial or office uses. The site could benefit from a
    planned approach, as some buildings may be able to be saved, but other buildings will
    need to be demolished.
Geographic Focus
    Economic Development Goal #8 is focused on a limited number of sites along Imperial
    Avenue, the Adams Avenue corridor, and the Highway 86 railroad properties.
ED Goal 3.9: Encourage more intensive development at underutilized
     shopping center sites
    El Centro should encourage proposals to more intensively develop vacant and
    underutilized shopping centers. Proposals to add more building square footage and
    reduce off-street parking requirements should be encouraged.
Policies and Actions
ED Po licy/Acti o n 3. 9 . 1 : Collaborate with the property owners to attract new uses with
more building space and reduced parking
    More intensive development can be achieved by redeveloping sites with a mix of uses.
                                                  ED·10

                                ECONOMIC D EVELOPMENTELEMENf                   _____..
ED Policy/Action 3. 9.2 : Collaborate with the property owners to transition underutilized
shopping center sites into pedestrian friendly areas
    The design and amenities incorporated into the redevelopment of underutilized sites
    should promote pedestrian movement, including shade and walking areas that separate
    pedestrians from moving vehicles.
Geographic Focus
    Economic Development Goal #9 is focused on a limited number of sites along Imperial
    Avenue including the Valley Plaza Shopping Center, the former Heilig Meyers Center,
    the Valley Centerpoint Plaza, and the former Wai-Mart store.
ED Goal 3. l 0 : Upgrade the Appearance of Abandoned and
   Underutilized Commercial Properties Until They are Revitalized
    The appearance of the vacant and underutilized shopping centers should be improved in
    the short-term, and in advance of redevelopment or revitalization.
Policies and Actions
ED Po licy/Action 3. 1 0 . 1 : Expand code enforcement and require property owners to
maintain vacant and underutilized commercial sites
    A number of underutilized shopping center sites have become blighted with graffiti,
    broken windows and unmaintai11ed parki11g lots. The ow11ers should be required to
    maintain the properties, which will make the sites more attractive to new investors and
    improve the City's appearance.
ED Policy/Action 3. 10. 2 : Encourage property owners to improve the appearance of
boarded up buildings by collaborating with local artists
    T he City should encourage property owners to improve the look of the vacant and
    underutilized shopping center sites by allowing local artists to create mura ls, sculptures,
    and other public art.
ED Policy/Action 3. 10. 3: Collaborate with property owners to utilize the vacant parking
lots with temporary activities.
    People could be attracted to return to the vacant sites by establishing temporary
    activities on the unused parking lots such as cook offs, art shows, farmer's markets and
    other similar activities.
Geographic Focus
    Economic Development Goal # 10 is focused on a limited number of sites along
    Imperial Avenue.
ED Goal 3. 11 : Convert a Portion of Vacant Industrial Land Into
     Business Park or General Commercial Uses
    The current General Plan land-use designations leave El Centro with a 64-yeor inventory
    of undeveloped industrial land, some of which con be converted to other business uses.
                                                 ED·11

                                ECON OMIC D EVELOPMENTELEMENf                   _____..
   Essentially, El Centro has an oversupply of undeveloped industrial land, and a lack of
   land designated for office and business-park uses outside of the Main Street corridor.
Policies and Actions
ED Po licy/Acti o n 3. 11.1 : Encourage and allow some industrially zoned vacant land to
be developed for general commercial or business park uses.
   Alternative business uses for undeveloped industrial land should be considered because
   the absorption of industrial land is very slow, and it is difficult to finance the needed
   infrastructure improvements is difficult.
ED Po licy/Acti o n 3 .11. 2: Proposals to convert industrially zoned land to residential uses
should be discouraged.
   Conversion to residential land use will remove sites from job creating business uses, and
   may set the stage for future land use conflicts.
Geographic Focus
   Economic Development Goal # 11 applies to the 120-acre Abatti site and the 18 acres
   of industrially zoned land within the El Centro Town Center Phase II site. The goal also
   applies to the built out Highway 86 railroad site that needs to be redeveloped.
ED Goal 3. 12: Complete the development of the Imperial Valley
  Commons site
   A new Kohl's was recently attracted to the Imperial Valley Commons site, which will
   encourage additional new investment f or commercial uses. The buildout of the partially
   completed site is an important economic development goal.
Policies and Actions
ED Po licy/Acti o n 3. 12. 1 : Encourage and allow the site to be developed for a mix of
general commercial, retail and business park uses
   The General Plan update should allow and encourage the site to be built out as a mix of
   uses. The City should partner with the landowner and developers to implement
   infrastructure improvements needed to complete the site buildout.
Geographic Focus
   Economic Development Goal # 12 applies to the Imperial Valley Commons site.
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS FOR TARGETED
OPPORTUNITY AREAS
   Table ED-2 below re-sorts the economic development goals, policies, and action steps
   for the 16 opportunity areas identified in Figure ED-1. T he re-sort allows the reader to
   connect the goals, policies, and action steps with the individual opportunity areas. The
   number of each goal and policy is consistent with the citywide goals.
                                                ED·12

                                                                                                 ECON OMIC D EVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                                                                                                                    •
                                                                                TABL E ED·2
                                                    OPPORTUNITY AREA GOALS AND POLICIES
   OPPORTUNITY AREA                                          ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT GOALS                                                              ACTIONS &POLICIES
Imperial Avenue Corridor
                            • Reduce the inventory of vacant commercial space        • Encourage and allow the shopping center to be transitioned into a mix of commercial retail,
                              (ED Goal #8)                                             office and/or residential uses (ED Policy 8.1 )
 1. Imperial Valley Plaza
                            • Encourage more intensive development at                • Attract new uses with more building space and reduced parking (ED Policy 9.1)
                              underutilized shopping centers (ED Goal #9)            • Transition the shopping center into a pedestrian friendly area (ED Policy 9.2)
                            • Reduce the inventory of vacant commercial space
                              (ED Goal #8)                                           • Encourage and allow the shopping center to be transitioned into a mix of commercial retail,
                                                                                       office and/or residential uses (ED Policy 8.1)
                            • Encourage more intensive development at
 2. Former Heilig Meyers
                              underutilized shopping centers (ED Goal #9)            • Attract new uses with more building space and reduced parking (ED Policy 9.1)
     Center
                            • Upgrade the appearance and maintenance of the          • Expand code enforcement and require property owner to maintain the site and the appearance
                              shopping center until the property is revitalized or     of dilapidated buildings (ED Policy 10.1)
                              redeveloped (ED Goal #10)
                              Encourage the vacant parcel to be developed for
 J. Bowling Alley Site                                                                 Collaborate with the property owner to facilitate development of the vacant site
                              recreation or entertainment related uses
                                                                                     • Encourage and allow the shopping center to be transitioned into a mix of commercial retail,
                                                                                       office and/or residential uses (ED Policy 8.1)
                                                                                     • Encourage the property owner to attract new uses with more building space and reduced
                            • Reduce the inventory of vacant commercial space          parking (ED Policy 9.1)
                              (ED Goal #8)
 4.Valley Centerpoint Plaza                                                          • Transition the shopping center into pedestrian friendly areas (ED Policy 9.2)
                            • Encourage more intensive development at
                              underutilized shopping centers (ED Goal #9)            • Expand code enforcement and require property owner to maintain the site and the appearance
                                                                                       of dilapidated buildings (ED Policy 10.1)
                                                                                     • Collaborate with property owners to attract temporary uses to the unused parking in front of
                                                                                       Imperial Avenue (ED Policy 10.2
                                                                     ED-13

                                                                                                  E CONOMIC D EVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                                                                                                                      •
                                                                           TABLE ED-2 (continued)
                                                                  Opportunity Area Goals and Policies
   OPPORTUNITY AREA            ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT GOALS                                                                  ACTIONS & POLICIES
                          • Reduce the inventory of vacant commercial space         • J Encourage the property owner to attract new uses with more building space and reduced
                            (ED Goal #8)                                                parking (ED Policy 9.1)
                          • Encourage more intensive development at                 •   Transition the shopping center into pedestrian friendly areas (ED Policy 9.2)
5. Former Wai-Mart Store    underutilized shopping centers (ED Goal #9)             •   Expand code enforcement and require property owner to maintain the site and the appearance
                          • Upgrade the appearance and maintenance of the               of dilapidated buildings (ED Policy 10.1)
                            shopping center until the property is revitalized or    •   Collaborate with property owners to attract temporary u1ses to the unused parking in front of
                            redeveloped (ED Goal #10)                                   Imperial Avenue (ED Policy 10.2)
                                                                                    •   Use tax increment financing and the City's Capital Improvement Fund to finance the
                          • Create more shovel ready industrial and business            infrastructure improvements nee<led to create shovel ready sites (ED Policy 4.1)
&. El Centro Town Center    park sites (ED Goal #4)                                 •   Seek federal and stat~ grants to fund the infrastructure improvements needed to create shovel
    Phase II              • Convert land zoned for regional airport (RAP) into          ready industrial sites (ED Policy 4.2)
                            business park uses (ED Goal #1 1)                       •   Encourage and allow some vacant RAP zoned land to be developed for business park uses (ED
                                                                                        Policy 11.1)
Center City District
                          • Reduce the inventory of vacant commercial space
                                                                                      • 8.2 Encourage infill development and the redevelopment of underutilized sites along the Adams
                            (ED Goal #8)
                                                                                        Avenue corridor
                          • Encourage and allow more intensive <levelopment at
                                                                                      • Collaborate with property owners to attract new uses with more building space to vacant and
1·. Adams Avenue Corridor   underutilized shopping center sites (ED Goal #9)
                                                                                        underulilized sites (ED Policy 9.1)
                          • Upgrade the appearance and maintenance of
                                                                                      • Expand code enforcement and require property owners to maintain the sties and the
                            abandoned and underutilized commercial properties
                                                                                        appearance of dilapidated buildings (ED Policy 10.1)
                            until they are revitalized (ED Goal #10)
                                                                   ED-14

                                                                                                          ECONOMIC D EVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                                                                                                                                  •
                                                                                   Table ED- 2 (continued)
                                                                           Opportunity Area Goals and Policies
   OPPORTUNITY AREAS                    ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT GOALS                                                                  ACTIONS & POLICIES
                                                                                               • Encourage the development of r~ew housing and live/work space that will be attractive to people
                                                                                                 who may not have previously considered living downtown. (ED Policy 7.1)
                                                                                               • Continue to invest in downtown urban design and streetscape improvements (ED Policy 7.2)
                                  • Transform Downtown El Centro into a mixed use
 a. Downtown Main Street             neighborhood that attracts people to live, work and
                                                                                               • Encourage a mix of different sizes and types of downtown businesses (ED Policy 7.3)
     Corridor
                                     play in the area (ED Goal #7)                             • Provide financial support in the form of reduced rents to attract artists and non-traditional uses to
                                                                                                 occupy vacant space (ED Policy 7.4)
                                                                                               • Implement Project Shape recommendations for improved parking, landscaping, and land use
                                                                                                 changes
                                 • Reduce the inventory of vacant commercial space
                                                                                               • Encourage and allow the site to be transitioned into a mix of commercial retail, general
                                    (ED Goal#8)
 9•. Highway 86 Railroad                                                                         commercial or office uses (ED Policy 8.1)
     Properties                  • Upgrade the appearance and maintenance of
                                                                                               • Expand code enforcement and require property owners to maintain the sties and the
                                    abandoned and undenutiliz<:!d commercial properties
                                                                                                 appearance of dilapidated buildings (ED Policy 10.1)
                                    until they are revitalized (ED Goal #10)
 Industrial Areas
                                                                                             •   Use tax increment financing and the City's Capital Improvement Fund to finance the
                               ••    Create more shovel ready industrial and business            infrastructure improvements needed to create shovel ready sites (ED Policy 4.1)
10. 8th Street Industrial Park       park sites (ED Goal #4)                                 •   Seek federal and stat-e grants to fund the infrastructure improvements needed to create shovel
   Subdivision                 ••    Convert the industrially zoned land into business           ready industrial sites (ED Policy 4.2)
                                     park or general commercial uses (ED Goal #11)           •   Encourage and allow some vacant industrially zoned land to be developed for general
                                                                                                 commercial or business park uses (ED Policy 11.1)
                                                                                             •   Use tax increment financing and the City's Capital Improvement Fund to finance the
                               ••    Create more shovel ready industrial and business            infrastructure improvements needed to create shovel ready sites (ED Policy 4.1)
11. Danenberg Industrial Site
                                     park sites (ED Goal #4)                                 •   Seek federal and stat-e grants to fund the infrastructure improvements needed to create shovel
                                                                                                 ready industrial sites (ED Policy 4.2)
                                                                           ED-15

                                                                                                    ECONOMIC D EVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                                                                                                                          •
                                                                               TABLE ED-2 (continued)
                                                                       Opportunity Area Goals and Policies
  OPPORTUNITY AREAS                    ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT GOALS                                                             ACTIONS &POLICIES
                                                                                         • Use tax increment financing and the City's Capital Improvement Fund to finance the
12. South of El Centro          • Create more shovel ready industrial and business pari<   infrastructure improvements needed to create shovel ready sites (ED Policy 4.1)
    Industrial Park               sites (ED Goal #4)                                     • Seek federal and state grants to fund the infrastructure improvements needed to create shovel
                                                                                           ready industrial sites (ED Policy 4.2)
                                                                                         • Use tax increment financing and the City's Capital Improvement Fund to finance the
                                                                                           infrastructure improvements needed to create shovel ready sites (ED Policy 4.1)
                                                                                         • Seek federal and state grants to fund the infrastructure improvements needed to create shovel
                                • Create more shovel ready industrial and business pari<   ready industrial sites (ED Policy 4.2)
13. Abatti Property
                                  sites (ED Goal #4)                                     • Encourage and allow some vacant industrially zoned land to be developed for general
                                                                                           commercial or business park uses (ED Policy 11.1)
                                                                                         • Proposals to convert industrially zoned land to residential uses should be discouraged (ED
                                                                                           Policy 11.2)
New Shopping Areas Along South Dogwood Road
                               • Continue to attract shoppers from Mexicali and
                                  neighboring communities (ED Goal #5)
14. The Plaza@ Imperial Valley                                                               Promote the shopping center in Mexicali (ED Policy 5.1)
                               • Reduce the inventory of vacant commercial space (ED
                                  Goal #8)
                               ·• Continue to attract shoppers from Mexicali and
15. 1mperial Valley Mall                                                                     Promote the shopping center in Mexicali (ED Policy 5.1)
                                  neighboring communities (ED Goal #5)
                                                                                             Encourage and allow the site to be developed for a mix of commercial retail, business park
                                                                                             uses (ED Policy 12.1)
                               •• Complete the development of the Imperial Valley
16. 1mperial Valley Commons                                                                  Promote the shopping center in Mexicali (ED Policy 5.1)
                                  Commons site (ED Goal #12)
                                                                                             Partner with the property owner to complete the infrastructure improvements required for site
                                                                                             buildout (ED Policy 12.2)
                                                                        ED-16

                                        E CON OMIC D EVELOPMENT E LEMENT                                      ______..
                                                   FIGURE ED-1
     EL CENTRO' S KEY ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OPPORTUNITY SITES
                                   Area 1 -Valley Plaza Shopping Center   Area 9- Plaza @ Imperial Valley
---   Approximate city limns       Area 2- Former Heilig Meyers Center    Area 10 -Imperial Valley Mall and Surrounding Pads
~isting businesses (for reference)
                                   Area 3 - Bowtang Alley Site            Area 11 -Imperial Valley Commons
                                   Area 4 - El Centro Shopping Center     Area 12- 5" Street Industrial Park Subdivision
                                   Area 5 - Former Wai-Mart Store         Area 13 - Abatti Property
  Opportunity snes                 Area 6- El Centro Town Center Phase II Area 14- Oanenberg Industrial Site
                                   Area 7- Adams Avenue Corridor          Area 15 -Industrial Area South of El Centro Industrial Park
                                   Area 8 - Main Street Corridor          Area 16 - Industrial Area South of Centerpoint Business Park
                                                                 ED·11

                               ECONOMIC D EVELOPMENT ELEMENT                  ______..
Imperial Avenue Corridor
Area Goal 4. 1: Valley Plaza Shopping Center
  The Valley Plaza Shopping Center should transition into a mixed-use business center.
  The General Plan update should encourage the site to be more intensively developed
  with new business space, reduced parking, and amenities that encourage pedestrian
  activities.
Area Goal 4.2: Former Heilig Meyers Center
  This underutilized shopping center should be more intensively developed with new
  business space and a reduced number of parking spaces. The site's appearance should
  be upgraded and maintenance improved until the demand f or new business space
  improves.
Area Goal 4.3 : Bowling Alley Site
  This area should encourage more recreation or entertainment-uses that complement the
  bowling alley. It is also important that the bowling alley remains a recreation and
  entertainment destination that is competitive in the regional market place.
Area Goal 4.4: Valley Centerpoint Plaza
   (Former El Centro Shopping Center)
  This underutilized site should be redeveloped or reused with a mix of uses that are
  compatible with the Imagine Charter School. The General Plan update should
  encourage the site to be more intensively developed with additional buildings and a
  reduced amount of land dedicated for parking. The vacant buildings should be properly
  maintained until the demand for new business space improves.
Area Goal 4.5: Former Wai-Mart Store Site
  The former Wai-Mart site should be redeveloped with a mix of business uses. More
  intensive development on the site should be encouraged along with a reduced amount
  of land reserved for parking. T he vacant building should be properly maintained until the
  demand for new business space improves.
Area Goal 4.6: El Centro Tow n Center Phase II
  The General Plan should encourage the build out of this 30-acre area with a mix of
  office, business-park uses, recognizing that site buildout is constrained by the area's
  location within the regional airport zone. A public-private partnership could help finance
  the infrastructure improvements needed to develop shovel ready business sites.
                                               ED-18
                                E C ONOMIC D EVELOPMENT E LEMENT               ______..
Center City District
Area Goal 4.7: Adams Avenue Corridor
   Vacant and underutilized sites within this corridor should be developed or redeveloped
   for higher and better uses. T he attraction of new private investment con upgrade the
   appearance and economic vitality of the corridor.
A rea Goal 4.8: Downtown Main Street Corridor
   The downtown should be tronsitioned into a mixed-use neighborhood that includes
   retail, general commercial, office, and residential uses. lnf ill housing should be
   encouraged on vacant and underutilized lots. Flexible zoning should attract a diversity of
   people and businesses into the vacant downtown spaces. Project Shope
   recommendations for parking, landscaping and land use changes should be
   implemented.
Area Goal 4.9: Highway 86 Railroad Properties
   T his area should be transformed into general commercial or office uses. The dilapidated
   buildings should be maintained and the appearance improved until the site con be
   rev ito lized.
Industrial Areas
A rea Goal 4. 10:     8th  Street Industrial Park Subdivision
   Shovel ready business sites should be created for this 17 acres of vacant industrially
   zoned land. The effort will require a partnership between the private property owners, the
   City and federal and state agencies that may fund infrastructure improvements.
Area Goal 4. 11 : Danenberg Industrial A rea
   Shovel ready business sites should be created for the 27 acres of vacant industrially
   zoned land. The effort will require a partnership between the private property owners, the
   City, and federal and state agencies that may f und infrastructure improvements.
Area Goal 4. 12: South of El Centro Industrial Park
   Shovel ready business sites should be created for this 17-acre area of vacant industrial
   land. The effort will require a partnership between the private property owners, the City,
   and f ederal and state agencies that may fund infrastructure improvements.
Area Goals 4. 13: A batti Property (South of Centerpoint Business Park)
   T his 120-acre area should be developed with a mix of business uses. The General Plan
   update should allow the vacant industria lly zoned land t o be reclassified and developed
   for business park and/or office uses due to the weak demand for industrial space and
   strong demand for business park space. Shovel ready sites should be created for
   business park/office uses.
                                                ED-19
                               ECONOMIC D EVELOPMENT ELEMENT                  ______..
New Shopping Areas Along South Dogwood Avenue
Area Goal 4.14: Plaza @ Imperial Valley
  T he Plaza @ Imperial Volley Plaza should remain a competitive retail destination in the
  regiona l marketplace by a strong marketing effort that continues to attract corporate
  retailers to occupy the Iorge spaces. Office and general commercial uses should be
  attracted to the newly built smaller spaces on the other side of the parking lot.
Area Goal 4. 15: Imperial Valley Mall and Surrounding Pads
  T he covered moll should be promoted as Imperial County's premier regional shopping
  destination by marketing the area to Mexicoli shoppers, ond improving the flow of traffic
  along Dogwood Avenue and at the Interstate 8 interchange.
Area Goal 4 . 16: Imperial Valley Commons
  This area should complete the site built out by allowing the property owner to develop a
  mix of office, general commercial, and retail uses. T he City should no longer require the
  property owner to develop another regional shopping center because of saturated
  demand for new reta il space. The new Kohl's should be promoted to Mexicoli shoppers.
                                              ***
                                               ED-20
                     CIRCULATION
                     ELEMENT
                     El Centro General Plan
INTRODUCTION
  The City of El Centro is served by a diverse circulation system consisting of roadways,
  public transit, rail and air service, and pedestrian and bicycle trails. While the Interstate 8
  freeway serves as the City’s primary thoroughfare, Highway 86 and County Highway S80
  bisect El Centro at Imperial and Adams Avenues; with County Highway S80 turning into
  Evan Hewes Highway near the City’s eastern boundary. Imperial County Transit provides
                                                th
  public bus service along Highway 86 (4 Avenue), State Street (south of Main St.),
  Highway 86 (Imperial Avenue) and a loop to the El Centro Regional Medical Center.
  Greyhound Bus provides additional intracity service with other fixed routes and charter. In
  addition to vehicular roadways, the San Diego & Arizona railroads approach El Centro
  from the east and west and merge into the Union Pacific Railroad, which extends north
  and south through the center of the City. Douthitt Strip Airport, a private airstrip, is located
  in the eastern portion of the City near Evan Hewes Highway. The City’s network of bicycle
  paths offers an alternative to more conventional modes of transportation.
  Whereas the City’s planned land use development pattern is identified in the Land Use
  Element, the Circulation Element guides the continued development and improvement of
  both the existing and planned transportation system. Demand for local and regional
  circulation improvements and construction will increase as additional land is developed in
  the future. The Circulation Element establishes acceptable roadway service levels and
  identifies improvements required to maintain the service levels. The use of other modes of
  transportation such as transit, walking, bicycling and ridesharing are promoted to reduce
  the demand for transportation system improvements and to improve air quality.
Purpose of the Circulation Element
  The purpose of the Circulation Element is to provide a safe, efficient and adequate
  circulation system for the City. State planning law requires:
  “…a circulation element consisting of the general location for proposed major
  thoroughfares, transportation routes, terminals and other local public utilities and facilities,
  all correlated with the land use element plan.”
  To meet this purpose, the Circulation Element addresses the circulation improvements
  needed to provide adequate capacity for future land uses. Additionally, a hierarchy of
  transportation routes with typical development standards described for each roadway is
  established in the element.
                                              1

  The State’s 1998 General Plan Guidelines recommend that the circulation policies and
  plans should:
  ¾ Coordinate the transportation and circulation system with planned land uses;
  ¾ Promote the safe and efficient transport of goods and the safe and effective
       movement of all segments of the population;
  ¾ Make efficient use of existing transportation facilities; and
  ¾ Protect environmental quality and promote the wise and equitable use of
       economic and natural resources.
  According to the Guidelines, the Circulation Element should address all facets of
  circulation including streets and highways, transportation corridors, public transit,
  railroads, bicycle and pedestrian facilities, and commercial and general airports. The City
  of El Centro Circulation Element fulfills state requirements by including a plan to provide
  effective circulation facilities to support desired community development.
Scope and Content of the Circulation Element
  Included in this element are goals and policies to improve overall circulation in the City of
  El Centro. A hierarchical roadway network is established for vehicle transportation, with
  designated roadway types and design standards. The roadway type is linked to
  anticipated traffic levels, and acceptable levels of service are established to determine
  when capacity improvements are necessary. Alternative transportation modes are also
  emphasized in this element to reduce dependency on the automobile and thereby improve
  environmental quality.
  The Circulation Element has three sections: 1) Introduction; 2) Issues, Goals and Policies;
  and 3) the Circulation Plan. In the Issues, Goals and Policies section, major issues
  pertaining to the transportation system are identified, and related goals and policies are
  established.
  The goals are statements of the City’s desires and consist of broad statements of purpose
  and direction. The policies serve as guidelines for planning circulation improvements to
  accommodate anticipated population growth, maintaining acceptable service levels while
  development occurs, promoting alternative transportation modes, and coordinating with
  local and regional jurisdictions to phase regional transportation facilities. The Circulation
  Plan explains how the goals will be achieved and the policies implemented. Specific
  action programs for the Circulation Element are contained in the Circulation Plan.
  The Circulation Element was created in a public forum with input from numerous interest
  groups, citizens, jurisdictions, and agencies. Extensive efforts were made to involve the
  public, including:
  ¾ Public workshops to receive initial comments and discuss circulation and
       transportation issues;
  ¾ Coordination with the Southern California Association of Governments
       (SCAG);
  ¾ Coordination with the Imperial Valley Association of Governments;
                                                2

   ¾ Coordination with Imperial County;
   ¾ Coordination with CALTRANS and other related agencies.
Related Plans and Programs
   There are several existing plans and programs prepared by various agencies that are
   directly applicable to the aims and objectives of the Circulation Element. Plans and
   programs related to the Circulation Element include the following:
Southern California Association of Governments Plans and Programs (SCAG)
   The Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) is responsible for the
   regional planning in Southern California. SCAG has prepared long range growth and
   development plans for the Southern California region since the early 1970s as part of the
   ongoing Development Guide Program.             This program provides a framework for
   coordinating local and regional decisions regarding future development and growth. An
   important component of this process is the preparation of growth forecast policies at
   intervals ranging from three to five years. The adopted growth forecast policies become
   the basis for SCAG’s functional plans (transportation, housing, air and water) for the
   region. The population totals and growth distribution are used in planning the future
   capacity of highways and transit systems.
   The Growth Management Plan recommends ways to redirect the region’s growth in order
   to minimize congestion and better protect the environment. While SCAG has no authority
   to mandate implementation of its Growth Management Plan, some of the Plan’s principal
   goals (such as improved jobs/housing balance) are being implemented through county
   and city general plans.
Circulation Element of the Imperial County General Plan
   The Circulation Element of the Imperial County General Plan contains the most recent
   information about the transportation needs of the County and the various modes available
   to meet the identified needs. A Circulation and Scenic Highways Plan is contained in the
   County Circulation Element to ensure adequate capacity on County roads and regional
   routes serving unincorporated areas of the County. To ensure that improvements to the
   County circulation system correspond with new development, the Circulation Element
   addresses the phasing of roadway improvements and financing alternatives.
City of El Centro Bicycle Plan
   In 2000, the City of El Centro adopted a Bicycle Master Plan for use as a guideline for
   designing future bicycle facilities. Elements of the Bicycle Master Plan are included in the
   Pedestrian and Bicycle Network section of this document.
                                              3

Other plans related to the Circulation Element include the following:
   •   Imperial County Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan
   •   Imperial County Transit Vision Report
   •   City of Imperial General Plan
   •   Arterial Needs and Circulation Analysis for Imperial Valley Association of
       Governments
Communication and coordination between the City of El Centro and other agencies should
continue in order to encourage an integrated approach to circulation strategies for the region.
Relationship to Other El Centro General Plan Elements
   In accordance with State planning law, the Circulation Element, although independent,
   must be consistent with the other General Plan elements. All elements of the General
   Plan are interrelated to a degree, and certain goals and policies of each element may also
   address issues that are the major subjects of other elements. The Circulation Element
   relates most closely to the Land Use, Noise, and Safety Elements.
   Planned development identified in the Land Use Element is the basis for determining
   future road improvements; therefore the Land Use Element is directly linked to the
   Circulation Element. For example, the circulation policies and plans identify the
   improvements to the roadway system that will be required in order to serve traffic
   generated by the uses permitted in the Land Use Element. In addition, the Circulation
   Element promotes alternative transportation modes to minimize the regional impacts of
   planned local development.
   The Noise Element contains policies and plans aimed to ease the adverse effects of noise
   on the community that are directly attributable to the future transportation plans contained
   in the Circulation Element. Noise exposure will be a key consideration when locating and
   designing new development along arterials and other transportation related noise sources.
   In addition, policies and plans contained in the Safety Element addressing transportation
   related hazards are complementary to policies and plans contained in the Circulation
   Element.
                                             4

                         ISSUES, GOALS, AND POLICIES
                         The City of El Centro has a circulation system that includes vehicular,
                         public transit, rail, air, bicycle and pedestrian components. An inter-
                         dependent circulation system is created as the local system is tied to
                         a larger regional circulation system. A safe and convenient circulation
                         system is needed to support a variety of land uses in the community.
   Four major issues are addressed by the goals, policies, and plans of the Circulation
   Element. These major issues include: 1) providing a suitable system of City roadways that
   meets the needs of the community; 2) providing a public transportation network that gives
   El Centro residents access to various locations within the City and throughout the region;
   3) ensuring adequate bicycle and pedestrian access throughout the community; and 4)
   supporting regional serving airports and railways.
Primary Circulation System
   A well-designed local roadway system provides safe and convenient access to activities in
   the community. As well as providing access to all sections of the community, the roadway
   system should reflect the ideals of the community.
   Circulation Goal 1:        Provide a system of roadways that meets the needs of the
   community.
   Policy 1.1: Provide and maintain a circulation system that is in balance with the land uses
   in El Centro by implementing the Circulation Master Plan.
   Policy 1.2: Improve El Centro circulation system roadways in concert with land
   development to ensure sufficient levels of service.
   Policy 1.3: Strive to maintain traffic conditions at intersections and roadways at level of
   service C or better, with the exception of the largely commercial corridors located along
   Imperial Avenue, Fourth Street, Dogwood Avenue and Ross Avenue (as specified in
   Figure C-8), where level of service D during peak hours is acceptable only after all
   respective circulation element improvements are implemented to the satisfaction of the
   City engineer. Exceptions to these standards will be allowed only where the City Council
   determines that the improvements needed to maintain the City’s level of service standard
   at specific locations are infeasible.
   Policy 1.4: Review new development proposals to ensure that the proposed development
   provides adequate parking and would not increase traffic on roadways and intersections to
   a level of service (LOS) worse than “C” unless the project will provide overriding
   socio/economic benefits to the City.
   Policy 1.5: Provide Thresholds-of-Significance criteria to determine whether a project
   might have a significant effect on the environment.
                                                 5

  Policy 1.6: Provide policies and procedures for System Planning as it relates to
  interregional transportation and Access Management to manage and regulate the design
  and implementation of driveways, medians, median openings, traffic signals, and freeway
  interchanges.
  Policy 1.7: Work with adjacent jurisdictions and transportation agencies to identify
  necessary improvements to the regional roadway system to ensure adequate regional
  access to and from El Centro.
  Policy 1.8: Coordinate improvements to the local circulation system with other major
  transportation improvement programs.
  Policy 1.9: Enforce minimum design standards for streets as established in the General
  Plan and City ordinances.
  Policy 1.10: Encourage site planning and subdivision design that best utilizes available
  traffic capacity on abutting streets through design techniques such as lot orientation,
  limitations on intersecting streets, and driveway locations and spacing.
  Policy 1.11: Beautify the City’s major thoroughfares and entrances to the business loop
  through a streetscape improvement program that includes activities such as tree planting
  and landscaping.
  Policy 1.12: Strive to preserve existing on-street parking in commercial areas wherever
  possible. However, right-of-way constraints may make it necessary to eliminate on-street
  parking to accommodate needed roadway improvements.
Public Transportation
  Public transportation is an important factor in the provision of alternative means of
  transportation. It offers an alternative to the use of automobiles and helps reduce air
  pollution and road congestion.
  Circulation Goal 2: Promote a public transportation network that allows for convenient
  access to major destinations, both within El Centro, as well as within the region.
  Policy 2.1: Coordinate with the Imperial Valley Association of Governments (IVAG) to
  ensure that adequate bus service, including a fixed-route public transit system, is available
  for all segments of the community.
  Policy 2.2: Encourage the increased use and expansion of public transportation
  opportunities.
  Policy 2.3: Provide for the location of necessary transit infrastructure, such as bus stops,
  in major activity centers.
  Policy 2.4: Support ridesharing services and other similar alternative modes of
  transportation.
                                               6

Pedestrian and Bicycle Network
   Non-vehicular modes of transportation offer an alternative option to the traditional use of
   automobiles. These modes of transportation, such as bicycling and walking, help to
   reduce roadway congestion and air pollution and provide recreational opportunities for the
   City’s residents.
   Circulation Goal 3: Provide for adequate bicycle and pedestrian access throughout the
   community.
   Policy 3.1: Provide and maintain a system of pedestrian and bicycle access-ways that
   links residential areas with parks, scenic areas, schools, libraries, civic center, major
   employment and retail centers, and other areas of congregation within El Centro and the
   surrounding area.
   Policy 3.2: Continue to improve the accessibility of public facilities and commercial
   centers to improve access and mobility of the elderly and the disabled.
   Policy 3.3: Encourage the incorporation of bicycle facilities, such as bike lockers and
   showers at workplaces, bicycle racks on buses, and bike lockers and/or racks in retail
   areas to facilitate bicycle travel.
   Policy 3.4: Maintain the pedestrian and bicycle system, including improving the road
   surface and sidewalk, to reduce safety hazards associated with drainage grates,
   manholes, potholes, and uneven surfaces.
   Policy 3.5: Strive to include a separation between curbs and sidewalks, such as a
   landscaped planting strip, as well as implementing traffic calming measures in order to
   reduce safety hazards to pedestrians, create “walkable” streets, and provide an
   aesthetically pleasing environment.
Airports and Railways
   Airports and railways provide essential functions for cities and regions. Efficient movement
   of people and goods in and out of El Centro is fundamental to the economic vitality of the
   City and Imperial County.
   Circulation Goal 4: Continue to utilize regional airports and railways to facilitate
   economic development, as well as the movement of people, and establish El Centro as a
   regional hub of commerce and travel.
   Policy 4.1: Coordinate with the County of Imperial and plan for the expansion of the
   Imperial County Airport to encourage inter-regional travel and commerce.
   Policy 4.2: Review development proposals within areas affected by the operation of local
   airports and railways to ensure land use compatibility, protect the public safety, and allow
   for continued aviation and rail operations.
                                               7

  Policy 4.3: Continue to pursue a joint use agreement with the U.S. Navy to allow
  commercial jet service at the Naval Air Facility.
  Policy 4.4: Encourage passenger rail service between El Centro, Calexico and San
  Diego.
Related Goals and Policies
  The goals and policies described in the Circulation Element are related to and support
  subjects included within other General Plan elements. In turn, many goals and policies
  from other elements directly or indirectly support the goals and policies of the Circulation
  Element. These supporting goals and policies are identified in Table C-1.
                                           Table C-1
                       Related Goals and Policies by Element
                                             Circulation Issue Area
     General Plan Elements   Primary                            Pedestrian
                             Circulation     Public             and Bicycle Airports and
                             System          Transportation     Network     Railways
                             1.1, 1.4,       1.1, 1.11, 1.13, 1.1, 1.13     1.2, 2.1, 2.4
     Land Use                1.11, 1.12,     2.2, 2.3, 3.3
                             1.13, 3.3
     Economic Development    1.1, 1.3        1.1, 1.3                       1.1, 1.3, 2.1
     Housing
     Circulation
     Public Facilities
     Conservation/Open       5.1, 5.2, 5.3   5.1, 5.2, 5.3      3.3, 5.3
     Space
                             1.3, 5.1, 5.2,  1.3                5.2, 5.3    1.3, 5.1, 5.4,
     Safety
                             5.6                                            5.5, 5.6
                             1.1, 2.1, 2.2,  1.1                            1.1, 2.1, 2.3,
     Noise                   2.3                                            2.6, 2.7, 2.8
                                              8
                          CIRCULATION PLAN
                          El Centro is supported by a diverse circulation system with vehicle,
                          rail, transit, air, pedestrian, and bicycle linkage. The local system
                          connects with the larger regional system, and the operation of the
                          two systems is interdependent. Established in this section is the
                          City’s Circulation Plan. The Plan summarizes the approach to
                          ensure safe and convenient operation of the circulation system and
   identifies improvements required to accommodate traffic from planned development.
   Vehicular transportation is the primary mode of travel and a Circulation Master Plan is
   established with hierarchical roadway designations, physical design standards for the
   roadway designations, and service standards. The Circulation Master Plan includes
   regional arterials and anticipated regional traffic levels. The use of alternative modes of
   transportation is promoted to reduce dependency on automobile transportation. The
   Circulation Master Plan is shown in Figure C-1.
   The Circulation Plan is based on issues, goals, and policies identified in the previous
   section. The Circulation Element Implementation Program, which is part of the General
   Plan Implementation Program is an extension of the Circulation Plan and contains specific
   programs to coordinate planned development with vehicular and non-vehicular circulation
   improvements.
Primary Circulation System
Road Classifications
   Roadway classification is the process by which streets and highways are grouped into
   classes, or systems, according to the type of service they are intended to provide.
   Fundamental to this process is the recognition that individual streets and highways do not
   operate independently. Rather, most travel involves movement through a network of
   roads. The City of El Centro has adopted a classification system which includes a primary
   and secondary system, as described below. Examples of roadway cross sections are
   provided in Figure C-2. Examples of intersection layouts are provided in Figure C-3.
   Existing roadway constructed prior to adoption of these cross sections may have different
   dimensions. General guidelines for roadway network planning and design are included in
   Table C-2.
   The County of Imperial uses somewhat different roadway cross-sections than the City.
   New roadway segments within the City limits and within unincorporated areas anticipated
   to be annexed into the City should be built to the City's standards. In transition areas
   between City and County lands, cooperation between the City and County is needed in
   order to achieve a functional roadway system.
                                                9

Primary Circulation System
¾ Freeways are controlled access routes that provide for major intra and interregional travel.
   They are corridors that accommodate trips at highest speeds with access only from
   selected links to the network, consistent with the population and network densities of the
   areas they traverse.
¾ Arterial Streets are intended to provide for the movement of through-traffic between
   major traffic generators such as the Civic Center, the Central Business District and other
   commercial centers, and distribute traffic from freeways to less important arterials serving
   residential areas directly. Insofar as possible, direct vehicle access to abutting properties
   should, on these arterials, be at limited intervals. The City of El Centro currently has two
   designations of arterials: four-lane and two-lane.
¾ Collector Streets collect and distribute traffic to and from major highways and local
   streets. Collector streets also serve secondary traffic generators such as shopping and
   business centers, schools, parks and high density or large-scale residential areas.
Secondary Circulation System
   The secondary circulation system includes local streets for both residential and business
   use, as well as alternative modes of transportation which do not rely on private
   automobiles.
¾ Local Streets provide for direct access to property by local traffic.          They are usually
   constructed by landowners as abutting land is developed.
   *Note: Levels of service are not applied to residential streets since their primary purpose
   is to serve abutting lots, not carry through traffic. Levels of Service normally apply to roads
   carrying through traffic between major trip generators and attractors.
¾ Alleys make up a significant portion of existing local streets. The City contains
   approximately twenty-two miles of alleys. At one time alleys were required with all
   residential, commercial, and industrial development including single-family home
   construction. Although alleys are no longer required in new low-density residential
   projects, the City will focus on maintaining the existing alley network.
Circulation Element Implementation Program
   Phasing and construction of needed improvements identified in the Circulation Master
   Plan will be achieved through a variety of methods. These methods include the adoption
   and implementation of a capital improvement program, and coordination with the Southern
   California Association of Governments (SCAG), Caltrans, Imperial County Local
   Transportation Authority, the County of Imperial, and other regional transportation
   agencies. In addition, the City will develop a financing plan to facilitate the development of
   necessary transportation system improvements that identifies available funding sources
   and requires proposed development projects to construct and/or fund necessary traffic
   improvements, such as traffic signals and roadway improvements, resulting from the
   proposed project. These improvements should include alternative means of transportation
   in addition to improvements associated with automobile usage.
                                               10

                          Figure C-1 (1 of 2)
   City of El Centro General Plan Buildout
 Circulation Element Future Road Network
11
2-Lane Collector
         [Type a quote from the document or the summary of an interesting point. You can position the text box anywhere in the document.
         Use the Text Box Tools tab to change the formatting of the pull quote text box.]
4-Lane Collector
2-Lane Arterial
4-Lane Arterial
6-Lane Arterial
Freeway / Expressway                                               IN GENERAL, PRIMARY ARTERIALS SHOULD BE
                                                                   CONSTRUCTED AT A ½-MILE GRID SPACING IN FUTURE
City of El Centro Sphere of Influence                              GROWTH AREAS. SPECIFIC PLANS MAY ALLOW FOR AN
                                                                   ALTERATION OF THIS GUIDELINE PER APPROVAL FROM
Railroad Tracks                                                    THE CITY. ROADWAYS THAT ARE NOT INCLUDED IN THE
                                                                   CITY’S TRAFFIC IMPACT FEE SHOULD BE PAID FOR BY
Future Interchange                                                 THE DEVELOPMENT THEY SERVE.
Future Bridge
Future Bridge Widening
Study Intersection
                                                                                                                  Figure C-1 (2 of 2)
                                                                            City of El Centro General Plan Buildout
                                                           Circulation Element Future Road Network Legend
                                                                        12

Notes:
1.  STREETS THROUGH AREAS WITH RIGHT-OF-WAY CONSTRAINTS MAY USE
    NARROWER SHOULDERS, TRAVEL LANES AND/OR PARKING STRIPS, SUBJECT TO
    THE APPROVAL OF THE CITY OF EL CENTRO AND OTHER AGENCIES WITH
    ROADWAY JURISDICTION.
2.  BIKE LANES SHALL BE INCLUDED WHERE INDICATED ON THE MOST RECENT “CITY
    OF EL CENTRO BICYCLE MASTER PLAN” AND “CITYWIDE BIKEWAY SYSTEM DESIGN
    REPORT” (REFER TO FIGURE C-6). BIKE LANES MAY BE IN ADDITION TO OR MAY       Figure C-2
    DISPLACE ON-STREET PARKING, SUBJECT TO THE APPROCAL OF THE CITY OF EL
    CENTRO AND OTHER AGENCIES WITH ROADWAY JURISDICTION.                    Typical Street
                                                                           Cross-Sections
                                                         13

  
      Figure C-3 (1 of 3)
   Typical Intersection
                Layouts
14

      Figure C-3 (2 of 3)
   Typical Intersection
                Layouts
15
      Figure C-3 (3 of 3)
   Typical Intersection
                Layouts
16
                                                                                             TABLE C-2
                                                    Functional Roadway Classifications Planning and Design Guidelines
                                                                                      Typical Portion of
                                           Typical Percent of                                                             Minimum
                                                                           Spacing     Surface Street         Direct                   Speed Limit
  Classification           Function          Surface Street    Continuity                                              Roadway Inter-               Parking               Comments
                                                                            (miles)   System Vehicle-      Land Access                    (mph)
                                            System Mileage                                                             section Spacing
                                                                                        Miles Carried
                                                                                                                                                              Supplements capacity of arterial
Freeway and
                    Traffic movement               NA         Continuous       4              NA         None               1 mile        45-55    Prohibited street system and provides high
Expressway
                                                                                                                                                              speed mobility.
Primary             Intercommunity               5-10%        Continuous      1-2          40-65%        Limited-          1/2 mile      35-45 in  Prohibited
Arterial            and intrametro                                                                       major                             fully
                    area                                                                                 generators                     developed
                    Primary-traffic                                                                      only                             areas
                    movement
                    Secondary-land
                    access
Secondary           Primary-                     10-20        Continuous     1/2-1          25-40        Restricted-       1/8 mile       30-35    Generally
                                                                                                                                                              Backbone of street system.
Arterial            intercommunity,                                                                      some                                      prohibited
                    intrametro area,                                                                     movements
                    traffic movement                                                                     may be
                    Secondary-land                                                                       prohibited;
                    access                                                                               number and
                                                                                                         spacing of
                                                                                                         driveways
                                                                                                         controlled
Collector           Primary-collect/              5-10        Not         1/2 or less        5-10        Safety            300 feet       25-30     Limited   Through traffic should be
                    distribute traffic                        necessarily                                controls;                                            discouraged.
                    between local                             continuous:                                limited
                    streets and arterial                      should not                                 regulation
                    system                                    extend
                    Secondary-land                            across
                    access                                    arterials
                    Tertiary-
                    inter-neighborhood
                    traffic movement
                                                                                                         Safety                                               Through traffic should be
Local               Land access                  60-80        None        As needed         10-30                          300 feet         25     Permitted
                                                                                                         controls only                                        discouraged.
NA = Not applicable.
Source: Planning Urban Arterial and Freeway Systems
Published by: Institute of Transportation Engineers, Washington, D.C.
                                                                                                 17
Performance Criteria
   The goal of the Circulation Element will be to provide a roadway system with adequate
   capacity and acceptable levels of service (LOS) to accommodate projected travel
   demands associated with the buildout of the Land Use Element. This can be
   accomplished by establishing minimum service levels for the designated street and
   conventional state highway system. Strategies that result in improvements to the
   transportation system, coupled with local job creation, will allow County residents to have
   access to a wide range of job opportunities within reasonable commute times.
   The performance criteria used for evaluating volumes and capacities on the City Street
   System are based on Average Daily Traffic (ADT) data and the classification system
   described previously. El Centro’s current system of LOS evaluation criteria is described in
   Table C-3. Level of service C is considered acceptable, with the exception of the largely
   commercial corridors located along Imperial Avenue, Fourth Street, Dogwood Avenue and
   Ross Avenue (as specified in Figure C-8), where level of service D is acceptable.
   Exceptions to these standards will be allowed only where the City Council determines that
   the improvements needed to maintain the City’s level of service standard at specific
   locations are infeasible.
   The City will utilize the LOS criteria outlined in Table C-3 to determine the significance of
   potential impacts as a result of development proposals. Those projects resulting in
   significant impacts to the transportation system will be required to mitigate such impacts
   through physical improvements and/or impact fees.
Relationship to Land Use
   Future traffic volumes and highway capacity are directly related to future land use.
   Different types of land uses have differing effects on the street system in terms of the
   number of trips that are generated. Table C-4 indicates the expected trip generation of
   selected land uses that are identified in the Land Use Element.
                                              18

                                                                               Table C-3
                          Level of Service Threshold Volumes for Various Roadway Types (ADT)
                     ROADWAY TYPE                                                 CODE        LOS A        LOS B         LOS C        LOS D         LOS E
                     10-Lane Freeway                                                 10F       64,000       99,000      139,000       160,000       182,000
                     8-Lane Freeway                                                   8F       51,000       79,000      112,000       136,000       146,000
                     6-Lane Freeway                                                   6F       39,000       59,000        85,000      102,000       110,000
                     8-Lane Expressway                                               8E        35,000       54,000        75,000       90,000         98,000
                     6-Lane Expressway                                               6E        28,000       42,000        56,000       67,000         74,000
                     4-Lane Freeway                                                   4F       26,000       40,000        57,000       69,000         74,000
                     8-Lane Divided Arterial (w/ left-turn lane)                       9       40,000       47,000        54,000       61,000         68,000
                     6-Lane Divided Arterial (w/ left-turn lane)                       7       32,000       38,000        43,000       49,000         54,000
                     4-Lane Expressway                                               4E        18,000       27,000        36,000       45,000         50,000
                     4-Lane Divided Arterial (w/ left-turn lane)                       5       22,000       25,000        29,000       32,500         36,000
                     4-Lane Undivided Arterial (no left-turn lane)                     4       16,000       19,000        22,000       24,000         27,000
                     2-Lane Rural Highway                                            2R          4,000       8,000        12,000       17,000         25,000
                     2-Lane Arterial (w/ left-turn lane)                               3       11,000       12,500        14,500       16,000         18,000
                     2-Lane Collector                                                  2         6,000       7,500          9,000      10,500         12,000
                     2-Lane Local                                                      1         1,200       1,400          1,600        1,800          2,000
                     1-Lane Freeway Diamond Ramp                                     1D        11,000       12,800        14,700       16,500         18,300
                     2-Lane Freeway Diamond Ramp                                     2D        22,000       25,600        29,400       33,000         36,600
                     1-Lane Freeway Loop Ramp                                         1L         9,000      10,500        12,000       13,500         15,000
                     2-Lane Freeway Loop Ramp                                         2L       16,000       18,700        21,300       24,000         26,700
Notes:
1. The above threshold volumes for preliminary planning purposes only. If available, the results of detailed level of service analyses will typically have priority over
   the levels of service derived from this table. In that case this table can be used by the analyst for providing additional considerations for recommending the
   appropriate general roadway type for the specific condition being analyzed.
2. All above facilities assume a 60%/40% peak hour directional split. All above facilities assume peak hour representing approximately 10% of the Average Daily
   Traffic (ADT), except for mainline freeway facilities, which assume peak hour representing 9% of the Average Daily Traffic (ADT).
3. Based on Highway Capacity Manual, Transportation Research Board, 2000.
4. Freeway thresholds are consistent with conditions utilizing a .95 peak hour factor, with 2% trucks and slightly over a one-mile average interchange spacing.
5. Expressways are consistent with the average of a multi-lane highway (with no signals) and Class 1 arterial (with an average signal spacing of 0.8 signals per mile
   and a .45 G/C ratio).
6. Arterial thresholds are consistent with the average of Class 1 and Class 2 arterials with an assumed signal density of two signals per mile. This assumes a divided
   arterial with left-turn lanes. Thresholds for four-lane undivided arterials assume approximately two-thirds the capacity of a four-lane divided arterial due to the
   impedance in traffic flow resulting from left-turning vehicles waiting in the inside through lane, thus significantly reducing the capacity of the roadway.
7. Rural highways are generally consistent with the 2000 Highway Capacity Manual rural highway, assuming 8% trucks, 4% RV’s, 20% no-passing, and level
   terrain. The greatest difference is that it assumes a maximum capacity (upper end of LOS E) of 25,000 rather than the 28,000 calculated using the new Highway
   Capacity Manual.
8. Two-lane collectors assume approximately three-fourths of the capacity of a two-lane arterial with left-turn lanes. This is based on the assumption that left-turn
   channelization is not provided on a two-lane collector.
9. Local street level of service thresholds are based upon “Neighborhood Traffic Related Quality-of-Life Considerations” which assumes a standard suburban
   neighborhood, 40-foot roadway width, and 25 mile per hour speed limit with normal speed violation rates.
10. Capacities for Diamond Ramps and Loop Ramps may be slightly higher or lower than the planning level capacities indicated above. The 2000 Highway Capacity
   Manual (2000 HCM) states that the capacity of a one-lane diamond to be 2,200 vehicles per hour (vph), and 1,800 vph for a small radius loop ramp. Two-lane
   freeway ramp capacities are estimated in the 2000 HCM to be 4,400vph for a two-lane diamond, and 3,200vph 20 for a two-lane small radius loop. Varying
   intermediate capacities are provided for incremental conditions between these extremes. Capacities given for each service level assume the same level of service
   for the adjoining merging roadway as well as level of service being determined by volume-to-capacity and not attainable speed. Level of service will be
   controlled by freeway level of service if worse than ramp. Mitigations of level of service deficiencies may include the addition of a lane on the freeway ramp, the
   addition of an auxiliary lane on the freeway mainline, the addition of approach lanes at the ramp junction with the local intersecting street, and/or geometric
   modifications to improve the efficiency of the ramp itself or its termini. The appropriate mitigation should be determined on a case-by-case basis, considering
   freeway main line volumes and weaving, the extent that the freeway ramp volume exceeds the above planning thresholds, and the level of service of the ramp
   intersection with the local street.
11. All volumes are approximate and assume ideal roadway characteristics.
                                                                                     19

                                          Table C-4
                        Land Use and Trip Generation Summary
                                   Daily Trip Generation
                                   Daily Trips Per   Daily Trips per   Daily Trips per 1,000
  Land Use
                                   Acre              Dwelling Unit     Square Feet Building
  Residential
  Rural                            12                12                N/A
  Low Density                      45                10                N/A
  Medium Density                   68                8                 N/A
  High-Medium Density              96                6                 N/A
  Commercial
  Neighborhood Commercial          1,200             N/A               120
  Office Commercial                300               N/A               20
  Heavy Commercial                 200               N/A               16
  Tourist Commercial               300               N/A               N/A
  Downtown Commercial              400               N/A               40
  Industrial
  General Industrial               50                N/A               4
  Light Manufacturing              50                N/A               4
  General Manufacturing            60                N/A               5
  Planned Industrial               90                N/A               8
  Community Facilities
  Civic                            450               N/A               30
  Public                           150               N/A               10
  Note: The above trip generation rates are approximate and for informational purposes
  only. Trip generation rates used for environmental purposes should be based on rates
  established in publications by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) or San Diego
  Association of Governments (SANDAG) and approved by the El Centro Public Works
  Department.
General Plan Circulation System
  The circulation goals and policies emphasize the need for a circulation system capable of
  serving both existing and future traffic. The location, design and constituent modes of the
  circulation system have major impacts on air quality, noise, community appearance and
  other environmental resources. The El Centro Circulation Master Plan depicted in Figure
  C-1 delineates the planned circulation system including primary roadway segments with
  the freeways, arterial streets and collector street designations. The plan accommodates
  anticipated traffic levels and the hierarchical roadway classification system is implemented
  to avoid community impacts.
                                              20
El Dorado Colonia Circulation System
   The Land Use Element identifies the El Dorado Colonia as an area that would benefit from
   redevelopment and new development activities. For a new development, a street system
   must be in place to serve this new development. Figure C-4 provides a conceptual
   illustration of an appropriate street system for this area. The proposed street system
   assumes residential development and conforms to the grid street pattern that is prevalent
   in other parts of the Planning Area. Other circulation patterns may serve this area
   effectively.
Future Railroad Crossings
   The California Public Utilities Commission (P.U.C.) is requesting that all existing railroad
   at-grade crossings be modified to grade separations if the existing roadway is proposed to
   remain over the tracks. It must be emphasized that the P.U.C. request is not a
   requirement. A grade separation involves reconstructing the roadway to pass over the
   railroad tracks on a bridge or to construct a bridge under the existing railroad tracks to
   allow the existing roadway to pass underneath the railroad tracks. At-grade widening is
   routinely implemented and is a reasonable option in most cases.
   Roadways in and near the City of El Centro that will include grade separations include
   Bradshaw Drive and Villa Avenue. McCabe Road intersects Dogwood Avenue in the
   immediate proximity of the existing railroad tracks. The McCabe Road overcrossing will
   probably require Dogwood Avenue to also be reconstructed as an overcrossing. This will
   result in the entire McCabe Road / Dogwood Avenue intersection being constructed on an
   elevated roadway. The alternative is to realign and/or offset the McCabe and Dogwood
   Intersection so as to create a single road grade separation (for only a single leg of the
   intersection), and not the entire intersection..
   There are other existing minor at-grade crossings near the downtown area. These
   roadways are not planned to be widened in the future and will remain as at-grade
   crossings. City staff should seek the assistance of a consultant to assist with the design
   and approval process through the P.U.C. to allow for widening of the existing at-grade
   railroad crossings within the roadway’s right-of-way at La Brucherie Avenue, Imperial
   Avenue, Eighth Street, Ross Avenue, and Danenberg Drive per P.U.C. General Order 88.
                                              21

                Figure C-4
   Proposed Street System
       El Dorado Colonia
22
Regional Transportation
   El Centro and the Imperial County region have experienced great success during the last
   century providing agricultural products to the rest of the nation and parts of the world. This
   would not have been possible without an efficient regional transportation system. The
   system must link localities with outside commerce centers and regional transportation
   hubs. In addition, the regional circulation system must meet the needs of local residents.
   Interstate 8 bisects El Centro and provides the major access route to other regional
   highways and freeways throughout California. The Union Pacific Railroad extends north-
   south through the City and is intersected with the San Diego and Arizona railroad tying
   into the City’s industrial areas to the east. Air transportation is available at the Imperial
   County and Brawley airports, located north of the City.
   Since many local roadways, such as Interstate 8, are used by regional traffic traveling
   through the City, the community is interested in reducing the negative impacts to local
   residents from vehicles traveling on I-8. To avoid adverse impacts from regional traffic,
   the City will continue to coordinate transportation improvements and address circulation
   issues with the County of Imperial, other cities in the County, Caltrans, and the Southern
   California Association of Governments (SCAG).
   The Imperial Valley Association of Governments is in the process of developing of a
   regional traffic impact fee which will assist in funding capital improvements to mitigate
   regional traffic growth, including the growth from the City of El Centro. The City of El
   Centro should cooperate with the other agencies in Imperial County to expedite the
   development and implementation of a regional traffic impact fee in order to provide funding
   for El Centro’s fair share of traffic impacts on these regional facilities.
Goods Movement
   The efficient movement of goods in and through Imperial County is vital to the local
   economy. The ability of the City of El Centro, as well as the entire region, to compete
   domestically and internationally on an economic basis requires an efficient and cost-
   effective method for distributing and receiving products. This can be accomplished
   through planning, design, construction, and maintenance of the regional and local street
   and highway system.
Truck Traffic
   Although the City of El Centro does not currently designate truck routes, generally the
   majority of truck travel occurs on Interstate 8, State Route 86 and Dogwood Avenue. In
   addition, local truck traffic on arterial roads is significant, especially in the eastern and
   southeastern portions of the City where the major industrial development is located. In
   addition, heavy industrial uses are located along the Union Pacific Railroad.
                                               23

Public Transportation
   Promotion of alternative modes of transportation such as public transit and bicycling is a
   key component of the Circulation Plan. Use of alternative modes of transportation will
   produce a number of benefits for the community including reduced traffic, less need for
   costly roadway improvement projects and improved air quality.
Public Transit
   Services in Imperial Valley and the City of El Centro include: Greyhound Bus providing
   intracity service with fixed routes and charter; EOC/Salton Senior Transportation; Valley
   Transit System; Imperial County Transit; Imperial Valley Transit Authority; City of El
   Centro Blue Line Shuttle Bus System (see Figure C-5).
Community Systems
   There are various specialized services, primarily only for those people that are enrolled in
   these programs, such as: IV Transit; Association for Retarded Citizens; Work Training
   Center; MediVan; IV Blind Center; EOC Senior Nutrition; Clinica de Salud; and Calexico
   Senior Transportation. Other public access to transportation include: Dial-a-Ride, Desert
   Cab Company, City Cab Company and Yellow Cab.
Paratransit Service
   The City supports reliable, efficient and effective countywide paratransit service by
   encouraging development of service systems that satisfy the transit needs of the elderly
   and physically handicapped. Paratransit services are transportation services such as car
   pooling, van pooling, taxi service, and dial-a-ride programs.
Fixed Route Transit Service
   The Imperial County Transit provides bus service along Fourth Street (SR 86), State
   Street, Imperial Avenue (SR 86) and a loop to the El Centro Regional Medical Center on
   Ross Avenue and Aurora Drive (see Figure C-6).
   In an effort to improve transit service and increase ridership, the City will require that
   transit facilities be constructed along with major new development and rehabilitation
   projects. Additionally, the City will work with Imperial Valley Transit to expand transit
   routes and special transit services to meet the community’s expanding needs.
Pedestrian and Bicycle Network
   Continuing the promotion of alternative modes of transportation, the Circulation Plan
   promotes and encourages the development and use of a network of pedestrian and
   bicycle routes. The City’s pedestrian network is mainly associated with sidewalks on
   existing roads as shown in Figure C-2. The City will identify areas within the existing
   community that would benefit from improved pedestrian facilities, and future development
   and redevelopment will be required to incorporate pedestrian connections with major
                                             24

   destinations. In addition, the City will strive to include a separation between curbs and
   sidewalks, such as a landscaped planting strip, in order to reduce safety hazards to
   pedestrians, create “walkable” streets, and provide an aesthetically pleasing environment.
   Bicycling is a highly feasible alternative to vehicle transportation within the City of El
   Centro. With the exception of the hottest summer months, the climate within the city and
   the relative short distances between activity centers and residences make bicycling
   increasingly attractive.
   The City of El Centro has adopted the Caltrans classifications of bicycle facilities (Class I,
   Class II, and Class III). Class I bikeways are “bike paths”, separated completely from the
   roadway and designated for the exclusive use of bicyclists and pedestrians. Class II
   bikeways are “bike lanes” within the roadway designated for the use of bicyclists. Class III
   bikeways are “bike routes” which provide signs and a travel lane shared by bicyclists and
   vehicles. The current system of bicycle facilities is depicted in Figure C-6 and is described
   in detail in the “City of El Centro Bicycle Master Plan”. In addition to the Bicycle Master
   Plan, the City recently completed a “Citywide Bikeway System Design Report”. The City
   will continue to implement and update the plans as appropriate.
Airports and Railways
Airports
   Commercial air service to Imperial Valley is provided through the Imperial County Airport.
   The airport provides for scheduled airline service and private air travel. The airport,
   located just north of the City of El Centro, is accessible by State Route 86 and, in large
   part, is surrounded by residential and industrial development. Additionally, Douthitt Strip, a
   private airstrip located in the eastern portion of El Centro, is accessible by State Route 80
   (see Figure C-7).
   To ensure public safety, the City will continue to coordinate with the County of Imperial
   Airport Land Use Commission and review proposed development projects within the area
   impacted by airport operations.
Railroads
   Two rail lines serve El Centro. The Union Pacific Railroad main line enters the eastern
   border near Winterhaven and then bears northwest and leaves Imperial County just east
   of the Salton Sea. This is the railroad that serves Los Angeles and points northward in
   California. There is a major branch line from this main line at Niland that provides rail
   service to Calipatria, Brawley, Imperial, El Centro, Calexico, and Mexico. This line is used
   extensively for agricultural shipments. Minor spurs provide service to Westmoreland and
   the area north of Holtville. A San Diego and Arizona route links El Centro to San Diego,
   but is not currently in operation beyond Plaster City because of flooding damage, but
   feasibility studies have been undertaken to bring it back into operation (see Figure C-7).
   The City will coordinate with rail service providers and developers to ensure new
   development and nearby railways incorporate appropriate safety and noise reduction
   features into project design.
                                              25

                  Figure C-5
          City of El Centro
   Blue Line Shuttle Route
26
        Figure C-6
27    Transit and
   Bicycle Routes
               Figure C-7
   Airports and Railways
28
                    Note:
                    The Level of service
                    “D” corridors apply
                    only during peak hours
                    and after all respective
                    circulation element
                    improvements are
                    implemented to the
                    satisfaction of the City
                    engineer.
                           Figure C-8
   Level of Service “D” Corridors
29

                  Circulation Element Implementation Program
                       CIRCULATION
                       ELEMENT
                       E l      C e n t r o          G e n e r a l           P l a n
This Implementation Program provides actions to implement the adopted policies and
plans identified in the Circulation Element. The Circulation Element Implementation
Program is a series of actions, procedures and techniques which includes a description of
the responsible agency/department, funding source, time frame and related policies in the
Circulation Element.
Primary Circulation System
    C-1: Capital Improvement Program: Adopt and implement a capital
    improvement program including the phasing and construction of needed traffic
    improvements identified in the City’s Circulation Master Plan. Update the Circulation
    Master Plan to include the needed traffic improvements identified in the Circulation
    Element of the General Plan Draft Final Report prepared by VRPA Technologies (April
    2003).
    Responsible Agency/Department: Public Works, Development Services
    Funding Source: General Fund
    Time Frame: Update on an annual basis
    Related Policies: 1.1, 1.2, 1.6
    C-2: Proposed Development: Review development proposals for potential
    impacts to the transportation system. The Level of Service Standards established in the
    Circulation Element will be used to determine the significance of impacts. Mitigation
    in the form of physical improvements and/or impact fees will be required for
    significant impacts.
    Responsible Agency/Department: Development Services, Public Works
    Funding Source: Development fees, General Fund, project proponent
    Time Frame: Ongoing in response to development proposals
    Related Policies: 1.2, 1.3, 1.8
    C-3: Coordinate Local and Major Transportation Improvements: To
    reduce expenditures, improve design and minimize traffic disruption, work with
    Imperial County, Caltrans, and other local and regional agencies to coordinate local
                                          A-7

                 Circulation Element Implementation Program
  street improvements with major transportation system and infrastructure improvement
  projects such as an Imperial Avenue/Interstate 8 interchange. In addition, the impacts
  of both development projects and major transportation projects will be monitored and
  mitigation may be required.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Public Works, Development Services, Caltrans,
  County of Imperial
  Funding Source: General Fund, development fees, project proponent, gas tax, state
  and federal funds
  Time Frame: Ongoing
  Related Policies: 1.5, 1.6, 2.1
  C-4: Transportation Financing: Identify available funding sources and establish
  a financing plan to guide construction and funding of transportation system
  improvements. Require new development projects to construct and/or fund in whole
  or in part necessary traffic improvements associated with the proposed project.
  Transportation improvements should include both automobile, as well as alternative
  means of transportation.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Development Services, Public Works, County of
  Imperial, Caltrans
  Funding Source: General Fund, state and federal funds, development fees
  Time Frame: Ongoing
  Related Policies: 1.3, 1.7, 1.9
  C-5 Ross Avenue Traffic Calming: Undertake a detailed study analyzing
  various traffic calming techniques, their impact on through traffic, and the potential for
  adverse traffic impacts along parallel streets should be performed prior to
  implementing any traffic calming measures on Ross Avenue.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Development Services, Public Works
  Funding Source: General Fund, state and federal funds
  Time Frame: Undertake study by the end of 2005
  Related Policies: 1.1, 1.3
Public Transportation
  C-6: Improved Transit Service: Work with Imperial County Transit to improve
  transit service and encourage ridership through the following actions:
      ¾ Require transit facilities in major new development and rehabilitation projects;
      ¾ Coordinate with Imperial County Transit to expand transit routes to new areas
           of development and the Sphere of Influence.
      ¾ Work with Imperial County Transit to provide special transit services (such as
           direct service shuttles) to meet community needs.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Development Services, Imperial County Transit
  Funding Source: Project proponent, development fees, state and federal funds
                                            A-8

                  Circulation Element Implementation Program
   Time Frame: Ongoing
   Related Policies: 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4
Pedestrian and Bicycle Network
   C-7: Pedestrian Facilities: Require new development and redevelopment to
   provide pedestrian connections with major destinations. Identify areas within the
   existing community that would benefit from improved pedestrian facilities. Explore
   additional funding sources to provide additional pedestrian facilities.
   Responsible Agency/Department: Development Services, Community Services
   Funding Source: General Fund, state and federal funds, project proponent
   Time Frame: Ongoing
   Related Policies: 3.1, 3.2, 3.4
   C-8: Bike Master Plan and Design Report: Continue to implement, and
   update as necessary, the City of El Centro Bicycle Master Plan and associated
   Citywide Bikeway System Design Report.
   Responsible Agency/Department: Community Services, Public Works
   Funding Source: General Fund, state and federal funds
   Time Frame: Ongoing
   Related Policies: 3.1, 3.3, 3.4
Airports and Railways
   C-9: Compatible Land Use: Continue to coordinate with the County of Imperial
   Airport Land Use Commission to review development proposals for area impacted by
   airport operations to ensure the continued operation of local airports and protect the
   public safety.
   Responsible Agency/Department: Development Services, County of Imperial
   Funding Source: General Fund, development fees
   Time Frame: Ongoing
   Related Policies: 4.2
   C-10: Railroad Design: Continue to coordinate with rail service providers on
   development projects near railways to mitigate potential circulatory and safety
   concerns through the introduction of appropriate crossing design and safety features,
   such as fencing along the rail corridor. In addition, ensure new development that is
   impacted by railroad noise includes appropriate noise reduction design features to
   allow for the continued operation of the railroad without negative impacts to
   development.
   Responsible Agency/Department: Development Services, Public Works, rail service
   providers
   Funding Source: General Fund, development fees
   Time Frame: Ongoing
   Related Policies: 4.2
                                         A-9
Circulation Element Implementation Program
              A-10
                                                   Conservation/Open Space Element
                                   TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION                                                                                                                                      PAGE
Introduction ............................................................................................................. COS-1
   Purpose of the Conservation/Open Space Element .................................................... COS-1
   Scope and Content of the Conservation/Open Space Element .............................. COS-2
   Related Plans and Programs ............................................................................................. COS-2
       California Environmental Quality Act ......................................................................... COS-2
       California Endangered Species Act ........................................................................... COS-3
       Federal Endangered Species Act .............................................................................. COS-3
       U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and California Department of Fish and Game ...... COS-3
       National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) ...................................... COS-3
       Regional Transportation Plan and Improvement Program .................................... COS-4
       El Centro Parks and Recreation Facilities Master Plan ............................................ COS-4
   Relationship to Other General Plan Elements ................................................................ COS-4
Issues, Goals and Policies ...................................................................................... COS-5
    Agriculture and Soils Conservation .................................................................................. COS-5
    Water Conservation ........................................................................................................... COS-6
    Open Space and Natural Resources .............................................................................. COS-6
    Community and Historic Resources ................................................................................. COS-7
    Air Quality ............................................................................................................................. COS-8
    Health and Safety ............................................................................................................... COS-8
    Geothermal Resources ...................................................................................................... COS-9
    Energy Conservation ........................................................................................................ COS-10
    Related Goals and Policies ............................................................................................. COS-10
Conservation/Open Space Plan ......................................................................... COS-12
    Agriculture and Soils Conservation ................................................................................ COS-12
          Soils ............................................................................................................................. COS-12
          Agriculture ................................................................................................................ COS-13
    Water Conservation ......................................................................................................... COS-16
    Open Space and Natural Resources ............................................................................ COS-17
    Community and Historic Resources ............................................................................... COS-18
    Air Quality ........................................................................................................................... COS-19
    Health and Safety ............................................................................................................. COS-22
                                                                    COS-i
                                           Conservation/Open Space Element
        Agricultural Activities .............................................................................................. COS-22
        Geologic Hazards ................................................................................................... COS-22
        Flooding .................................................................................................................... COS-22
   Geothermal Resources .................................................................................................... COS-23
   Energy Conservation ........................................................................................................ COS-23
                                                LIST OF TABLES
TABLE                                                                                                                                  PAGE
COS-1   Related Goals and Policies by Element .............................................................. COS-11
                                               LIST OF FIGURES
FIGURE                                                                                                                                 PAGE
COS-1   Important Farmlands ............................................................................................... COS-15
COS-2   Salton Sea Air Basin ................................................................................................. COS-21
COS-3   Geothermal Resource Areas ................................................................................. COS-24
                                                            COS-ii
                              Conservation/Open Space Element
                 CONSERVATION/
                 OPEN SPACE
                 ELEMENT
                 E l  C e n t r o       G e n e r a l       P l a n
INTRODUCTION
  Some of El Centro’s most valuable assets include its agricultural land, open
  space, parks, and community and historical resources. The Conservation/Open
  Space Element focuses on the protection and enhancement of open space and
  natural and historic resources to ensure a high quality living environment in El
  Centro.
Purpose of the Conservation/Open Space Element
  The El Centro Conservation/Open Space Element meets the State requirements
  for Conservation and Open Space Elements as defined in Sections 65302(d) and
  65301(e) of the Government Code. According to these requirements, the
  Conservation Element must contain goals and policies to protect and maintain
  natural resources such as water, soils, wildlife, and minerals, and prevent wasteful
  resource exploitation, degradation, and destruction. The Open Space Element
  must contain goals and policies to manage open space areas, including
  undeveloped lands and outdoor recreation areas. Specifically, the Open Space
  Element must address several open space categories such as those used for the
  preservation of natural resources and managed production of resources, as well
  as open space maintained for public health and safety reasons. This last
  category of open space is addressed in the Safety Element. Additionally, while
  air quality is not a state-mandated element, air quality is included in the
  Conservation/Open Space Element to address reducing pollutant levels through
  stationary source, mobile source, transportation and land use control, and
  energy conservation measures. Because the subjects required to be addressed
  under the Conservation Element and Open Space Element overlap substantially,
  the two elements have been combined for this Plan.
                                     COS-1

                                 Conservation/Open Space Element
Scope and Content of the Conservation/Open Space Element
   The Conservation/Open Space Element expresses community goals to protect
   environmental and historic resources and open space. Resources addressed in
   this element include: a) agricultural and soils conservation; b) water
   conservation; c) open space and natural resources; d) community and historic
   resources; e) air quality; f) health and safety; g) geothermal resources; and h)
   energy conservation.
   The Conservation/Open Space Element is comprised of four sections: 1) this
   Introduction; 2) Issues, Goals, and Policies; and 3) the Conservation/Open Space
   Plan. In the Issues, Goals, and Policies section, community open space needs
   and resource management issues are identified and corresponding goals and
   policies are established. The goals, which are overall statements of the City
   desires, are comprised of broad statements of purpose and direction. The
   policies serve as guidelines for planning and maintaining recreational facilities,
   enhancing the natural amenities of El Centro and minimizing the environmental
   effects of planned development. The Plan explains how the goals and policies
   will be achieved and implemented, while the Implementation Program, included
   in Appendix A, identifies the specific implementation programs for this Element.
Related Plans and Programs
   There are a number of existing plans and programs that directly relate to the
   Conservation/Open Space Element. These plans and programs have been
   enacted through federal, State and local action, and are administered by
   agencies and special districts. Federal laws pertaining to the protection of
   significant resources include the Endangered Species Act of 1973 and the
   National Environmental Policy Act. Other related plans and programs are
   described below.
California Environmental Quality Act
   The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) was adopted by the state
   legislature in response to a public mandate for thorough environmental analysis
   of projects impacting the environment.           The provisions of the law and
   environmental review procedures are described in the CEQA statutes and CEQA
   Guidelines.     CEQA will continue to be instrumental in ensuring that the
   environmental impacts associated with local development projects are
   appropriately assessed and mitigated.
                                        COS-2
                                Conservation/Open Space Element
California Endangered Species Act
   The California Endangered Species Act (CESA) (Fish & Game Code §§2050, et.
   seq.) generally parallels the main provisions of the Federal Endangered Species
   Act and is administered by the California Department of Fish and Game (CDFG).
   CESA prohibits the “taking” of listed species except as otherwise provided in
   State law. Any future development or redevelopment in El Centro that has the
   potential to affect wildlife will be subject to the restrictions contained in the
   CESA.
Federal Endangered Species Act
   The Federal Endangered Species Act (ESA), administered by the U.S. Fish and
   Wildlife Service, applies to federally listed species and habitat occupied by
   federally listed species. Federally listed species are most likely to occur within
   riparian habitat areas in the City’s floodplains. ESA Section 9 forbids specified
   acts that directly or indirectly harm listed species. Section 9 also prohibits
   “taking” any species of wildlife or fish listed as endangered. These restrictions
   apply to all federal agencies and all persons subject to United States jurisdiction.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and California Department of Fish and Game
   Both the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and California Department of Fish and
   Game have regulations to protect wildlife resources. Special permits are
   required for the alteration, dredging, or any activity in a lake or stream, as well as
   other activities that may affect fish and game habitat. Both agencies also
   regulate impacts to sensitive plant and animal species as described above.
   Future development in El Centro that has the potential to affect wildlife habitat
   will be subject to the regulations of both of these federal and State agencies.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
   Under the NPDES storm water permit issued to the City of El Centro, all
   development and significant redevelopment must be implemented with runoff
   pollution control measures known as Best Management Practices (BMPs).
   Proposed development projects (both public and private) within El Centro must
   incorporate structural and non-structural BMPs to preclude significant water
   quality impact from non-point source pollutants.
                                         COS-3

                                  Conservation/Open Space Element
Regional Transportation Plan and Improvement Program
    The Southern California Association of Governments has adopted a Regional
    Transportation Plan and a Regional Transportation Improvement Program to
    implement the projects and programs listed in the Regional Transportation Plan.
    These plans work together to help improve vehicular traffic within the region and
    thereby reduce air pollution.
El Centro Parks and Recreation Facilities Master Plan
    In 2008, the City adopted a Parks and Recreation Facilities Master Plan to further
    develop the projects, programs and investments necessary to implement
    General Plan goals. While the Parks and Recreation Facilities Master Plan focuses
    primarily on public facilities, its recommendations also help implement goals for
    Water Conservation, Open Space and Natural Resources, Community and
    Historic Resources, Geothermal Resources and Energy Conservation.
Relationship to Other General Plan Elements
    The Conservation/Open Space Element must be consistent with the other
    General Plan elements and all elements of the General Plan are interrelated to a
    degree. Certain goals and policies of one element may also address issues that
    are the primary subjects of other elements. Table COS-1 located in the following
    section identifies related goals and policies by General Plan element. The
    integration of overlapping issues throughout the General Plan elements provides
    a strong basis for the implementation of plans and programs and achievement
    of community goals. The Conservation/Open Space Element most closely
    relates to the Land Use and Safety Elements.
    The Land Use Element provides a planned land use pattern with the following
    general land use designation categories: Residential, Commercial, Industrial, and
    Community Facilities. The more specific Public - Parks and Other Governmental
    designations are applied to public and private land that is intended for
    conservation, open space, and recreational uses. These designations apply to
    areas that have recreational value and/or public safety concerns, such as flood
    control basins.
    The Safety Element relates to the Conservation/Open Space Element in that it
    identifies hazard-prone areas such as floodplains and seismic hazard areas that
    should be conserved as open space.
                                           COS-4
                                  Conservation/Open Space Element
                  ISSUES, GOALS, AND POLICIES
  El Centro possesses valuable assets in the form of its agricultural land, historic
  resources, water supply, and geothermal resources.           Conservation and
  enhancement of these assets can be accomplished by addressing certain issues
  affecting the City. Eight major issues are addressed by the goals, policies, and
  plan in the Conservation/Open Space Element. These major issues include: 1)
  agricultural and soils conservation; 2) water conservation; 3) open space and
  natural resources; 4) community and historic resources; 5) air quality; 6) health
  and safety; 7) geothermal resources; and 8) energy conservation. Each issue
  and the related goals and policies are included in this section of the
  Conservation/Open Space Element.
Agricultural and Soils Conservation
  Imperial Valley contains some of the most productive agricultural soils in the
  world. The economic base of El Centro and of the entire Valley has been, and
  continues to be, tied to that productivity. Therefore, it is important that the
  vitality of these agricultural resources be protected.
  Conservation/Open Space Goal 1: Conserve and maintain farmland and prime
  soil areas surrounding El Centro so that agriculture remains a viable and
  dominant part of the community’s character and local economy.
  Policy 1.1: Direct future development away from prime soils areas to allow their
  continued use for agricultural uses.
  Policy 1.2: Continue to implement the City’s Urban Development Program to
  encourage compact and contiguous development within El Centro, minimizing
  the amount of agricultural land converted to urban uses.
  Policy 1.3: Promote infill and compact development to minimize the amount of
  agricultural land necessary for future growth.
  Policy 1.4: Maintain agricultural facilities and services including irrigation
  channels, commercial fertilization and pest control, and transportation of
  supplies, equipment, and harvested crops.
                                        COS-5

                               Conservation/Open Space Element
  Policy 1.5: Continue to work with County and State agencies to ensure the
  effective conservation of agricultural lands within the region and to minimize the
  impacts of geothermal development on agricultural activities.
Water Conservation
  El Centro’s water supply comes from the Colorado River and is of fairly good
  quality, despite a relatively high salt content. In consideration of California’s
  current overdraft of the Colorado River and the unpredictability of future climatic
  and population factors affecting water, conservation should be encouraged.
  Conservation/Open Space Goal 2: Maintain and improve the quality of water
  used by the City and surrounding agricultural areas.
  Policy 2.1: Coordinate water quality and supply programs with responsible
  water agencies.
  Policy 2.2: Develop and implement standards for site design, storm water
  management, planting, irrigation and maintenance.
  Policy 2.3: Promote water conservation by El Centro residents, businesses,
  agriculture, and government to reduce overall demand for water.
  Policy 2.4: Use recycled water for irrigation.
  Policy 2.5: Utilize drought tolerant materials in the design of parks, recreation
  facilities and detention basins.
Open Space and Natural Resources
  Surrounded by agricultural uses, there are limited natural resources remaining in
  the El Centro Planning Area. The most prevalent open space and habitat areas
  are associated with agricultural operations, such as the channel system and the
  open space, rural character of the surrounding agricultural lands.
  Conservation/Open Space Goal 3: Direct future urban growth and expansion of
  the City to promote the conservation of important natural habitats, ecosystems,
  and open space areas of unique natural quality and community significance.
  Policy 3.1: Protect unique or high quality natural habitats through open space
  designation or parkland dedication.
                                       COS-6

                                 Conservation/Open Space Element
  Policy 3.2: Utilize the environmental review process to evaluate and mitigate
  impacts to natural resources and plant and animal habitats that may be
  affected by proposed development.
  Policy 3.3: Develop pedestrian and bicycle trails to connect existing and new
  parks, consistent with the City of El Centro Bicycle Master Plan. Examine new
  street rights-of-way, utility easements, river banks, and the canal rights-of-way
  system to create the trail system.
  Policy 3.4: Require new development to provide connectivity to the existing
  community and access to new park and open space features.
  Policy 3.5: Develop a greenbelt system that provides buffer zones between
  potentially incompatible land uses, such as between industries and homes, and
  that upgrades the visual quality of the community.
  Conservation/Open Space Goal 4: “Embrace the Desert” by investing in City
  programs and facilities that highlight the unique value of the landscape and
  appropriate use of materials.
  Policy 4.1: Create an Environmental Education Program to help residents of El
  Centro understand the unique value of desert habitat.
  Policy 4.2: Create a Desert Demonstration Garden to highlight desert plant
  material and adapted drought tolerant plant material.
Community and Historic Resources
  El Centro’s rich historic past has grown out of the agricultural development of
  Imperial Valley and has been incorporated into the fabric of the City, providing
  a link to the community’s heritage and history. The many sites and structures of
  architectural and/or historic significance create focal points within the
  community and provide a sense of place. Areas within the City having historic
  resources and buildings should be protected and enhanced.
  Conservation/Open Space Goal 5: Maintain local historic structures and places
  that provide a sense of continuity and unique character to El Centro.
  Policy 5.1: Encourage the preservation of structures and places with historic or
  community value, including the post office, library, County Courthouse, arcades
  in the downtown, and the railroad buildings.
                                       COS-7

                                 Conservation/Open Space Element
   Policy 5.2: Protect and enhance the downtown area as the City’s center of
   activity and community life.
Air Quality
   Air quality in El Centro, which is within the Salton Sea Air Basin (SSAB), is generally
   very good, though particulate matter is generated by wind blowing dry soils,
   particularly during the late fall and during the dust storms of winter and early
   spring. Air pollutants from vehicles are found in very low concentrations within
   the SSAB. Cooperation among all agencies in the basin is necessary to achieve
   desired improvements to air quality. El Centro can participate and contribute its
   share in those efforts by proper planning for land use, transportation, and energy
   use.
   Conservation/Open Space Goal 6: Protect and maintain good air quality in the
   Imperial Valley region.
   Policy 6.1: Cooperate with the Imperial Valley Air Pollution Control District and
   Southern California Association of Governments in their efforts to implement the
   regional Air Quality Management Plan.
   Policy 6.2: Cooperate and participate in regional air quality management
   planning, programs, and enforcement measures.
   Policy 6.3:     Integrate air quality planning with land use and transportation
   planning.
Health and Safety
   El Centro’s geographic location and the composition of local soils expose the
   City to various environmental hazards. Risk from these hazards can be reduced
   by planning future development with these concerns in mind.
   Conservation/Open Space Goal 7: Direct future urban growth and expansion of
   the City to minimize hazards from areas requiring special management and/or
   separation from other land uses, such as seismic fault zones, unstable soil areas,
   flood plains, and areas required for protection of water quality.
   Policy 7.1: Reduce the risk of impacts from natural hazards by applying proper
   development engineering, building construction, and retrofitting requirements.
                                         COS-8

                                Conservation/Open Space Element
  Policy 7.2: Develop controls to restrict access to the irrigation canal system,
  especially adjacent to residential areas.
  Policy 7.3: Monitor and control agricultural activities within the City, such as
  pesticide and crop dusting adjacent to residential areas.
Geothermal Resources
  Direct use of the hot geothermal brines for energy needs within El Centro is
  possible due to the City’s close proximity to the Heber Resource Area.
  Geothermal heat energy could potentially be used for air conditioning,
  refrigeration, space and water heating, food processing plants, aquaculture fish
  farms, and specialized green houses. Furthermore, geothermal development
  may be an important factor in the economic growth of El Centro.
  Conservation/Open Space Goal 8: Encourage utilization of geothermal resources
  and develop the resources in a planned and efficiently managed manner by
  discouraging wasteful use, minimizing environmental impacts, and prolonging
  the economic production life of this resource.
  Policy 8.1: Coordinate with County and State regulatory agencies to plan for
  the environmentally safe extraction of geothermal resources.
  Policy 8.2:       Support, generally, implementation of the Imperial County
  Geothermal Element policies, including:
        Geothermal plants shall be sited so as to have minimal impact upon
         agriculture;
        Slant drilling techniques shall be utilized in the irrigated areas of Imperial
         County where appropriate;
        The County shall seek the resources to prepare and publish anomaly-wide
         Environmental Impact Reports for each economic anomaly, to be used as
         a guide for development of each resource area;
        The County shall encourage the development of the direct use of
         geothermal energy; and
        The County shall initiate a study to determine the location of services
         required by the increased population, and any other effects engendered
         by geothermal development.
                                       COS-9

                                 Conservation/Open Space Element
  Policy 8.3: Regulate any geothermal activity within the City and ensure that
  local goals and concerns are taken into account in the formation of geothermal
  production policies.
  Policy 8.4:     Promote the use of geothermal energy by local residents and
  businesses.
  Policy 8.5: Continue to identify funding sources for experimental demonstration
  projects adapting geothermal direct energy to residential and non-residential
  uses.
Energy Conservation
  Urban development and agricultural activities depend on adequate supplies
  and distribution of energy. The City must promote the conservation of energy in
  order to sustain existing and future economic and population growth.
  Conservation/Open Space Goal 9: Utilize all energy resources in an efficient,
  conserving manner, taking in to account local climatic factors, to reduce the
  consumption of valuable fossil resources such as oil and natural gas.
  Policy 9.1: Promote energy conservation by the public and private sectors.
  Policy 9.2: Provide incentives for subdivision plans that incorporate energy
  conserving design.
  Policy 9.3: Encourage the use of passive solar design concepts and the
  retrofitting of older buildings with energy-conserving features as a way to reduce
  energy consumed.
  Policy 9.4: Encourage the recycling of waste heat and the application of direct
  geothermal energy.
Related Goals and Policies
  The goals and policies described in the Conservation/Open Space Element are
  related to and support subjects included within other General Plan elements. In
  turn, many goals and policies from other elements directly or indirectly support
  the goals and policies of the Conservation/Open Space Element. These
  supporting goals and policies are identified in Table COS-1.
                                        COS-10
                                   Conservation/Open Space Element
                                           Table COS-1
                           Related Goals and Policies by Element
                                       Conservation/Open Space Issue Area
General Plan                           Open
              Agricultural  Water                Community             Health     Geo-    Energy
                                    Space and                   Air
Elements       and Soils   Conser-               and Historic            and     thermal  Conserv
                                      Natural                 Quality
              Conversion    vation                Resources             Safety  Resources  ation
                                     Resources
                                                  1.1, 1.14,
 Land Use       1.1, 2.1              1.1, 2.1                1.1, 2.1 1.1, 2.1
                                                     2.1
 Economic
                                                                                   1.10    1.10
 Development
 Housing
                                                                2.1.
                                                                2.2,
                                                                2.3,
 Circulation                                                             3.4
                                                                2.4,
                                                                2.5,
                                                              3.1, 4.5
 Public                               1.1, 1.4,
                             9.1                     7.1               4.1, 5.2
 Facilities                             1.6
 Conservation
 / Open
 Space
                                                                         1.2,
                                                                         1.3,
                                                                         2.1,
 Safety
                                                                         2.4,
                                                                         2.5,
                                                                       2.6, 3.2
 Noise
                                             COS-11
                                Conservation/Open Space Element
                     CONSERVATION/
                     OPEN SPACE PLAN
   The multi-cultural community of El Centro has a history rich in the agricultural
   industry. The City’s array of historic downtown and surrounding agricultural uses
   create a distinct identity for the City. The Conservation/Open Space Plan
   establishes an approach for the balanced use, management, and
   conservation of the City’s unique resources. The seven conservation and open
   space issue areas identified in the Issues, Goals and Policies section are the
   focus of this Plan. The related goals and policies are the basis of the Plan and
   are supported by approaches to protect and enhance natural resources. The
   Conservation/Open Space Implementation Program contained in Appendix A
   of this General Plan is an extension of this Plan and contains specific programs
   to achieve the City’s goals related to conservation and open space.
Agricultural and Soils Conservation
   Imperial Valley contains some of the most productive agricultural soils in the
   world. The deep, rich, silty soils found surrounding El Centro in its sphere of
   influence and throughout much of the Imperial Valley were created as a result
   of historic flooding of the Colorado River and were deposited over thousands of
   years. These soils provide a basis for the agricultural operations located
   throughout the area.
Soils
   The General Plan area lies within the Salton Trough, the dominant landform
   within the County. The Salton Trough encompasses the Coachella, Imperial,
   and Mexicali Valleys and extends north from the Gulf of California. Ancient
   lakebed sediments, alluvial channels, and dune sands occur in the Salton
   Trough. Clay and silt deposits of the lakebed cover the central portion of the
   basin with shoreline deposits predominantly of unconsolidated sand and gravel,
   changing into the clays and silts around the prehistoric lake edge. Lakebeds
   are generally less than 100 feet thick. East and west of the central portion of
   the Trough there is dissected, flat-lying alluvium. These poorly consolidated silts,
   sands, and gravels form thin veneers of desert pavement between washes.
   Sand dunes up to 200 feet thick occur on mesa areas to the east and west sides
   of Imperial Valley.
                                        COS-12

                               Conservation/Open Space Element
  Soils in the El Centro area are underlain by Late Pleistocene to Holocene
  lacustrine deposits associated with ancient Lake Cahuilla. These sediments are
  typically unconsolidated to poorly consolidated and porous, consisting
  generally of clay, silt, and sand. Clay and silt soils are expected to exhibit a
  medium to high expansion potential. Near surface soils are generally soft
  and/or loose due to recent agricultural processing. Some of the soils in the
  Imperial Valley area have a high expansion or shrink-swell potential. These are
  generally found where fine-grained clayey sediments occur.
Agriculture
  El Centro is the largest urban center in Imperial County. Urban growth in the
  region has traditionally been concentrated around the County’s regional
  agricultural centers and shipping stations. Highly productive soils, climate, and
  a reliable water source have combined to make agriculture the single most
  important economic activity of Imperial County. According to the County
  Agricultural Commissioner, agricultural production currently contributes close to
  one and a half billion dollars annually to the region’s economy. More than 120
  types of crops are grown in Imperial County, including field crops (such as
  alfalfa and sudan grass) and row crops (such as lettuce, carrots, and melons).
  A critical factor in determining whether a particular property is suitable for
  agriculture is its soil composition. The agricultural soils found in Imperial County
  are considered to be among the finest in the world. Figure COS-1 depicts the
  Important Farmlands in the El Centro Planning Area as identified by the
  Department of Conservation. As shown, a substantial amount of land in the
  Planning Area is identified as Important Farmland. More specifically, as of 2000
  there are approximately 270 acres of Farmland of Local Importance, 170 acres
  of Prime Farmland, and 850 acres of Farmland of Statewide Importance within
  El Centro. The sphere of influence has an additional 150 acres of Farmland of
  Local Importance, 4,000 acres of Prime Farmland, and 5,415 acres of Farmland
  of Statewide Importance.
  These agricultural uses provide revenue for the City while preserving rural
  character and maintaining open space and scenic views. While many of the
  agricultural uses will continue to operate in the future, increasing pressures from
  surrounding urban development and changes in the economy will likely result in
  the development of many of these areas for urban uses. Planning for the
  eventual conversion of these areas into urban uses, while allowing agricultural
  areas to remain as an interim use, provides short- and long-term benefits to the
  City.
                                       COS-13

                           Conservation/Open Space Element
Under the Williamson Act, owners of prime farmlands are only taxed for the
agricultural use-value of their land, in return for guaranteeing that the land will
be kept in agricultural use for the term of the contract. The City will encourage
voluntary enrollment by owners of local prime farmlands into agricultural
preserve contracts to protect the continued use of these lands for agricultural
use.
                                    COS-14
                    Conservation/Open Space Element
Figure COS-1
Important Farmlands
                         COS-15
                                 Conservation/Open Space Element
Water Conservation
  El Centro’s water supply comes from the Colorado River via the canals and
  facilities of the Imperial Irrigation District (IID). According to the IDD, Imperial
  Valley’s agricultural industry is estimated to use 98 percent of the region’s water
  supply. The City owns and operates a water treatment plant that provides
  clarification, filtration, and disinfection of water from the Colorado River.
 Colorado River water is of fairly good quality; however, the amount of total
 dissolved solids (primarily salt) is very high. The City has little control over the
 quality of the water supplied to it, since the quality is primarily determined by
 land uses located along the Colorado River outside the State of California.
 Water for residential and commercial use is treated at the City’s water
 purification plant, which has a 12 million gallon per day (mgd) capacity.
 According to the City of El Centro Water Quality Report for Year 2001, the City’s
 drinking water meets or exceeds all federal and State requirements. The City’s
 goal is to maintain and improve the quality of water used by the City and
 surrounding agricultural areas.
  California has consistently exceeded its yearly allocation of 4.4 million acre feet
  from the Colorado River by 20 percent over the past several years. Although
  the long-term supply of water to El Centro is fairly well protected by various laws
  and agreements over rights to the Colorado River, the State’s overdraft
  potentially jeopardizes this long-term supply.            As a result of California
  consistently exceeding this allotment, the IID has initiated many water
  conservation programs in Imperial County and participated in various programs
  in cooperation with governmental agencies.
  In 1988, a Water Conservation Agreement was forged between the IID and the
  Metropolitan Water District of Southern California (MWD). The agreement
  provides for the implementation of water conservation projects, which are
  funded by the MWD. In return, MWD is eligible to divert additional water that is
  equivalent to the amount of water conserved. The water conservation projects
  implemented through the agreement primarily focus on increasing the
  efficiency of the IID’s water conveyance system and conserving water in
  agricultural operations.
  More recently, the Imperial Irrigation District (IID) has negotiated an agreement
  with the San Diego County Water Authority (SDCWA) for the transfer of
  conserved water from the Imperial Valley to the San Diego region. Under the
  agreement, IID and its agricultural customers will conserve water and sell it to
  the SDCWA for at least 45 years. In addition, the SDCWA will pay the costs of
  conserving water incurred to Imperial Valley farmers plus an incentive to
  encourage participation.
                                         COS-16

                               Conservation/Open Space Element
  Prior to the implementation of the program, numerous negative impacts on the
  Salton Sea related to the transfer and concerns about the potential impact to
  the local economy must be mitigated.
  Sustaining a reliable supply of water to El Centro in the long run may be very
  difficult. Although California has a guaranteed priority use of the Colorado
  River water, there will not be enough water to serve the needs of the projected
  population growth and development within California and the adjoining states
  in the future. While it appears that law protects the long-term supply, and that
  water resources are presently abundant, the future climatic and population
  growth factors affecting water use are unpredictable.
  In order for the City of El Centro to sustain a reliable supply of water for the City
  residents, the City will promote water conservation by the residents, businesses,
  agriculture, and government to reduce overall demand for water in
  accordance with California’s “4.4 Plan”; an ongoing effort to reduce the State’s
  use of Colorado River water to 4.4 million acre-feet per year, California’s
  entitled amount. Additionally, the City coordinates water quality and supply
  programs with responsible water agencies.
  In addition to maintaining an adequate supply of water, the City of El Centro
  will reduce pollutants in urban runoff to improve water quality through
  participation in the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
  program. According to the City’s NPDES permit, all new development projects
  and substantial rehabilitation projects are required to incorporate Best
  Management Practices (BMPs). Implementation of BMPs will enhance surface
  and ground water quality in the planning area.
Open Space and Natural Resources
  El Centro is primarily surrounded by agricultural lands which are considered to
  be open space for the production of food and fiber. Most of the natural flora
  has been replaced by cultivation in the El Centro area. The remaining “natural
  areas” exist mostly along irrigation canal rights-of-way and other lowland areas
  created by agriculture and irrigation.
  Currently, there are approximately 127 acres of public park land within the City.
  To increase the acreage for parks and open space areas, the City continues to
  examine utility easements, river banks, and the canal right-of-way system for
  recreational opportunities, such as bicycle and pedestrian corridors and linear
  parks.     The City will continue to require new development to provide
  recreational opportunities as allowed by law.
                                      COS-17

                              Conservation/Open Space Element
  In addition, the City will continue to promote the Planned Unit Development
  (PUD) provision in the zoning ordinance that encourages the incorporation of
  more useable open space than provided under traditional development
  standards.
  Local drainage patterns within the valley have been altered through
  agricultural activities. The IID maintains about 1,600 miles of irrigation drainage
  structures, which collect surface water runoff and subsurface drainage from
  some 32,200 miles of agricultural drains (tile) and channel the flow into the New
  and Alamo Rivers, which ultimately drain to the Salton Sea. The canals and
  laterals are often open and unprotected. The City will require developers of
  land adjacent to these open drainage facilities to underground the facilities to
  protect public safety.
  The irrigation and drainage canals network is within the City’s area of influence
  and some portions of the City. Canal right-of-way will remain as open space, to
  provide access for maintenance, to protect water flow capacities as urban
  development expands into the immediately adjacent farmlands, and to
  provide linear pedestrian and bicycle pathways and park areas. The canal
  system provides habitat for saline adapted plant species. Populations of a
  number of fish species live in the canals. The mosquito fish has been introduced
  by the Imperial County Health Department for mosquito control, and species of
  Tilapia have been introduced to control aquatic weeds. The canal system has
  created an aquatic habitat within a naturally arid environment and provides
  opportunities for people to fish and observe wild species in a unique manmade
  “natural” environment. Pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act
  (CEQA) and associated federal regulations, the City will continue to assess
  development proposals for potential impacts to significant natural resources
  and habitat.
Community and Historic Resources
  El Centro has grown out of the agricultural development of the Imperial Valley
  and is the core of the Imperial Valleys’ retail district. Agricultural processing and
  packing have dominated the City’s industrial sector. The City preserves
  structures and places with historic or community value including the post office,
  County Courthouse, downtown arcades, library, and the railroad buildings. The
  City continues to maintain local historic structures and places that provide a
  sense of continuity and unique character to El Centro. The City will also
  enhance and protect the downtown area as the City’s center of activity and
  community life through the continued implementation of recommendations
  made by the Downtown Business District Study.
                                      COS-18

                                Conservation/Open Space Element
   In addition, as shown in Figure LU-3 in the Land Use Element, the City has
   identified some of the older residential single family neighborhoods for
   protection to maintain their existing historical character.
   Presently the City supports an archaeological museum, a Community Center, a
   variety of informal theatre and recreation groups, and a number of community
   groups. A state of the art Southwest High School auditorium provides facilities
   for theatrical plays, master coral performances, and concerts.
   El Centro may contain some archaeological resources; however, most of the
   Planning Area has been disturbed by urban development and agriculture. In
   the event that archaeological resources are located within the Planning Area,
   new development that has the potential to impact these resources will be
   required to mitigate its impact pursuant to the California Environmental Quality
   Act.
   The City will foster local awareness of El Centro’s rich heritage through a variety
   of programs including the placement of plaques or markers to highlight the
   significance of buildings or places and the designation of historic landmarks by
   the City Council.
Air Quality
   As shown in Figure COS-2, El Centro lies within the Salton Sea Air Basin (SSAB).
   The SSAB includes Imperial County and the central part of Riverside County,
   including the Coachella Valley. The City’s goal is to protect and maintain good
   air quality in the Imperial Valley Region.
   Particulate matter (PM10) is a major air pollutant consisting of tiny solid or liquid
   particles of soot, dust, smoke, fumes, or mists. The size of the particles (10
   microns or smaller) allows them to enter the air sacs deep in the lungs where
   they may be deposited, resulting in adverse health effects. PM10 also causes
   visibility reduction. Particulate matter is generated by wind blowing dry soils,
   particularly during the late fall, and during dust storms of winter and early spring.
   Agricultural burning and cultivation practices contribute most of the airborne
   dust in the El Centro area. Some agricultural practices that generate dust are
   regulated, including: leaving cultivated fields vacant and open to blowing
   winds, burning of crop residues to clear fields for new cultivation, and crop
   dusting for fertilization and pest control. Since agriculture contributes to the air
   quality issues in the region, the majority of the Imperial Valley Air Pollution
   Control District regulations relate to control of agricultural operations to reduce
   air pollution.
                                        COS-19

                              Conservation/Open Space Element
In an effort to reduce dust and particulate matter levels, the City will support
the Imperial County Air Pollution District in the implementation of its regulations
to control agricultural operations.
Air pollutants from vehicles are found in low concentration within El Centro
area. Because the population and average density of development are very
low, there is comparatively little air pollution from vehicular activity. In order to
keep the low levels of air pollutants generated from vehicles in the future, the
City will integrate air quality planning with land use and transportation planning.
Future geothermal energy production in Imperial County may generate a
significant amount of air pollutants. The noncondensible gases that could be
emitted from cooling towers would be primarily carbon dioxide, but could
include hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, nitrogen, ammonia, methane, and
hydrogen. Dissolved in precipitation, these products are highly corrosive to
living tissue and to exposed metals and common surface coatings such as
paints and plastics.
In order to protect the air quality in the Imperial Valley, the City will continue to
cooperate with the Imperial Valley Air Pollution Control District and Southern
California Association of Governments in their efforts to implement the regional
Air Quality Management Plan.
Figure COS-2
Salton Sea Air Basin
                                     COS-20
                                 Conservation/Open Space Element
Health and Safety
Agricultural Activities
   The City is surrounded by thousands of acres of prime farmland that have
   transformed the desert into one of the most productive farming regions in
   California. The extensive irrigation canal system is responsible for much of this
   transformation. Recently, much of the most productive farmlands lie on the
   fringe of developing areas. Residential land uses adjacent to farmlands are
   potentially subject to health and safety conflicts. For example, unsupervised
   children often have easy access to the irrigation canals, and airborne drift of
   chemicals from pesticide and crop dusting may adversely affect the residential
   population. The City will develop controls to restrict access to the irrigation
   canal system from residential uses and continue to monitor and control
   agricultural activities, including pesticide and crop dusting, as allowed by law.
   This can be done by designating land buffers between the two different land
   uses, and pesticide spraying can be conducted from the ground in agricultural
   areas in proximity to residences. Additionally, the use, storage, and transport of
   pesticides are strictly regulated by the State.
Geologic Hazards
   As discussed in the Safety Element, the Imperial Valley is one of the most
   tectonically active regions in the United States. Since the Imperial Valley area is
   subject to frequent seismic events, there are concerns relating to ground
   shaking and liquefaction. The composition of geologic strata (bedrock and
   soil) determines what can be expected from an area as a result of ground
   shaking. It is therefore important to know the soil makeup in order to determine
   the design of structures proposed for an area. The City reduces the risks of
   impacts from geologic hazards by applying proper development engineering,
   building construction, and retrofitting requirements.
Flooding
   The City of El Centro includes a small area on the eastern portion of the City
   within the 100-year flood hazard area. As depicted in Figure S-2 of the Safety
   Element, the flood hazard area is located in the vicinity of the intersection of
   Earls Road and East Gillette Street. Additionally, there is a small 100-year flood
   hazard area on the eastern portion of the City’s sphere of influence, between
   Evan Hewes Highway and Interstate 8. As discussed in the Safety Element, the
   City will continue to fund needed infrastructure improvements, identifying new
   funding sources as necessary. The City will also promote programs and actions
   that educate the public about flood hazards and reduce the risk of flood losses.
                                       COS-21

                               Conservation/Open Space Element
Geothermal Resources
  Thermal water of sufficient temperature for direct heat application underlies the
  Salton Trough at shallow depths. Distributed throughout the Trough are areas of
  hotter fluids suitable for electrical generation. Figure COS-3 shows the known
  distribution geothermal resource areas in the region. The City plans to educate
  the public and encourage utilization of geothermal resources, as well as
  develop the resources in a planned and efficiently managed manner.
  Subsidence, a phenomenon associated with groundwater withdrawal and can
  occur as a result of geothermal energy generation; however, the potential is
  considered low to moderate on the valley floor under the current hydrological
  conditions. Due to the poor groundwater quality, little use is made of the
  existing groundwater resource.         Poor groundwater quality and irrigation
  practices employing imported water in the Imperial Valley result in groundwater
  basin recharge exceeding extraction; therefore; creating rising groundwater
  levels. In addition, as discussed above, future geothermal energy production in
  Imperial County may generate a significant amount of air pollutants.
  The City will coordinate with the Imperial County and State regulatory agencies
  to plan for the environmentally safe extraction of geothermal resources.
  Additionally, the City plans to develop the resources in a planned and
  efficiently managed manner by discouraging wasteful use, minimizing
  environmental impacts, and prolonging the economic production life of this
  resource.
Energy Conservation
  A tight energy market and sometimes insufficient power supply highlights the
  continued need for both private and public energy conservation. Additionally,
  pollutants are generated by the combustion of fossil fuels to produce electricity
  and by the combustion of natural gas. Reducing energy usage decreases the
  amount of pollutants generated. The City supports reducing energy demand
  by encouraging the use of passive solar design concepts and the retrofitting of
  older buildings with energy-conserving features. The City will also provide
  incentives for subdivision plans that incorporate energy conserving design.
  Recycling of waste resources including aluminum, glass, and newspaper, waste
  heat and the application of direct geothermal energy is also supported by the
  City.
                                       COS-22
                          Conservation/Open Space Element
The City promotes energy conservation by implementing energy conservation
measures in public buildings, and implementing State Title 24 energy
performance requirements through building codes. In addition, the relationship
between project design and future energy requirements is considered when
reviewing proposals for new development.
                                 COS-23
                        Conservation/OS Implementation Program
                 CONSERVATION/
                 OPEN SPACE
                 ELEMENT
                 E l   C e n t r o   G e n e r a l   P l a n
  This Implementation Program provides actions to implement the adopted policies
  and plans identified in the Conservation/Open Space Element.                  The
  Conservation/Open Space Element Implementation Program is a series of actions,
  procedures and techniques that includes a description of the responsible
  agency/department, funding source, time frame and related policies in the
  Conservation/Open Space Element.
Agricultural and Soils Conservation
  COS-1: Agricultural Preservation: Use development incentives such as priority
  project processing, density bonuses, and infrastructure improvements to
  encourage redevelopment and infill projects that reduce development pressure
  on agricultural lands.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Planning and Zoning, County of Imperial
  Funding Source: General Fund
  Time Frame: Ongoing
  Related Policies: 1.1, 1.5
  COS-2: Agricultural Buffers: Encourage the provision and maintenance of
  buffers, such as roadways, topographic features, and open space, to prevent
  incompatibilities between agricultural and non-agricultural land uses. During the
  development review process, a number of factors shall be used to determine the
  appropriate buffer, including the type of agricultural use, topography, and
  pesticide and machinery use.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Planning and Zoning, County of Imperial
  Funding Source: General Fund
  Time Frame: Ongoing
  Related Policies: 1.1, 1.5
                                      A-14
                        Conservation/OS Implementation Program
Water Conservation
  COS-3: Promote Water Conservation: Work with the Imperial Irrigation District to
  encourage water conservation throughout El Centro in the following ways:
       Require the use of drought resistant plant species in landscaping for private
        and public areas, including parks;
       Utilize xeriscape principles in all new parks, recreation facilities, public
        buildings and private developments.
       Work with the City and the El Centro Unified School District to establish water
        conservation educational programs; and
       Require the incorporation of water conservation devices (including low-flush
        toilets, flow restriction devices and water conservation appliances) in new
        development, public projects and rehabilitation projects.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Planning and Zoning, Public Works, Parks and
  Recreation, Imperial Irrigation District, El Centro Elementary School District, Central
  Union High School District, McCabe Union Elementary School District
  Funding Source: General Fund, project proponent
  Time Frame: Ongoing
  Related Policies: 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.5
  COS-4: 4.4 Plan: Support California's "4.4 Plan"; an ongoing effort to reduce
  California's use of Colorado River water to 4.4 million acre-feet per year,
  California’s entitled amount.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Development Services, Public Works
  Funding Source: General Fund
  Time Frame: Ongoing
  Related Policies: 2.1, 2.2
  COS-5: Water Recycling: Implement water recycling in El Centro in the following
  ways:
      Apply for funding for a Recycled Water Feasibility Study from the State
        Water Resources Control Board;
      Conduct Feasibility Study;
      Implement recommendations through the CIP process, a new recycled
        water use ordinance (if appropriate) and requirements for new
        development.
                                          A-15

                        Conservation/OS Implementation Program
  Responsible Agency/Department: Public Works
  Funding Source: Water/Wastewater Enterprise Fund, SWRCB Grants
  Time Frame: Ongoing
  Related Policies: 2.4
Open Space and Natural Resources
  COS-6:     Subdivision Ordinance: Continue to implement and enforce the
  subdivision ordinance that contains provisions for the dedication of land for park
  and recreational purposes. The ordinance requires a land dedication calculated
  on a basis of a ratio of five acres of park for each 1,000 residents generated by
  the project. A fee can be paid in lieu of land dedication and the collection of
  these and fees and other funds can be used to set up a revolving fund to be used
  for the acquisition of park and open space lands.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Planning and Zoning, Parks and Recreation,
  Public Works
  Funding Source: General Fund, development fees, project proponent
  Time Frame: Ongoing
  Related Policies: 3.1
  COS-7: Zoning Ordinance: Continue to promote the Planned Unit Development
  (PUD) provision in the Zoning Ordinance. PUDs are a way to encourage the
  development of residential environments containing more usable open space
  than provided under traditional development standards.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Planning and Zoning, Parks and Recreation
  Funding Source: General Fund
  Time Frame: Ongoing
  Related Policies: 3.1, 3.3, 3.4
  COS-8: Protect Natural Resources: Assess development proposals for potential
  impacts to significant natural and aesthetic resources pursuant to the California
  Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and associated federal regulations. Require
  appropriate mitigation for all significant impacts if impact avoidance is not
  possible.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Planning and Zoning, Parks and Recreation
  Funding Source: General Fund, development fees
  Time Frame: Ongoing
  Related Policies 3.2
                                       A-16
                         Conservation/OS Implementation Program
  COS-9: “Embrace the Desert”: Invest in the City programs and facilities that
  highlight the unique value of the landscape and appropriate use of materials. City
  investments should include an Environmental Education Program and a Desert
  Demonstration Garden.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Planning and Zoning, Parks and Recreation,
  Finance.
  Funding Source: General Fund, Development Impact Fees, Water Enterprise Fund.
  Time Frame: Ongoing
  Related Policies: 4.1, 4.2
Community and Historic Resources
  COS-10: California Environmental Quality Act: Continue to assess development
  proposals for potential impacts to sensitive historic, archaeological, and
  paleontological resources pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act
  (CEQA). Require appropriate mitigation for all significant impacts if impact
  avoidance is not possible.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Planning and Zoning
  Funding Source: General Fund, development fees
  Time Frame: Ongoing
  Related Policies: 5.1
  COS-11: Downtown Business District: Continue to implement and update as
  necessary the recommendations of the Downtown Business District Study as one
  method of maintaining and enhancing the downtown area to retain the
  character of the central area, with its arcades and store fronts, and to create a
  more lively and vibrant city center.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Redevelopment, Planning and Zoning
  Funding Source: Redevelopment funds, General Fund, private business investment
  Time Frame: Ongoing
  Related Policies: 5.2
  COS-12: Local Awareness of Community Heritage: Foster local awareness of El
  Centro’s heritage by:
        Implementing a program of recognition, for example, the placement of
         plaques or markers to highlight the significance of a building or place;
        Investigating the eligibility of local buildings for listing in the national, State,
         or local register of historic places;
                                           A-17

                         Conservation/OS Implementation Program
        Designating historic landmarks, recognizing a building, structure, site or
         collection of buildings or sites which are found by the City Council to have
         historic, cultural, or architectural significance;
        Purchasing development rights to important buildings or property so as to
         provide protection from alteration or destruction; and
        Purchasing and re-selling important buildings or property with a covenant
         and reverter clause in the deed, restricting changes in the structure of the
         place.
   Responsible Agency/Department: Public Works, Redevelopment, Finance
   Funding Source: General Fund, redevelopment funds
   Time Frame: Ongoing
   Related Policies: 5.1
Air Quality
   COS-13: Participation in Regional Air Quality Programs: Work with the Imperial
   County Air Pollution Control District and the Southern California Association of
   Governments (SCAG) to implement the Air Quality Management Plan and meet
   federal and State air quality standards for all pollutants. Participate in future
   amendments and updates of the AQMP to ensure that new measures can be
   practically enforced in the region.
   Responsible Agency/Department: Planning and Zoning, Public Works, Imperial
   County Air Pollution Control District, SCAG
   Funding Source: General Fund, state and federal funds
   Time Frame: Ongoing
   Related Policies: 6.1, 6.2
   COS-14:      Minimize Impacts of New Development:            Review development
   proposals for potential air quality impacts pursuant to the California Environmental
   Quality Act. Reduce impacts using available land use and transportation
   planning techniques such as:
        Incorporation of public transit stops;
        Pedestrian and bicycle linkage to commercial centers, employment
         centers, schools and parks;
        Preferential parking for car pools;
        Traffic flow improvements; and
        Employer trip reduction programs.
                                           A-18

                        Conservation/OS Implementation Program
  Responsible Agency/Department: Public Works, Planning and Zoning, Imperial
  County Air Pollution Control District, SCAG
  Funding Source: General Fund, development fees, project proponent, state and
  federal funds
  Time Frame: Ongoing
  Related Policies: 6.3
  COS-15: Control Dust and Particulate Matter: To reduce dust and particulate
  matter levels, support the Imperial County Air Pollution Control District in the
  implementation of its regulations, including ICAPCD Rule 800 to control agricultural
  operations.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Planning and Zoning, Public Works, Imperial
  County Air Pollution Control District
  Funding Source: General Fund, state and federal funds
  Time Frame: Ongoing
  Related Policies: 6.1, 6.2
Health and Safety
  COS-16: Irrigation Canal System: Develop controls to restrict access to the existing
  irrigation canal system from residential areas where unsupervised children
  currently have easy access. Require developers to underground the canals and
  laterals as new development occurs adjacent to existing open drainage facilities,
  as allowed by the Imperial Irrigation District.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Planning and Zoning, Public Works, Imperial
  Irrigation District
  Funding Source: General Fund, water usage fees, state and federal funds
  Time Frame: Ongoing
  Related Policies: 7.1, 7.2
  COS-17: Pesticides and Crop Dusting: To the extent allowed by law, restrict the
  type and method of spraying activities related to agricultural use of pesticides
  and crop dusting within the City’s area of influence to reduce the adverse effect
  from airborne drift of chemicals into adjacent residential areas.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Community Development, County Agriculture
   Commission
  Funding Source: General Fund
  Time Frame: Ongoing
  Related Policies: 7.3
                                          A-19

                       Conservation/OS Implementation Program
Geothermal Resources
  COS-18: Regulate Geothermal Activity: Regulate any geothermal activity within
  the City with the goal of:
    Ensuring that the loss of productive agricultural lands due to geothermal
     development is minimized;
    Preventing geothermally-induced subsidence or seismicity; and
    Ensuring that local goals and concerns are taken into account in the formation
     of geothermal production policies and that the public is well informed about
     the effects of resource extraction and use.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Planning and Zoning
  Funding Source: General Fund
  Time Frame: Ongoing
  Related Policies: 8.1, 8.2, 8.3
  COS-19: Promote Benefits of Geothermal Resources: In an effort to educate the
  public and promote the use of geothermal resources, the City shall:
       Promote the varied and experimental application of direct geothermal
        energy to activities within the City area;
       Support the development of a skills center for training local residents
        specific geothermal related skills required in local resource production;
       Encourage local business and industry to consider how direct geothermal
        energy could be applied to their energy needs;
       Continue to search out funding sources for experimental and demonstration
        projects adapting geothermal direct energy to industrial processing and to
        space heating and cooling; and
       Encourage factories and businesses that utilize geothermal energy to
        maintain an “open shop,” allowing visitors to tour the facilities, in order to
        gain an understanding of the resource and its use.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Planning and Zoning
  Funding Source: General Fund
  Time Frame: Ongoing
  Related Policies: 8.4, 8.5, 9.4
                                        A-20

                         Conservation/OS Implementation Program
Energy Conservation
  COS-20: Implement State Energy Performance Requirements:                  Continue to
  implement building code requirements for energy performance according to Title
  24 Energy Regulations to meet State energy conservation requirements.
  Encourage project proponents to incorporate energy conservation techniques in
  proposed projects. Provide brochures with information on energy efficient
  building and site design at the public counter.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Public Works
  Funding Source: General Fund, project proponent
  Time Frame: Ongoing
  Related Policies: 9.1, 9.2, 9.3
  COS-21: Energy Efficient Public Buildings: Implement energy conservation
  measures in public buildings through the following actions:
        Promote energy efficient building and site design for all new public buildings
         during the site development permit process; and install energy saving
         devices in new public buildings and retrofit existing public buildings.
        Utilize light colored asphalt and light colored resin pavements which
         minimize the “heat island” effect caused by darker pavements.
        Utilize passive solar techniques; trees, architectural shading devices, etc.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Planning and Zoning, Public Works
  Funding Source: General Fund
  Time Frame: Ongoing
  Related Policies: 9.1, 9.2, 9.3
  COS-22: Promote Energy Retrofit Programs: Promote retrofit programs by the
  City to reduce energy usage and consequently reduce emissions from energy
  consumption. Provide informational literature about available retrofit programs at
  City offices.     Inform property owners of retrofit programs when plans for
  remodeling and rehabilitation projects are submitted.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Public Works
  Funding Source: General Fund
  Time Frame: Ongoing
  Related Policies: 9.1
                                         A-21

                      Conservation/OS Implementation Program
COS-23: Coordination with Suppliers: Require project proponents to coordinate
with IID and the Southern California Gas Company early in the development of
development plans.
Responsible Agency/Department: Planning and Zoning
Funding Source: General Fund, developer fees, user fees
Time Frame: Ongoing
Related Policies: 9
COS-24: Local Resource Recycling: Remain compliant with AB 939 and increase
recycling activities to maintain the mandated 50 percent waste diversion goal.
Specifically, encourage the recycling of waste resources including aluminum,
glass, and newspaper.
Responsible Agency/Department: Public Works
Funding Source: General Fund
Time Frame: Ongoing
Related Policies: 9.1
                                     A-22
            City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element
      Adopted September 3, 2013
                  City of El Centro
 Community Development Department
              1275 W. Main Street
              El Centro, CA 92243

        City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element
             City Council
 Benjamin James Solomon III, Mayor
Cheryl Viegas-Walker, Mayor Pro-Tem
   Jason Jackson, Council Member
  Sedalia Sanders, Council Member
     Efrain Silva, Council Member
        Planning Commission
    Harold M. Walk, Jr., Chairman
    David H. West, Commissioner
   Darian Dax Chell, Commissioner
    Evelia Jimenez, Commissioner
   Sergio A. Lopez, Commissioner
   Ron N. Merideth, Commissioner
   Marcela Miranda, Commissioner
                City Staff
  Norma M. Villicaña, AICP, Director
  Michael Coyne, Assistant Planner
             Consultants
    Veronica Tam, AICP, Principal
  Rick Brady, AICP, Senior Planner






Table of Contents
1.1. Legislative Requirements .............................................................................................................................1
     1.2. Relationship with Other General Plan Elements ..................................................................... 2
     1.3. Public Participation ................................................................................................................. 2
2. Community Profile .......................................................................................................................... 5
     2.1.   Demographic Profile ............................................................................................................... 5
     2.2.   Economic Profile ..................................................................................................................... 7
     2.3.   Household Characteristics .................................................................................................... 11
     2.4.   Housing Problems ................................................................................................................ 13
     2.5.   Special Needs....................................................................................................................... 17
     2.6.   Housing Stock Characteristics .............................................................................................. 27
     2.7.   Housing Cost and Affordability .............................................................................................. 31
     2.8.   Affordable Housing ............................................................................................................... 35
3. Housing Constraints .................................................................................................................... 41
     3.1.   Market Constraints ................................................................................................................ 41
     3.2.   Governmental Constraints .................................................................................................... 45
     3.3.   Public Policy Constraints ...................................................................................................... 67
     3.4.   Utility and Public Service Constraints ................................................................................... 68
     3.5.   Environmental Constraints .................................................................................................... 71
4. Housing Resources ...................................................................................................................... 73
     4.1.   Residential Development Potential ....................................................................................... 73
     4.2.   Financial Resources ............................................................................................................. 78
     4.3.   Administrative Resources ..................................................................................................... 79
     4.4.   Opportunities for Energy Conservation ................................................................................. 80
5. Housing Plan................................................................................................................................. 81
     5.1    Goals and Policies ................................................................................................................ 81
     5.2    Housing Programs ................................................................................................................ 85
     5.3    Summary of Quantified Objectives ....................................................................................... 95
Appendix A: Outreach Efforts .......................................................................................................... A-1
     A.1. Joint Study Session and Outreach List ................................................................................A-1
     A.2. Public Service Provider Interviews .......................................................................................A-3
     A.3. Draft Housing Element – Public Meeting .............................................................................A-4
Appendix B: Review of Past Accomplishments ............................................................................. B-1
Appendix C: Sites Inventory ............................................................................................................ C-1
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                                           Page i

List of Tables
Table 1: Population Trends – El Centro and Neighboring Cities (1990-2010) ........................................................ 5 
Table 2: Population by Age Trends (2000-2010) .................................................................................................... 6 
Table 3: Population by Race and Ethnicity (2010) .................................................................................................. 7 
Table 4: Employment by Industry Type (2009-2011) .............................................................................................. 7 
Table 5: Employment by Commuting Patterns (2007-2011) ................................................................................... 8 
Table 6: Household Income (1990-2011) ................................................................................................................ 9 
Table 7: Median Household Income Trends (2000-2011) ..................................................................................... 10 
Table 8: Households by Income Categories (2005-2009) ..................................................................................... 10 
Table 9: Household Trends (1990-2010) .............................................................................................................. 11 
Table 10: Average Persons-Per-Household Trends (2000-2010) ......................................................................... 12 
Table 11: Household Size Trends (2000-2010) .................................................................................................... 12 
Table 12: Tenure (2000-2010) .............................................................................................................................. 13 
Table 13: Housing Type by Tenure (2011) ........................................................................................................... 13 
Table 14: Housing Assistance Needs of Lower Income Households (2006-2008) ............................................... 15 
Table 15: Overcrowded Units by Tenure (2011) ................................................................................................... 17 
Table 16: Special Needs Groups (2007-2011) ...................................................................................................... 17 
Table 17: Senior Population Trends (65+) (1990-2010) ........................................................................................ 18 
Table 18: Senior Household Trends (65+) (2000-2010) ....................................................................................... 18 
Table 19: Disabilities Tallied (2009- 2011) ............................................................................................................ 20 
Table 20: Household Type and Presence of Children 18 Years Old and Under (2010)....................................... 23 
Table 21: Households by Poverty Level (2007-2011) ........................................................................................... 24 
Table 22: Farm workers (2000-2011) .................................................................................................................... 25 
Table 23: Homeless Resources ............................................................................................................................ 26 
Table 24: Housing Unit Growth (1990-2010)......................................................................................................... 28 
Table 25: Housing Age .......................................................................................................................................... 30 
Table 26: Changes in Median Home Sale Prices (2010-2012) ............................................................................. 31 
Table 27: Median and Average Rents by Number of Bedrooms (2012-2013) ...................................................... 32 
Table 28: Affordable Housing Costs by Household Size and Tenure (2013) ........................................................ 34 
Table 29: Assisted Housing In El Centro (2012) ................................................................................................... 36 
Table 30: Market Value of At-Risk Housing Units ................................................................................................. 38 
Table 31: Rental Subsidies Required .................................................................................................................... 38 
Table 32: Estimated New Construction Costs ....................................................................................................... 39 
Table 33: Disposition of Home Loans (2011) ........................................................................................................ 43 
Table 34: Land Use Designations that Allow Residential Uses............................................................................. 45 
Table 35: Zoning Districts that Allow Residential Uses ......................................................................................... 48 
Table 36: Residential Development Standards by Zoning District ........................................................................ 49 
Table 37: Off-Street Residential Parking Requirements ....................................................................................... 51 
Table 38: Provision for a Variety of Housing Types .............................................................................................. 53 
Table 39: Circulation Element Roadway Standards .............................................................................................. 58 
Table 40: Permit Processing Fees ........................................................................................................................ 59 
Table 41: Development Impact Fees .................................................................................................................... 60 
Table 42: Development Fees for a Typical Unit .................................................................................................... 60 
Table 43: Residential Sites Inventory (Summary) ................................................................................................. 74 
Table 44: Adequacy of Sites to Accommodate the 2014-2021 RHNA ................................................................. 76 
Table 45: 2008-2014 Housing Element RHNA Analysis ....................................................................................... 77 
Table 46: Vacant Parcels Omitted from 2008-2014 Housing Element RHNA Analysis ........................................ 78 
Table 47: Quantified Objectives ............................................................................................................................ 95 
                                                                                                                                           City of El Centro
Page ii                                                                                                                  2013-2021 Housing Element

List of Figures
Figure 1: Senior Households by Tenure (1990-2010) ........................................................................................... 19 
Figure 2: Distribution of Housing Units (2000-2011) ............................................................................................. 28 
Figure 3: Vacant Units by Housing Type (2000-2011) .......................................................................................... 29 
Figure 4: Median Home Sales Prices (2012) ........................................................................................................ 32 
Figure 5: Income Needed to Afford Housing Compared With Wages .................................................................. 35 
Figure 6: Shared Parking in the Downtown Commercial (CD) Zone ..................................................................... 52 
 
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                                  Page iii


1. Introduction
1.1. Legislative Requirements
The Housing Element is one of seven elements required to be included in the City’s General
Plan. State law identifies the subjects that must be addressed in a Housing Element. These
guidelines are identified in Article 10.6 of the State of California Government Code (Sections
65580 et seq.).
State law specifies that the Housing Element must assess housing needs and evaluate the
current housing market in the City and then identify programs that will meet housing
needs. The housing market evaluation includes a review of housing stock characteristics as
well as housing cost, household incomes, special need households, availability of land and
infrastructure and various other factors.          Also included in this evaluation is the
community’s “Regional Housing Needs Allocation” (RHNA) which provides an estimate of
the number of housing units that should be provided in the community to meet its share of
new households in the region. In addition to this information, the Housing Element
document must evaluate and review its past housing programs and consider this review in
planning future housing strategies.
The City’s previous Housing Element was adopted in 2009. Until recently, Housing
Elements have been required to be updated every five years, unless otherwise extended by
State law. Senate Bill 375, enacted in 2008, established an eight-year cycle for housing
element updates. The statutory planning period for this Housing Element begins on October
15, 2013 and extends through October 15, 2021. However, the RHNA period begins January
1, 2014, and extends through October 31, 2021.
The 2013-2021 Housing Element is subject to review by the California Department of
Housing and Community Development (HCD) for compliance with applicable State laws.
A critical component of HCD’s review of the Housing Element is the local jurisdiction’s
ability in accommodating its RHNA through land use planning efforts. Compliance with
this requirement is measured by the jurisdiction’s ability in providing adequate land with
adequate density and appropriate development standards to accommodate the RHNA. The
Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG), as the regional planning agency,
is responsible for allocating the RHNA to individual jurisdictions within the region. For the
2013-2021 Housing Element update for the City of El Centro, SCAG has assigned a RHNA
of 1,924 units, in the following income distribution:
         Very Low Income:                    487 units
         Low Income:                         300 units
         Moderate Income:                    297 units
         Above Moderate Income:              840 units
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                               Page 1

1.2. Relationship with Other General Plan Elements
The current General Plan for the City of El Centro was adopted in 2004 and has seven
elements in addition to this Housing Element: 1) Land Use; 2) Economic Development; 3)
Circulation; 4) Public Facilities; 5) Conservation/Open Space; 6) Safety; and 7) Noise. Each
of these components addresses subject matter required for one or more of the mandatory
general plan elements. Some components also address subject matter which the City is
permitted, but not required, to address.
As required by State law, internal consistency is required among the various elements of the
General Plan, including the Housing Element. This 2013-2021 Housing Element is
consistent with the General Plan and subsequent amendments to the 2004 Plan.
State law also requires that the Conservation Element (AB 162, enacted 2009) and Safety
Element (SB 1241, enacted 2012) include an analysis and policies regarding flood hazard and
management information upon revisions to the Housing Element. Although these revisions
are not related to Housing Element law, the City will ensure compliance with this
requirement by reviewing its Conservation and Safety Elements.
1.3. Public Participation
The City of El Centro offers ample opportunities for the public to comment on housing-
related issues and on the Draft 2013-2021 Housing Element. A list of agencies and
organizations contacted to participate in the planning process and detailed summary of
comments is contained in Appendix A.
A.      Study Session
On January 29, 2013, the City conducted a joint study session with the Planning Commission
and City Council to discuss the Housing Element update process and solicit stakeholder and
public comments on housing issues and needs. Notices of the meeting were published in
English and Spanish in the Imperial Valley Press. The notices were also posted on City
website and flyers were made available at public counters. In addition, special invitations
were sent to housing developers, advocates, community stakeholders, and agencies that
serve the housing and supportive service needs of lower and moderate income persons, as
well as those with special housing needs. Agencies and organizations invited to attend the
study session are listed in Appendix A. The meeting was attended by 18 members of the
public and representatives of the development community and non-profit organizations.
B.      Telephone Interviews
A number of developers and service providers that are active in El Centro but did not attend
the study session were contacted by phone to discuss El Centro’s housing issues and needs.
The list of organizations interviewed and a summary of each conversation is included in
Appendix A.
                                                                                 City of El Centro
Page 2                                                                 2013-2021 Housing Element

C.        Draft Housing Element Review
The City conducted a public meeting before the Planning Commission on May 14, 2013 and
City Council on June 4, 2013 to review to the draft Housing Element. To solicit input from
supportive service and housing providers, the City sent special notices of the public meeting
to housing developers and professionals, as well as agencies that serve or represent the
interest of lower and moderate income households and persons with special housing needs.
The City also advertised the availability of the Housing Element for public review in English
and Spanish in the Imperial Valley Press and in Spanish in the Adelante Valle, a Spanish
language newspaper. The Housing Element outreach list is presented in Appendix A.
D.        Adoption Hearings
For the adoption of the 2013-2021 Housing Element, the City conducted public hearings
before the Planning Commission (August 13, 2013) and City Council (September 3, 02013). .
Notices for these hearings were published in the Imperial Valley Press and posted on City
website.
E.        Summary of Public Comments and City Responses
Overall, there is a concern about how the City will finance affordable housing projects after
the State’s dissolution of the City’s Redevelopment Agency. Housing for lower income
households (including extremely low income households), seniors, large households, and
persons with disabilities are among some of the key issues raised during the public
participation process of this Housing Element update.
The Housing Element addresses these needs through a variety of programs targeted to
conserve the existing affordable housing stock (Program 11), facilitate construction of new
affordable housing (Program 3), and coordinate with and fund social service agencies,
including organizations that support extremely low income seniors and persons with
disabilities (Program 9).
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                               Page 3


 2. Community Profile
 The purpose of this section is to summarize and analyze the existing housing conditions in
 the City of El Centro. This section contains an analysis of population trends, employment
 trends, household trends and special needs groups within the City.
 2.1. Demographic Profile
 When evaluating housing needs, analysis of demographic variables such as population,
 employment, and households is essential in order to assess the present and future housing
 needs of a city or county. This section presents data gathered from the following sources:
 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey (ACS), Comprehensive Housing
 Affordability Strategy (CHAS), U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
 (HUD), California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD), California
 Employment Development Department, Southern California Association of Governments
 (SCAG), Imperial Valley Housing Authority (IVHA), DataQuick, and Craigslist.org.
 A. Population Trends
 Between 1990 and 2000, the population in El Centro increased by 6,451 residents (or 20.6
 percent), from 31,384 to 37,835 residents, for an average annual growth rate of 2.1 percent.
 As shown in Table 1, over the subsequent decade, from 2000 to 2010, the population
 increased by an additional 4,763 persons (or 12.6 percent) for an average annual growth rate
 of approximately 1.3 percent. Although El Centro is the largest City in Imperial County
 and the seat of County Government, the City’s growth rate was substantially smaller than
 the County’s growth rate between 1990 and 2010 (35.7 percent versus 59.7 percent). The
 City’s growth rate was also substantially lower than many of the County’s incorporated
 cities.
Table 1: Population Trends – El Centro and Neighboring Cities (1990-2010)
                                                                                  Change
              City                       1990       2000      2010              (1990-2010)
                                                                        # of Persons    % of Total
El Centro                                   31,384     37,835    42,598        11,214        35.7%
Calexico                                    18,633     27,109    38,572        19,939       107.0%
Brawley                                     18,923     22,052    24,953         6,030        31.9%
Imperial                                      4,113     7,560    14,758        10,645       258.8%
Holtville                                     4,820     5,612     5,939         1,119        23.2%
Westmorland                                   1,380     2,131     2,225           845        61.2%
Imperial County                            109,303    142,361   174,528        65,225        59.7%
Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1990-2010.
 City of El Centro
 2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                  Page 5

B. Age Trends
As shown in Table 2, over the last ten years, the City of El Centro has experienced an
increase in the number of persons in almost every age group. The most significant growth
occurred in the middle age and older adult age groups (ages 50+), where the City’s oldest
residents (those ages 85 and older) had the largest proportional increase (89.6 percent).
Despite this growth, El Centro residents ages 17 and under continue to represent the largest
proportional share of the City’s population, with residents 6-13 years (12.8 percent) and
under 5 years of age (9.5 percent) being the largest. This age structure reflects a family-
oriented community. As of 2010, the median age in the City was 29.9 years of age, which is
essentially unchanged since 2000.
   Table 2: Population by Age Trends (2000-2010)
                                                   2000                            2010
        Age Group
                                  # of Persons          % of Total    # of Persons        % of Total
   Under 5 Years                              3,161            10.2%           4,032               9.5%
   6-13 Years                                 6,668            15.7%           5,530              12.8%
   14-17 Years                                2,935              7.8%          3,109               7.3%
   18-20 Years                                1,792              4.7%          2,196               5.2%
   21-24 Years                                1,879              5.0%          2,607               6.1%
   25-29 Years                                2,547              6.7%          2,871               6.7%
   30-34 Years                                2,669              7.1%          2,548               6.0%
   35-39 Years                                2,875              7.6%          2,539               6.0%
   40-44 Years                                2,841              7.5%          2,703               6.3%
   45-49 Years                                2,488              6.6%          2,786               6.5%
   50-54 Years                                1,950              5.2%          2,834               6.7%
   55-59 Years                                1,383              3.7%          2,356               5.5%
   60-64 Years                                1,166              3.1%          1,931               4.5%
   65-69 Years                                1,057              2.8%          1,404               3.3%
   70-74 Years                                1,006              2.7%          1,037               2.4%
   75-79 Years                                   694             1.8%            894               2.1%
   80-84 Years                                   473             1.3%            654               1.5%
   85+ Years                                     299             0.8%            567               1.3%
   Median Age                                      30.0                            29.9
   Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2000-2010.
C. Race/Ethnicity
According to the 2010 Census, the racial/ethnic composition of City residents was very
similar to that of County residents. As shown in Table 3, approximately 81.6 percent of the
City’s population categorized themselves as Hispanic (of any race) with the remaining
population identifying themselves as non-Hispanic (of one or more races): White (13.5
percent), Black or African American (2.0 percent), American Indian/Alaska Native (0.2
percent), Asian (1.8 percent), Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander (less than 0.1 percent), and
Other Race or multiple race individuals (0.8 percent).
                                                                                           City of El Centro
Page 6                                                                           2013-2021 Housing Element

        Table 3: Population by Race and Ethnicity (2010)
                                                         City of El Centro                  Imperial County
                      Category
                                                    # of Persons % of Total           # of Persons % of Total
        Not Hispanic or Latino                              7,847           18.4%            34,257        19.6%
        White                                               5,758           13.5%            23,927        13.7%
        Black or African American                             864            2.0%             5,114         2.9%
        American Indian/Alaska Native                           95           0.2%             1,642         0.9%
        Asian                                                 785            1.8%             2,201         1.3%
        Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander                        19          <0.1%                87        <0.1%
        Other Races or 2+ Races                               326            0.8%             1,286         0.7%
        Hispanic or Latino (any race)                      34,751           81.6%           140,271        80.4%
        Total                                              42,598          100.0%           174,528       100.0%
        Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2010.
2.2. Economic Profile
A. Employment
According to the 2009-2011 American Community Survey (ACS), the City’s labor force in
2011 consisted of 18,975 people and the unemployment rate was 18.7 percent. The
occupational category employing the most El Centro residents was management, business,
science, and arts, which employed 26.1 percent of the City’s workforce (see Table 4). In
terms of total employment, the second largest occupational category in El Centro was
service.
           Table 4: Employment by Industry Type (2009-2011)
                                                                                                 2009-2011
                                       Occupational Category                                   % of Employed
                                                                                                  Persons
           Management, Business, Science, and Arts Occupations                                          26.1%
           Service Occupations                                                                          25.8%
           Sales and Office Occupations                                                                 24.5%
           Natural Resources, Construction, and Maintenance Occupations                                 10.7%
           Production, Transportation, and Material Moving Occupations                                  12.8%
           Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, American Community Survey (ACS), 2009-2011.
As shown in Table 5, between 2007 and 2011, most of the City’s labor force lived fairly near
their place of employment. The mean travel time to work was 17.7 minutes; approximately
52.5 percent of commuters in the City traveled less than 15 minutes each way to work and
27.6 percent commuted less than 10 minutes.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                        Page 7

                    Table 5: Employment by Commuting Patterns (2007-2011)
                                                                     % of Employed
                               Commute to Work
                                                                          Persons
                    Less than 10 minutes                                             27.6%
                    10 to 14 minutes                                                 24.9%
                    15 to 19 minutes                                                 17.0%
                    20 to 24 minutes                                                   9.4%
                    25 to 29 minutes                                                   5.5%
                    30 to 34 minutes                                                   7.1%
                    35 to 44 minutes                                                   1.3%
                    45 to 59 minutes                                                   2.2%
                    60 or more minutes                                                 5.0%
                    Mean travel time to work (minutes)                                  17.7
                    Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, American Community Survey (ACS), 2007-
                    2011.
According to the 2007-2011 ACS, only four persons (or less than one percent of employed
persons in the City) were classified as military personnel. However, Naval Air Facility
(NAF) El Centro is a military airport located just outside city limits, approximately six miles
northwest of the City. The facility was initially commissioned on May 1, 1946, as a Naval Air
Station. Prior to that, the base was a Marine Corps Air Station. For the first 35 years of its
existence, the mission of NAF El Centro was devoted to aeronautical escape system testing,
evaluation, and design. Over time, the facility has developed into an integral part of Naval
Aviation Training. Today, NAF El Centro provides realistic training to active and reserve
military units. Squadrons visit the installation and its associated ranges to practice gunnery,
bombing, carrier landings and air combat.
The installation provides employment for more than 1,300 area residents and contributes
over $115.5 million to the local economy each year. In addition to employing local residents,
each month, seven to twelve squadrons, totaling 150 to 1,600 military transient personnel,
train at NAF El Centro. These military personnel come from Navy, Marine Corps, Army,
and Air Force installations throughout the United States. Foreign military services also send
personnel to train at NAF El Centro. Many of these training deployments extend over 30
days, and the military personnel are dependent on many local businesses and services
during their long training deployments.
The City, along with various regional organizations and surrounding municipalities, are
currently involved in a campaign to have the Navy’s F35C Joint Strike Fighter squadron
based at NAF El Centro. NAF El Centro is one of two facilities up for consideration to house
the squadron, the other being Naval Air Station Lemoore in Central California. Should NAF
El Centro be chosen as the home base for this squadron, up to 600 additional on-base jobs
could be created. A corresponding increase in off-base jobs is expected as well.
                                                                                                  City of El Centro
Page 8                                                                                  2013-2021 Housing Element

B. Household Income
In 1989, a significant percentage of households in the City (32.1 percent) had annual incomes
less than $25,000 per year. In that same year, households with annual incomes over $75,000
accounted for 15.5 percent of total households. Between 1989 and 2011, the City’s
households became increasingly stratified economically. There were noticeable increases in
the overall number and proportion of households with lower (less than $25,000) and higher
incomes ($75,000 and greater), while the proportion of households earning middle incomes
($25,000 to $74,999) decreased. As illustrated in Table 6, as of 2011, the proportion of
households in the City of El Centro with incomes less than $25,000 per year comprised 37.1
percent of all households; this was slightly above the County average of 34.1 percent.
Approximately 36.5 percent of households had incomes between $25,000 and $74,999 per
year, while households with incomes greater than $75,000 per year represented 26.4 percent
of total households. Although this distribution of household income roughly mirrored the
countywide distribution, the income profile of El Centro’s households differed significantly
from households throughout the State. The 2007-2011 ACS reported that 19.8 percent of
California households had incomes below $25,000 (compared to 37.1 percent in El Centro)
and 28.8 percent of statewide households had incomes over $100,000 (compared to 16.2
percent in El Centro).
 Table 6: Household Income (1990-2011)
                                          1990                     2000                     2011
   Income Ranges                  # of                       # of                     # of
                                               % of Total               % of Total              % of Total
                             Households                   Households               Households
 Less Than $10,000                      675         7.0%        1,586       13.9%        1,294       9.9%
 $10,000-$14,999                      1,457        15.1%        1,071         9.4%       1,268       9.7%
 $15,000-$24,999                        966        10.0%        1,818       15.9%        2,292     17.5%
 $25,000-$34,999                      1,710        17.7%        1,401       12.2%        1,349     10.3%
 $35,000-$49,999                      1,399        14.5%        1,789       15.6%        1,491     11.4%
 $50,000-$74,999                      1,510        15.6%        2,089       18.2%        1,935     14.8%
 $75,000-$99,999                      1,291        13.4%          842         7.4%       1,337     10.2%
 $100,000+                              198         2.1%          853         7.5%       2,126      16.2%
 Total                                9,656      100.0%        11,449      100.0%       13,092    100.0%
 Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1990-2010.
In 2011, Imperial County’s median income was $39,402; the median income within the City
of El Centro was only slightly lower than the County median (see Table 7). The City’s
median income declined 7.8 percent between 2000 and 2011.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                           Page 9

      Table 7: Median Household Income Trends (2000-2011)
         Year          Median Income             $ Change                % Change           Annual % Change
      City of El Centro
      2000                       $41,534
      2011                       $38,297                 -$3,237                   -7.8%                  -0.8%
      Imperial County
      2000                       $38,724
      2011                       $39,402                    $678                    1.8%                   0.2%
      Sources: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2000; American Community Survey (ACS), 2007-2011.
For planning and funding purposes, the State Department of Housing and Community
Development (HCD) categorizes households into five income groups based on the County
Area Median Income (AMI):
       Extremely Low Income – up to 30 percent of AMI
       Very Low Income – 31 to 50 percent of AMI
       Low Income – 51 to 80 percent of AMI
       Moderate Income – 81 to 120 percent of AMI
       Above Moderate Income – greater than 120 percent of AMI
Combined, extremely low, very low, and low income households are often referred to as
lower income households.
The 2010 Census does not contain information on household income. However, the
Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) tabulated household income data
by using the 2005-2009 ACS. As shown in Table 8, between 2005 and 2009, approximately 40
percent of the City’s households earned lower incomes, while approximately 60 percent had
moderate or above moderate earned incomes.
         Table 8: Households by Income Categories (2005-2009)
                                                               City of El Centro                Imperial
                      Income Group
                                                      # of Households         % of Total       County %
         Extremely Low (30% or less)                              1,610             12.2%             12.1%
         Very Low (31 to 50%)                                     1,861             14.1%             13.8%
         Low (51 to 80%)                                          1,862             14.1%             16.1%
         Moderate (81 to 100%)                                    1,943             14.7%             15.4%
         Above Moderate (over 100%)                               5,952             45.0%             42.6%
         Total                                                   13,228            100.0%           100.0%
         Source: SCAG, 2005-2009.
                                                                                                       City of El Centro
Page 10                                                                                     2013-2021 Housing Element

2.3. Household Characteristics
A household is defined as all persons occupying a housing unit. Families are a subset of
households, and include all persons living together who are related by blood, marriage, or
adoption. Single households include persons living alone in housing units, but do not
include persons in group quarters such as convalescent homes or dormitories. Other
households are unrelated people living together, such as roommates.                         Household
characteristics play an important role in defining community needs. Household type,
income and tenure can help to identify special needs populations as well as other factors
that affect the housing needs of a community.
A. Household Type and Size
Household types and sizes can change even in periods of static population growth as adult
children leave home, married couples divorce, or with the general aging of the population.
The number of households in Imperial County has been increasing at a stable rate since
1990. Between 1990 and 2000, the number of households in the County increased by 20.0
percent to 39,384 units. During the same period, the number of households in the City
increased by only 12.4 percent.
According to data gathered from the Census (see Table 9), between 2000 and 2010, the City
of El Centro increased by 1,669 households (or 14.6 percent), bringing the total number of
households in the City to 13,108. El Centro’s growth rate, though steady, continued to be
well below the growth rate of the County overall. As of 2010, an estimated 49,126
households resided in the County; an increase of nearly 25 percent since 2000.
              Table 9: Household Trends (1990-2010)
                  Year        # of Households           # Change   % Change Annual % Change
              City of El Centro
              1990                         10,179
              2000                         11,439            1,260    12.4%            1.2%
              2010                         13,108            1,669    14.6%            1.5%
              Imperial County
              1990                         32,831
              2000                         39,384            6,553    20.0%            2.0%
              2010                         49,126            9,742    24.7%            2.5%
              Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1990-2010.
Household size is a significant factor in housing demand. Often, household size can be used
to predict the unit size that a household will select. For example, small households (one and
two persons per household) traditionally can find suitable housing in units with up to two
bedrooms while large households (five or more persons per household) can usually find
suitable housing in units with three to four bedrooms. During the previous decade, El
Centro households became smaller, while County households remained relatively
unchanged (see Table 10).
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                      Page 11

                  Table 10: Average Persons-Per-Household Trends (2000-2010)
                                    Year                         City of El Centro       County
                  2000                                                           3.23         3.33
                  2010                                                           3.19         3.34
                  Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2000-2010.
Households with two and three persons increased the most within the County between 2000
and 2010. Within the City, two-person households increased more proportionally than
households of any other size (see Table 11). Meanwhile, the proportion of large households,
those comprised of five or more persons, increased in both the County and City.
           Table 11: Household Size Trends (2000-2010)
            Household                           2000                                  2010
                Size             # of Households          % of Total     # of Households % of Total
           City of El Centro
           1-Person                             2,156           18.8%                2,458        18.8%
           2-Person                             2,584           22.6%                3,061        23.4%
           3-Person                             2,013           17.6%                2,405        18.3%
           4-Person                             2,049           17.9%                2,271        17.3%
           5-Person                             1,445           12.6%                1,613        12.3%
           6+ Person                            1,192           10.4%                1,300         9.9%
           Imperial County
           1-Person                             6,724           17.1%                8,368        17.0%
           2-Person                             9,067           23.0%               11,105        22.6%
           3-Person                             6,660           16.9%                8,599        17.5%
           4-Person                             7,161           18.2%                8,814        17.9%
           5-Person                             5,117           13.0%                6,427        13.1%
           6+ Person                            4,655           11.8%                5,813        11.8%
           Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2000-2010.
B. Housing Tenure
Housing tenure refers to whether a unit is owned or rented. Tenure is an important market
characteristic because it is directly related to housing types and turnover rates. The tenure
distribution of a community’s housing stock can be an indicator of several aspects of the
housing market, including the affordability of units, household stability and residential
mobility among others. In most communities, tenure distribution generally correlates with
household income, composition and age of the householder.
Households in the City of El Centro continue to be equally split in terms of tenure, with
about one-half of the City’s households owning their homes and about one-half renting their
homes. By comparison, the County has a much higher proportion of owner-households (see
Table 12).
                                                                                                     City of El Centro
Page 12                                                                                    2013-2021 Housing Element

Table 12: Tenure (2000-2010)
                                                El Centro                                     County
     Household Size
                                  # of Households            % of Total         # of Households      % of Total
2000
Owners                                          5,748                 50.2%               22,975            58.3%
Renters                                         5,691                 49.8%               16,409            41.7%
2010
Owners                                          6,488                 49.5%               49,126            55.9%
Renters                                         6,620                 50.5%               21,661            44.1%
Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2000-2010.
As shown in Table 13, a significant portion (86.5 percent) of the owner-households resided
in single-family detached residences, compared to 28.5 percent of renter-households
residing in single-family residences.
 Table 13: Housing Type by Tenure (2011)
                                                                       Owner-                         Renter -
                                Total             Owner-                                Renter-
  Units in Structure                                                  Occupied                       Occupied
                                Units            Occupied                              Occupied
                                                                          %                              %
 1, Detached                         7,494               5,610              86.5%            1,884         28.5%
 1, Attached                           376                 185               2.9%              191          2.9%
 2                                     375                  12               0.2%              363          5.5%
 3 or 4                              1,174                  47               0.7%            1,127         17.1%
 5 to 9                                696                    0                 --             696         10.5%
 10 to 19                              592                    0                 --             592          9.0%
 20 or More                          1,190                  42               0.6%            1,148         17.4%
 Mobile Home                         1,164                 562               8.7%              602          9.1%
 Boat, RV, Van, etc.                     31                 31               0.5%                0              --
 Total                              13,092               6,489             100.0%            6,603        100.0%
 Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, American Community Survey (ACS), 2007-2011.
2.4. Housing Problems
While the SCAG data presented on page 10 estimates the number of households that fall
within each income level, it does not provide any detail on the specific housing needs and
problems faced by these households. The Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy
(CHAS) developed by the Census Bureau for HUD, however, provides detailed information
on housing needs by income level for different types of households in El Centro. Detailed
CHAS data based on the 2006-2008 ACS data is displayed in Table 14. Housing problems
considered by CHAS include:
         Units with physical defects (lacking complete kitchen or bathroom);
         Overcrowded conditions (housing units with more than one person per room);
         Housing cost burden, including utilities, exceeding 30 percent of gross income; or
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                  Page 13

        Severe housing cost burden, including utilities, exceeding 50 percent of gross
         income.
Most lower and moderate income households cope with housing cost issues either by
assuming a cost burden, or by occupying a smaller-than-needed or substandard unit.
Specifically, according to HUD, 71 percent of all of the City’s lower income households were
experiencing one or more housing problems (e.g. cost burden, overcrowding, or
substandard housing condition) between 2006 and 2008.1
The types of housing problems experienced by El Centro households vary according to
household income, type, and tenure. Some highlights include:
        In general, renter-households had a higher level of housing problems (60 percent)
         compared to owner-households (41 percent).
        Large renter-families had the highest level of housing problems regardless of income
         level (76 percent).
        Approximately 85 percent of extremely low income (households earning less than 30
         percent of the AMI) and 78 percent of very low income households (households
         earning between 31 and 50 percent of the AMI) had housing problems.
        Over one-half (52 percent) of extremely low income elderly renter- and owner-
         households experience a severe housing cost burden (i.e. spent more than 50 percent
         of their income on housing).
1   U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) data
    based on 2006-2008 ACS.
                                                                                               City of El Centro
Page 14                                                                           2013-2021 Housing Element

Table 14: Housing Assistance Needs of Lower Income Households (2006-2008)
 Household by Type,                                     Renters                                            Owners
                                                                                                                                           Total
         Income,                                Small            Large         Total                        Large         Total
                                Elderly                                                     Elderly                                    Households
and Housing Problem                            Families Families             Renters                     Families       Owners
Extremely Low Income
                                      475          1,000               70         1,730          165             60           420               2,210
(0-30% AMI)
   With Any Housing
                                     88%             82%           100%            87%          76%           100%           77%                 85%
   Problem
   Cost Burden >30%                  89%             76%            64%            82%          76%           100%           74%                 81%
   Cost Burden > 50%                 52%             49%            43%            55%          52%           100%           50%                 54%
Very Low Income
                                      535             710             245         1,865          175             10           510               2,375
(31-50% AMI)
   With Any Housing
                                     79%             75%           100%            81%          63%           100%           67%                 78%
   Problem
   Cost Burden >30%                  79%             75%            65%            76%          63%           100%           67%                 74%
   Cost Burden > 50%                  8%             23%            24%            21%          46%           100%           55%                 28%
Low Income
                                      130             650             265         1,155          535            250         1,320               2,475
(51-80% AMI)
   With Any Housing
                                     42%             35%             83%           49%          28%            84%           53%                 51%
   Problem
   Cost Burden >30%                  42%             26%            17%            29%          24%            74%           50%                 40%
   Cost Burden > 50%                  3%               0%             0%            0%          13%            58%           31%                 17%
Moderate & Above
                                      130          1,435              285         2,175          815            730         4,035               6,270
Income (>80% AMI)
   With Any Housing
                                     15%             26%             44%           25%          17%            35%           31%                 29%
   Problem
   Cost Burden >30%                  15%               9%             0%            8%          15%            25%           28%                 21%
   Cost Burden > 50%                  0%               0%             0%            0%           0%             1%            5%                    3%
Total Households                   1,270           3,735              865         6,985        1,630          1,110         6,345              13,330
   With Any Housing
                                     72%             52%             76%           60%          31%            50%           41%                 51%
   Problem
   Cost Burden >30%                  72%             42%            29%            49%          29%            41%           39%                 44%
   Cost Burden > 50%                 23%             17%            10%            20%          14%            20%           17%                 19%
Note: Data presented in this table are based on special tabulations from the American Community Survey (ACS) data. Due to the small sample size,
the margins are errors can be significant. Interpretations of these data should focus on the proportion of households in need of assistance rather than
on precise numbers.
Source: HUD Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS), 2006-2008.
      City of El Centro
      2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                        Page 15
A. Cost Burden (Overpayment)
Housing cost burden, also known as overpayment, is defined as a housing cost that exceeds
30 percent of a household’s gross income. A severe cost burden is a housing cost that
exceeds 50 percent of a household’s gross income.2 Housing cost burden is particularly
problematic for low and moderate income households in that it leaves little resources for a
household to pay for other living expenses.
The ACS calculated the percentage of income expended on housing costs for both renters
and owners over a three-period of 2006-2008 and the estimates are considered an average
for that time period. This three-year survey period includes the beginning of the foreclosure
crises and rising unemployment. While rents may not have increased during this period, the
ability to pay decreased as people were losing their jobs. The estimates discussed below
may, therefore, reflect an increase from previous years’ estimates.
Between 2006 and 2008, a total of 5,864 or 44 percent, of all households in the City of El
Centro paid in excess of 30 percent of their income for shelter (see Table 14 above). Cost
burden varies by tenure. About 39 percent of the City’s owner-households overpaid for
housing, while 49 percent of renter-households overpaid for housing. The cost burden
situation is particularly critical for those households with the lowest annual incomes. Of
extremely low income households, 81 percent overpaid for housing. About 74 percent of
very low income households also experienced a housing cost burden.
Severe housing cost burden is of even greater concern, particularly when those affected are
lower income households. Approximately 420 owner-households are considered to be in the
extremely low income category and one-half (50 percent) of these households experienced a
severe housing cost burden between 2006 and 2008. Similarly, of all renter-households
within the City, 1,730 are considered to be in the extremely low income category and a
majority of these households (55 percent) spend more than one-half of their net household
income on housing. As indicated in Table 14 as household income increases, cost burden
generally decreases.
B. Overcrowding
An overcrowded unit is defined by the Census as having more than one person or more per
room, excluding kitchens and bathrooms. A severely overcrowded unit has 1.5 or more
persons per room. Generally, a room is defined as a living room, dining room, bedroom, or
finished recreation room.
According to the 2007-2011 ACS, approximately 11 percent of all households in the City are
considered to be overcrowded (see Table 15). Overcrowding was much more likely to affect
renter-households (17 percent) than owner-households (four percent). Severe overcrowding
was also more prevalent among renter households than owner households (seven percent
versus two percent).
2   A household spending more than 30 percent of its gross household income on housing is considered cost-burdened
    both by the State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) and the U.S. Department of Housing
    and Urban Development (HUD).
                                                                                                  City of El Centro
Page 16                                                                               2013-2021 Housing Element

                 Table 15: Overcrowded Units by Tenure (2011)
                                                           Owner               Renter         Total Overcrowded
                     Persons per Room
                                                         #        %          #         %          #           %
                 0.50 or less                         3,802 58.6% 2,376 36.0%                     6,178      47.2%
                 0.51 to 1.00                         2,405 37.1% 3,090 46.8%                     5,495      42.0%
                 1.01 to 1.50                            173 2.7%            664 10.1%              837       6.4%
                 1.51 to 2.00                            109 1.7%            225 3.4%               334       2.6%
                 2.01 or more                               0 0.0%           248 3.8%               248       1.9%
                 Total                                6,489                6,603                13,092
                 % Overcrowded by Tenure                         4.3%               17.2%                    10.8%
                 Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2000; American Community Survey (ACS), 2007-2011.
 2.5. Special Needs
 As noted in Government Code Section 65583(a)(6), within the overall housing needs
 assessments there are segments of the population that have or require special housing.
 Generally, these are people who have lower incomes and less access to housing choices
 when compared to moderate and above moderate income households. Segments of the
 population that often have special housing needs include seniors, persons with disabilities,
 large households, single parents, people living in poverty, farm workers, and homeless
 individuals and families, and military personnel. These groups are summarized in Table 16.
Table 16: Special Needs Groups (2007-2011)
                                  # of Persons                                                                      % of Total
                                                           # of                           # of
  Special Needs Group                     or                           % Owner                       % Renter      Households
                                                        Owners                          Renters
                                   Households                                                                     or Population
Households with Seniors                      3,377                                                                        25.8%
Senior Headed
                                             2,657          1,085           40.8%           1,572         59.2%           20.3%
Households
Seniors Living Alone                         1,077            568           52.7%             509         47.3%            8.2%
Persons with
                                             5,163                                                                        12.2%
Disabilities**
Large Households                             2,913          1,365           46.9%           1,548         53.1%           22.2%
Single Parent
                                             2,051                                                                        15.6%
Households
Female Headed
                                             1,634                                                                        12.5%
Households w/ Children
People Living in Poverty*                  10,499                                                                         25.1%
Farm Workers*                                  966                                                                         3.2%
Homeless***                                     92                                                                         0.2%
Military*                                          4                                                                      <0.1%
* = 2010 Census data not available. Estimate is from the 2007-2011 ACS.
** = 2010 Census data not available. Estimate is from the 2009-2011 ACS.
*** = 2010 Census data not available. Estimate is from the HUD Point-in-Time Estimate of Homelessness, 2013.
Sources: Bureau of the Census, 2010; American Community Survey (ACS), 2007-2011 and 2009-2011.
 City of El Centro
 2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                              Page 17
A. Seniors
Seniors, defined as persons over the age of 65 years, often age in-place, living in housing
that is too expensive for their fixed incomes or that structurally does not accommodate
specific needs for assistance. Even though senior citizens may have difficulty living in their
own home, they often do not have the options or mobility afforded other segments of the
population.
In 1990, there were 2,661 seniors in El Centro, representing 8.5 percent of the total
population (see Table 17). Between 1990 and 2000, the senior population increased at a rate
of 3.3 percent annually; this pace slowed slightly to 2.9 percent between 2000 and 2010. As
of 2010, the senior population was estimated at 4,556 persons, representing approximately
9.3 percent of the total population.
Table 17: Senior Population Trends (65+) (1990-2010)
                                                                                              Annual %
         Year                   # of Persons            # Change           % Change
                                                                                                Change
1990                                          2,661
2000                                          3,529               865              32.5%                3.3%
2010                                          4,556             1,027              29.1%                2.9%
Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1990-2010.
Between 2000 and 2010, the number of senior-headed households in the City increased by
24.9 percent (see Table 18). In 2010, senior-headed households comprised approximately
20.3 percent of all households within the City. Since 1990, the proportion of senior
households who owned their homes has steadily declined, while the proportion of senior
households who rented their homes has increased (Figure 1). Nevertheless, as of 2010,
senior households who owned their homes (59.2 percent) continued to outnumber their
renter counterparts by a large margin (40.8 percent).
    Table 18: Senior Household Trends (65+) (2000-2010)
           Year             # of Households         # Change         % Change        Annual % Change
    2000                                  2,127
    2010                                  2,657            530              24.9%                   2.5%
    Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2000-2010.
                                                                                            City of El Centro
Page 18                                                                           2013-2021 Housing Element
                             Figure 1: Senior Households by Tenure (1990-2010)
                  80.0%
                  70.0%
                  60.0%
                  50.0%
                  40.0%
                  30.0%
                  20.0%
                  10.0%
                    0.0%
                                         1990              2000             2010
                    Owner               72.5%             62.6%            59.2%
                    Renter              27.5%             37.4%            40.8%
            Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1990-2010.
As documented in Table 14, elderly households in the City (particularly those that rented
their homes) were especially likely to experience a housing problem. Specifically, of all
elderly renter households, 72 percent reported experiencing a housing problem. Among
elderly owner households, 31 percent reported experiencing a housing problem.
Resources
The special needs of seniors can be met through a range of services, including congregate
care, rent subsides, shared housing, and housing rehabilitation assistance. For the frail or
disabled elderly, housing can be modified with features that help ensure continued
independent living arrangements.
There are currently six senior housing developments in the City:
         Green Gable Apartments – 19 units
         Regency Park Apartment – 106 units
         Cedar Homes Apartments – 19 units
         Boatwright Apartments – 19 units
         El Centro Senior Villas – 72 units
Seniors residents in the City can benefit from various services offered at the El Centro Adult
Center managed by the City’s Parks and Recreation Department. Services offered at the
Center include: computer and sewing courses, bingo, movie screenings, a senior nutritional
program, and adult and senior exercise days. Additionally, several local and regional
programs provide housing and social services to assist the elderly in the City. These
organizations include the Area Agency on Aging, Imperial County Work Training Center,
United Way, and Catholic Charities.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                               Page 19

Eleven licensed residential care facilities provide assisted living, nursing care, and general
services to seniors in El Centro. These facilities have a combined capacity of 214 beds. As
required by the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act, the City’s Zoning
Ordinance treats state-licensed residential care facilities serving six or fewer individuals the
same as any other residential use. Furthermore, larger residential care facilities that serve
seven or more clients are allowed by-right in the RR, R1, R2, and R3 zones.
B. Persons with Disabilities (Including Developmental Disabilities)
Three types of disabled persons are considered as having special housing needs: physically
impaired, mentally disabled, and developmentally disabled. Each type is unique and
requires specific attention in terms of access to housing, employment, social services,
medical services, and accessibility of housing.
The 2010 Census did not collect information on disability. According to 2009-2011 ACS
data, approximately 12 percent of El Centro residents had a disability. The ACS also tallied
the number of disabilities by type for residents with one or more disabilities (see Table 19).
Among the disabilities tallied, ambulatory (60.3 percent) and cognitive (39.1 percent)
difficulties were the most prevalent. However, the types of disabilities experienced varied
depending on the age of the disabled person. Specifically, cognitive disabilities were the
most common disability affecting disabled person ages five to 17, afflicting 58.3 percent of
the disabled persons in this age group. Meanwhile, ambulatory difficulties were the most
likely to affect older disabled persons.
The most obvious housing need for persons with disabilities is housing that is adapted to
their needs. Most older single-family homes are inaccessible to people with mobility and
sensory limitations. Housing may not be adaptable to widened doorways and hallways,
access ramps, larger bathrooms, lowered countertops, and other features necessary for
accessibility. Location of housing is also an important factor for many persons with
disabilities, as they often rely upon public transportation to travel to necessary services and
shops.
    Table 19: Disabilities Tallied (2009- 2011)
                                                                        % of Disabilities Tallied
               Disability Type
                                                  Age 5 to 17        Age 18 to 64        Age 65+           Total
    With a hearing difficulty                             0.0%                24.2%           33.9%           26.7%
    With a vision difficulty                             25.4%                19.6%           20.8%           20.6%
    With a cognitive difficulty                          58.3%                47.9%           26.6%           39.1%
    With an ambulatory difficulty                        35.4%                55.9%           69.2%           60.3%
    With a self-care difficulty                          32.9%                20.5%           20.5%           21.4%
    With an independent living difficulty                                     36.7%           36.4%           33.7%
    Total Disabled Persons                                  398                2,396           2,286           5,080
    Notes:
         1. A person can have multiple disabilities.
         2. This table does not include persons under the age of 5 with a disability.
    Source: Bureau of the Census, American Community Survey (ACS), 2009-2011.
                                                                                                         City of El Centro
Page 20                                                                                        2013-2021 Housing Element

Persons with Developmental Disabilities
A recent change in State law requires that the Housing Element discuss the housing needs of
persons with developmental disabilities. As defined by the Section 4512 of the Welfare and
Institutions Code, “developmental disability” means “a disability that originates before an
individual attains age 18 years, continues, or can be expected to continue, indefinitely, and
constitutes a substantial disability for that individual. As defined by the Director of
Developmental Services, in consultation with the Superintendent of Public Instruction, this
term shall include mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and autism. This term shall
also include disabling conditions found to be closely related to mental retardation or to
require treatment similar to that required for individuals with mental retardation, but shall
not include other handicapping conditions that are solely physical in nature.” This term
shall also reflect the individual’s need for a combination and sequence of special,
interdisciplinary, or generic services, individualized supports, or other forms of assistance
that are of lifelong or extended duration and are individually planned and coordinated.
The Census does not record developmental disabilities. According to the U.S.
Administration on Developmental Disabilities, an accepted estimate of the percentage of the
population that can be defined as developmentally disabled is 1.5 percent. This generally
equates to 640 persons in the City of El Centro with developmental disabilities, based on the
2010 Census population. However, according to the State’s Department of Developmental
Services, as of November 2012, approximately 39 El Centro residents with developmental
disabilities were being assisted at the San Diego Regional Center for the Developmentally
Disabled branch office located in the City of Imperial. Most of these individuals were
residing in a private home with their parent of guardian and 13 of these persons with
developmental disabilities were under the age of 18.
Many developmentally disabled persons can live and work independently within a
conventional housing environment. More severely disabled individuals require a group
living environment where supervision is provided. The most severely affected individuals
may require an institutional environment where medical attention and physical therapy are
provided. Because developmental disabilities exist before adulthood, the first issue in
supportive housing for the developmentally disabled is the transition from the person’s
living situation as a child to an appropriate level of independence as an adult.
Resources
Various non-profit groups provide supportive services to the special needs population in El
Centro, including persons with disabilities. The Imperial Valley Independent Living Center
offers various social services to City residents with the goal of empowering people with
disabilities. Among other organizations, ARC of Imperial Valley offers dial-a-ride
paratransit services to City residents and links them to additional health, employment, and
residential services.
According to the State Department of Social Services, eleven licensed residential care
facilities, with a total capacity of 214 beds, are located within El Centro. These facilities have
the capability to accommodate and serve persons with disabilities. The Zoning Ordinance
treats residential care facilities in accordance with the Lanterman Developmental
Disabilities Services Act.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                   Page 21

State and federal legislation mandate that a percentage of units in new or substantially
rehabilitated multi-family apartment complexes be made accessible to individuals with
limited physical mobility. The City’s Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program offers low
interest loans to lower income owner-occupants for home improvements, including
accessibility-related improvements (see Program 12).
C. Large Households
For the purposes of this section, large households are defined as households consisting of
five or more persons. Generally, the needs of large families are not targeted in the housing
market, especially in the multi-family market.
According to the 2000 Census, 23 percent (or 2,637 households) of the City’s households
were large households (see Table 11). By 2010, the number of large households in the City
had increased to 2,913 households (or 22 percent of all households, see Table 16). Generally,
two-bedroom units are considered to be the most common housing unit type in the housing
market; however, large households typically require dwelling units with three or more
bedrooms in order to avoid overcrowding. According to ACS data, the majority of owner-
occupied housing in the City had three or more bedrooms (85.1 percent or 5,529
households). The proportion of renter-occupied housing with three or more bedrooms was
significantly less (at just 26.4 percent or 1,742 households). Although housing options for
large renter-households in the City are numerically sufficient to meet the needs of the 1,548
large renter-households documented in the 2010 Census, lower income large renter-
households may have difficulty finding adequately sized and affordable housing in El
Centro.
Large households are often more susceptible to housing problems, like overcrowding and
cost burden (overpayment). According to CHAS data, 67.1 percent of large renter-
households and 28.8 percent of large owner-households had lower incomes (see Table 14).
CHAS also found that all (100.0 percent) of the City’s extremely low and very low income
large households experienced at least one housing problem between 2006 and 2008.
Resources
In order to address the problem of overcrowding in large family households, the City has
included, as part of this housing element, programs to increase opportunities for the
development of suitably sized housing for these households. Large households can benefit
from a variety of programs and services offered by different organizations in the City.
Providers such as the Center for Family Solutions, House of Hope, and Neighborhood
House shelter can aid households in need of emergency shelter and other services.
Additional organizations that offer support services such as assistance with utilities, food,
and housing referrals include the Imperial County Family Resource Center, Catholic
Charities, Imperial Valley Food Bank, Imperial Valley Housing Authority, and the Salvation
Army. Furthermore, room additions to alleviate overcrowded living conditions are eligible
improvements under the City’s Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program (see Program 12).
                                                                                 City of El Centro
Page 22                                                                2013-2021 Housing Element

D. Single-Parent/Female-Headed Households
Single-parent households, particularly female-headed families with children, often require
special consideration and assistance because of their greater need for affordable housing
and accessible day care, health care, and other supportive services. Female-headed families
with children are a particularly vulnerable group because they must balance the needs of
their children with work responsibilities, often while earning limited incomes.
The 2010 Census found that there were approximately 2,051 single-parent households with
children under 18 years of age in the City of El Centro. As shown in Table 20, of these
households, 1,634 households (or 79.7 percent) were headed by a female single-parent (12.5
percent of all households in the City).
     Table 20: Household Type and Presence of Children 18 Years Old and Under (2010)
                              Household Type             # of Households      % of Total
     Single-Parent Households                                       3,660             27.9%
            With Children Under 18 Years Old                        2,051             15.6%
            With No Children                                        1,609             12.3%
     Female Householder, No Spouse Present                          2,845             21.7%
            Female Householder With Children                        1,634             12.5%
            Female Householder With No Children                     1,211              9.2%
     Non-Family Households                                          2,898             22.1%
     Total Households                                                  13,108
     Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2010.
Resources
Various organizations located within El Centro offer family and youth services. The
Imperial Valley Food Bank also supports the City’s families through its food distribution
and emergency assistance programs. Womanhaven, Inc. offers shelter and a range of
services to victims of domestic violence and their children, including counseling, education,
advocacy, legal services, support groups, clothing, and case management. The agency also
offers children and youth education and violence prevention programs to foster better life
choices for the City’s young residents. Additional organizations offering programs and
services beneficial to single-parent households include the Center for Family Solutions,
Imperial County Family Resource Center, Catholic Charities, Imperial Valley Food Bank,
Neighborhood House, and the Salvation Army. The City coordinates with and funds social
service providers that serve El Centro’s population, including single-parent households (see
Program 9).
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                Page 23

E. Residents Living Below the Poverty Level
In the City of El Centro, an estimated 2,392 families (or 23.4 percent of all families) were
living below the poverty level between 2007 and 2011. Poverty thresholds vary depending
on the size of the family and the age of family members, therefore, no specific income
threshold can be specified. Approximately, 54.2 percent (1,296 families) of the family
households living below the poverty level were female-headed households. Of the female-
headed households living below the poverty level, 90.5 percent (1,173) of households had
children under 18 years of age (see Table 21).
Table 21: Households by Poverty Level (2007-2011)
                          Family Households                                    # of Households        % of Total
Total Families With Income In 2011 Below Poverty Level                                     2,392                23.4%
Total Families With Children Under 18 Year Of Age With
                                                                                           2,041                32.5%
Incomes In 2011 Below Poverty Level
Total Family Households                                                                      10,221
Female-Householder In 2011 Below Poverty Level                                             1,296                46.8%
Female-Headed Households With Children Under 18 Years Of
                                                                                           1,173                54.8%
Age In 2011 Below Poverty Level
Total Female-Headed Households                                                                2,769
Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, American Community Survey (ACS), 2007-2011.
Resources
Households within the City living below the poverty level can benefit from programs and
services offering assistance with utility bills, food supplies, and various other social services.
Organizations in the City offering these services include the Imperial County Family
Resource Center, Catholic Charities, Imperial County Social Services, Imperial Valley Food
Bank, Neighborhood House, and the Salvation Army. In addition to providing essential
support services, the Center for Family Solutions and House of Hope provide emergency
shelter to residents. The City promotes the maintenance and expansion of the Housing
Choice Voucher program, which provides an important source of rental assistance for
individuals and households living in poverty (see Program 10). Individuals living in
poverty can also benefit from small units such as studios and single room occupancy units
(SROs).
F. Farm Workers
Estimating farm workers and those households associated with farm work within the State
is extremely difficult. Generally, the farm worker population contains two segments of farm
workers: permanent and migratory (seasonal) farm workers. The permanent population
consists of farm workers who have settled in the region and maintain local residence and
who are employed most of the year. The migratory farm worker population consists of
those farm workers who typically migrate to the region during seasonal periods in search of
farm labor employment and from the region during the off-season. Traditional sources of
population estimates, including the Census, have tended to significantly underestimate
                                                                                                     City of El Centro
Page 24                                                                                    2013-2021 Housing Element
farm worker population based upon subsequent farm worker data and conflicts with
existing data. Moreover, different employment estimation techniques result in diverse
estimates of local agricultural employment.
According to 2007-2011 ACS data, shown in Table 22, 6.3 percent of the City’s labor force
was employed in the farming, fishing and forestry industries. The proportion of El Centro’s
labor force employed in agriculture is lower than for the County (9.6 percent).
 Table 22: Farm workers (2000-2011)
                                                         City of El Centro                       Imperial County
              Industry                             2000                        2011                   2011
                                                    % of Total                   % of Total             % of Total
                                           #                           #                       #
                                                   Employment                  Employment             Employment
 Farming, Fishing and Forestry           1,059              8.1%       966              6.3% 5,546              9.6%
 Total Labor Force                                14,862                      18,219                 69,690
 Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2000; American Community Survey (ACS), 2007-2011.
Resources
The City has a number of apartment complexes suitable for those in need of temporary
housing, such as seasonal farm workers (see Table 29). Furthermore, the City amended the
Zoning Ordinance in April 2013 to allow farm worker housing for six or fewer laborers in
accordance with the California Employee Housing Act. Furthermore, the City will study
options for the establishment of a farmland mitigation fee (Program 5). Property owners
seeking to convert active agricultural land to an urban use could be required to pay a fee to
mitigate the conversion of farm land to non-farm use. One of the potential uses of the
mitigation fees could be to provide farm worker housing and related supportive social
services.
G. Homeless Persons
The City of El Centro, with the assistance and participation of its local service providers,
maintains a continuum of care for the homeless population and to those facing the
possibility of homelessness. The continuum of care begins with the assessment of the
homeless individual or family; then refers to appropriate housing where supportive services
are provided to prepare them for independent living. The goal of a comprehensive
homeless service system is to ensure that homeless individuals and families move from
homelessness to self-sufficiency, permanent housing, and independent living.
Due to their transient nature, it is difficult to count the number of homeless in any one area.
It should also be noted that there are generally two types of homeless - the permanent
homeless, who are the transient and most visible homeless population, and the temporary
homeless, who are homeless usually due to eviction and may stay with friends, family, at a
shelter or motel until they can find a permanent residence.
The Point-in-Time Estimate of Homelessness conducted on January 25, 2013 counted 92
homeless persons in the City. Of these homeless, 17 were unsheltered. Factors contributing
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                     Page 25

to homelessness include the general lack of housing affordable to lower income persons,
increases in the number of persons whose incomes fall below the poverty level, reductions
in public subsidies to the poor, alcohol and substance abuse, domestic violence, and the de-
institutionalization of the mentally ill. Homeless people, victims of abuse, and other
individuals often have housing needs that are not being met by the traditional housing
stock. These people require temporary housing and assistance at little or no cost to the
recipient.
Resources
The City amended the Zoning Ordinance in 2010 to allow emergency shelters by-right and
with a ministerial permit process in the R3, CG, and CH zones and in April 2013 to allow
transitional and supportive housing by-right in all zones that allow residential uses,
pursuant to State law. Additionally, as documented in Table 23, a number of organizations
located within El Centro offer emergency shelter, transitional housing and supportive
services to the region’s homeless or those at risk of becoming homeless.
       Table 23: Homeless Resources
                               Organization                            Services
       Catholic Charities                                        Supportive Services
       Employment Development Department                         Supportive Services
       House of Hope                                   Emergency Shelter, Supportive Services
       Imperial County Health Department                         Supportive Services
       Imperial County Social Services                           Supportive Services
       Imperial Valley Behavioral Health Services                Supportive Services
       Imperial Valley Food Bank                                 Supportive Services
       I.V. Independent Living Center                            Supportive Services
       (Empowering People with Disabilities)
       Imperial Valley Regional Occupational Program             Supportive Services
       Salvation Army                                            Supportive Services
       Sure Helpline                                             Supportive Services
       Veteran Services                                          Supportive Services
       Volunteers of America                           Supportive Services, Transitional Housing
                                                       Emergency Shelter, Supportive Services,
       Womanhaven (d.b.a. Center for Family Solutions)
                                                                 Transitional Housing
       Source: City of El Centro, 2013.
H. Military Households
The military population’s influence on the demand for housing takes two forms: (1) existing
military households trying to find housing; and (2) former military households trying to
remain in the community. Often, the housing needs of military personnel are affected by
lower incomes and an uncertain length of residency.
While the 2007-2011 ACS documented only four persons in the City employed in the Armed
Forces, a far greater number of military personnel may actually be present in the City at any
                                                                                         City of El Centro
Page 26                                                                       2013-2021 Housing Element

given time. Naval Air Facility (NAF) El Centro is located about five miles from the City and
base personnel there may not be included in the City’s ACS employment estimates.
Furthermore, the City is currently one of two facilities in contention for becoming the home
base for the Navy’s F35C Joint Strike Fighter squadron. Should NAF El Centro be chosen as
the home base for this squadron, up to 600 additional on base jobs could be created.
Resources
Most special needs of military families are provided through on-base supportive programs
and services. NAF El Centro has established Community Support Programs (CSP), a
regional team responsible for policy development, resourcing and oversight of quality of life
programs for active-duty military, reservists, military retirees and their families. CSP
provides housing, morale/welfare/recreation, and family programs and services for
military personnel and their families.
2.6. Housing Stock Characteristics
The Census defines a housing unit as any of the following: a house, an apartment, a mobile
home or trailer, a group of homes, or a single room intended for use as separate living
quarters. Separate living quarters are those in which the occupants live separately from any
other individuals in the building, and which have direct access from outside the building or
through a common hall.
This section discusses various housing characteristics and trends that affect housing needs
in El Centro. Important characteristics include housing growth, type, vacancy, and age and
condition.
A. Housing Unit Growth
The City of El Centro has experienced substantial growth in its housing stock over the last
20 years. The 2010 Census estimated that a total of 14,476 dwelling units were located
within the City. Between 2000 and 2010, the number of housing units in the City increased
by 18.0 percent (see Table 24). During this time period, housing growth rates in most
neighboring jurisdictions were similar to, or greater than, El Centro’s. The cities of Imperial
and Calexico experienced the greatest growth rates, at 99.2 percent and 52.5 percent,
respectively. Countywide housing unit growth was 27.5 percent during the last decade.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                Page 27

                 Table 24: Housing Unit Growth (1990-2010)
                                                                                  % Change
                     Jurisdiction         1990       2000       2010
                                                                          1990-2000 2000-2010
                 Brawley                  6,124 7,038 8,231                   14.9%             17.0%
                 Calexico                 4,832 6,983 10,651                  44.5%             52.5%
                 Calipatria                  767        961 1,121             25.3%             16.6%
                 El Centro               10,180 12,263 14,476                 20.5%             18.0%
                 Holtville                1,477 1,617 1,937                     9.5%            19.8%
                 Imperial                 1,372 2,385 4,751                   73.8%             99.2%
                 Imperial County         36,559 43,981 56,067                 20.3%             27.5%
                 Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1990-2010.
B. Housing Type
A certain level of housing diversity is an important factor in ensuring adequate housing
opportunities for El Centro residents. A diverse housing stock helps ensure that all
households, regardless of their income, age group, and/or household size, have the
opportunity to find housing that is best suited to their needs.
According to the 2007-2011 ACS, approximately 7,870 single-family residences were located
within the City, an increase of 12.5 percent since 2000 (see Figure 2). The City’s housing
stock also includes 5,191 multi-family units; since 2000 the number of multi-family buildings
containing 20 or more units increased by 65.8 percent. Meanwhile, the number of mobile
homes, boats, RV’s, vans, etc. in the City decreased by 9.1 percent.
             Figure 2: Distribution of Housing Units (2000-2011)
              9,000
              8,000
              7,000
              6,000
              5,000
              4,000
              3,000
              2,000
              1,000
                   -
                                                                                            Mobile home,
                         Single-Family      2 to 4 Units    5 to 19 Units    20+ Units        boat, RV,
                                                                                               van, etc.
                 2000        7,021             1,060            1,472          1,420             1,314
                 2011        7,870             1,549            1,288          2,354             1,195
             Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2000; American Community Survey (ACS), 2007-2011.
                                                                                                         City of El Centro
Page 28                                                                                      2013-2021 Housing Element

C. Housing Vacancy
Vacancy rates are important indicators of the supply and cost of housing. Vacancy trends in
housing are analyzed using a “vacancy rate” which establishes the relationship between
housing supply and demand. For example, if the demand for housing is greater than the
available supply, then the vacancy rate is low and the price of housing will most likely
increase. Additionally, the vacancy rate indicates whether or not the City has an adequate
housing supply to provide choice and mobility. General industry standards indicate that
vacancy rates of five to six percent for rental housing and one to two percent of ownership
housing is sufficient to provide choice and mobility.
In 2000, the Census reported a vacancy rate of 6.7 percent for the City of El Centro. Between
2007 and 2011, the ACS estimated the vacancy rate for El Centro to be 9.9 percent. Of the
vacant units in the City in 2011, 24.7 percent were available for rent and 11.4 percent were
available for purchase. The increase in overall vacancy rate is a reflection of the depressed
housing market between 2008 and 2012 when mortgage financing was tightened by lenders
and unemployment resulted in some families sharing housing arrangements to save on
costs.
              Figure 3: Vacant Units by Housing Type (2000-2011)
                40.0%
                35.0%
                30.0%
                25.0%
                20.0%
                15.0%
                10.0%
                 5.0%
                 0.0%
                                                                    Seasonal,
                                                        Rented or   Recreation,
                            For Sale                                               For Migrant
                                          For Rent      Sold, Not        or                        Other
                              Only                                                  Workers
                                                        Occupied    Occasional
                                                                        Use
                   2000      8.6%          35.3%          5.1%        36.4%          1.5%          13.1%
                   2011      11.4%         24.7%         14.1%        13.0%          0.0%          36.9%
              Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2000; American Community Survey (ACS), 2007-2011.
D. Housing Age and Condition
Housing age can be an important indicator of housing condition within a community. Like
any other tangible asset, housing is subject to gradual physical or technological
deterioration over time. If not properly and regularly maintained, housing can deteriorate
and discourage reinvestment, depress neighboring property values, and eventually impact
the quality of life in a neighborhood. Many federal and state programs also use the age of
housing as one factor in determining housing rehabilitation needs.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                Page 29

Generally, housing older than 30 years of age will
                                                          Table 25: Housing Age
require minor repairs and modernization
                                                           Year Structure                  Percent
improvements. Housing units over 50 years of age                            Number
                                                                Built                      of Total
are more likely to require major rehabilitation such
                                                          1939 or earlier         500            3.4%
as roofing, plumbing, and electrical system repairs.
                                                          1940-1959             2,661           18.3%
Error! Reference source not found. shows that
56.4 percent of the housing units in El Centro were 1960-1969                   1,879           12.9%
built prior to 1980, meaning that more than one-          1970-1979             3,163           21.8%
half of the City’s housing stock is over 30 years old. 1980-1989                2,189           15.1%
Many of these older units could potentially require 1990-1999                   1,523           10.5%
minor repairs. Units older than 40 years of age 2000-2004                       1,377            9.5%
comprised about 34.6 percent of the housing stock. Built 2005 or later          1,235            8.5%
These units may require moderate to substantial Total                         14,527          100.0%
repairs. Approximately 21.7 percent of the housing Source: U.S. Bureau of Census, American Community
stock is over 50 years of age and may require Survey (ACS), 2007-2011.
substantial repairs.
Housing age is only a general indicator. It does not take into account private actions by
property owners to maintain and upgrade their properties. According to a Housing
Conditions Survey conducted by the City in 2008, the condition of housing units is generally
good as about 69.1 percent of all housing units in the City were in sound condition and not
in need of any repairs. Approximately 24.4 percent of units were in need of minor repairs
and an additional 5.7 percent were in need of moderate repairs. Only 0.6 percent of the
units surveyed needed substantial repair, and less than one percent of housing units are
dilapidated. Housing conditions in the City have not changed significantly since this survey
was conducted.
The survey also identified specific areas where poor housing conditions predominate, with
greater than 66 percent of the units in need of some rehabilitation. These areas were located
in the central and western central portions of the City, where housing in need of
rehabilitation was found to have the highest densities. The areas and their corresponding
rehabilitation needs include:
       Area bounded by Main Street on the north, 4th Street on the east, Heil Avenue on the
        south, and 8th Street on the west (73.1 percent rehabilitation).
       Area bounded by Treshill Road on the north, La Brucherie on the east, Imperial
        Avenue on the south, and the City Limits on the west (71.9 percent rehabilitation).
        This Block Group also contains an area of housing west of Imperial Avenue and north
        of Bradshaw Road at the north end of the City.
       Area bounded by Commercial Avenue on the north, the Southern Pacific Railroad
        tracks on the east, Ross Avenue on the south, and 4th Street on the west (71.7 percent
        rehabilitation).
       Area bounded by Main Street on the north, 8th Street on the east, Heil and Hamilton
        Avenues on the south, and Imperial Avenue on the west (66.3 percent rehabilitation).
Additional areas of the City were identified where slightly less, 50 to 60 percent, of the
housing units require some form of rehabilitation. These include:
                                                                                     City of El Centro
Page 30                                                                   2013-2021 Housing Element

        Area bounded by Adams Avenue on the north, 4th Street on the east, Main Street on
         the south, and 8th Street on the west (57.8 percent rehabilitation).
        Area bounded by the Southern Pacific Railroad tracks on the north, 1st Street on the
         east, Imperial Avenue on the south, and the Southern Pacific Railroad tracks on the
         west (52.8 percent rehabilitation).
        Area bounded by Imperial Avenue on the north, Dogwood Road on the east, Ross
         Avenue on the south, and the Southern Pacific Railroad tracks on the west (51.0
         percent rehabilitation).
2.7. Housing Cost and Affordability
One of the major barriers to housing availability is the cost of housing. In order to provide
housing to all economic levels in the community, a wide variety of housing opportunities at
various prices should be made available.
A. Ownership Housing
As shown in Table 26, the median home price in El Centro increased slightly, by 3.3 percent,
from $120,000 in 2010 to $124,000 in 2011. During this same time period, changes to median
home prices in most neighboring jurisdictions were minimal, except for Calipatria, which
had a significant increase in median price. The largest increase occurred in the City of
Imperial (6.7 percent) while the only jurisdiction to experience a decrease in home prices
was the City of Calexico (0.7 percent). The County’s median home price increased 4.8
percent between 2010 and 2011. Between 2011 and 2012, home prices in the region were
generally stagnant, exhibiting only small increases and decreases, except for Calipatria.
 Table 26: Changes in Median Home Sale Prices (2010-2012)
                                                                              Percent Change in
                        2010               2011                2012
                                                                              Median Sale Price
     Jurisdiction
                       Median                 Median               Median     2010-       2011-
                                   # Sold               # Sold
                        Price                   Price               Price      2011       2012
 Brawley               $122,000        230    $125,000      234    $123,000      2.46%      1.60%
 Calexico              $136,000        373    $135,000      302    $137,000     -0.74%      1.48%
 Calipatria             $46,000         20      $72,000      26     $60,000    56.52%    -16.67%
 El Centro             $120,000        440    $123,500      391    $123,000      3.33%     -0.40%
 Holtville              $95,000         38      $95,000      45     $95,000      0.00%      0.00%
 Imperial              $150,000        372    $160,000      351    $159,000      6.67%     -0.31%
 Imperial County       $125,000      1,774    $131,000    1,616    $130,000      4.80%     -0.76%
 Source: DQnews, 2013.
Figure 4 compares median home prices in El Centro with home prices in neighboring
jurisdictions during November 2012. The median price for a home in the City was similar to
those in neighboring jurisdictions and only slightly below median prices Countywide.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                    Page 31

              Figure 4: Median Home Sales Prices (2012)
                $180,000
                $160,000                                                         I
                $140,000
                                                         Imperial County: $130,000
                $120,000
                $100,000
                  $80,000                                                                           $159,000
                                               $137,000
                  $60,000        $123,000                                  $123,000
                                                                                      $95,000
                  $40,000
                                                              $60,000
                  $20,000
                          $0
                                  Brawley       Calexico      Calipatria   El Centro   Holtville    Imperial
              Source: DQnews, 2013.
B. Rental Housing
According to a survey of rental listings on www.Craigslist.org, the median rent in the City
of El Centro was $850 (see Table 27). Market rents in the City averaged approximately $867,
and ranged from $350 for a one-bedroom to $1,850 for a five-bedroom unit.
    Table 27: Median and Average Rents by Number of Bedrooms (2012-2013)
      # of Bedrooms                 # Listed              Median Rent            Average Rent          Rent Range
    0                                             2                     $500               $500           $450 to $550
    1                                            28                     $550               $566           $350 to $750
    2                                            20                     $863               $841         $600 to $1,050
    3                                            32                  $1,050                $986         $725 to $1,500
    4                                             9                  $1,450              $1,317         $850 to $1,700
    5+                                            2                  $1,775              $1,775       $1,700 to $1,850
    Total                                        93                     $850               $867         $350 to $1,850
    Source: Craigslist.org, December 14, 2012 to January 28, 2013.
C. Housing Affordability by Income
Housing affordability can be inferred by comparing the cost of renting or owning a home in
the City with the maximum affordable housing costs for households at different income
levels. Taken together, this information can generally show who can afford what size and
type of housing and indicate the type of households most likely to experience overcrowding
and overpayment.
                                                                                                             City of El Centro
Page 32                                                                                          2013-2021 Housing Element
Housing affordability is an important indicator of quality of life in El Centro. If residents
pay too much for housing they will not have sufficient income for other necessities such as
health care. Households that spend a substantial portion of their income on housing may
also be at risk of becoming homeless in the event of unexpected circumstances such as
illness or loss of employment. State law requires that the City facilitate provision of housing
opportunities that are affordable to all economic segments of the community.
The federal Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) conducts annual
household income surveys nationwide to determine a household’s eligibility for federal
housing assistance. Based on this survey, the California Department of Housing and
Community Development (HCD) developed income limits that can be used to determine
the maximum price that could be affordable to households in the upper range of their
respective income category. Households in the lower end of each category can afford less
by comparison than those at the upper end.
Based on these income limits for Imperial County and current real estate prices documented
in Table 26, homeownership in El Centro is within the reach of low to moderate income
households, with the exception of single-person low income households. Housing options
for extremely low and very low income households are virtually non-existent unless public
assistance is involved.
As shown in Table 28, moderate and median income households can generally afford the
market rents for apartments in El Centro. Low income households in El Centro may be able
to rent housing in the City depending on household size; however, competition for
appropriately sized rental homes may lead to a housing cost burden or overcrowding.
To afford the median-priced home of $123,000 in 2012, a household income of
approximately $31,000 would be needed; significantly less than that of the median-income
for a four-person household in Imperial County of $57,900 (see Table 28). Renting an
average apartment, at $867 per month, would require an annual income of approximately
$42,000, an amount within reach of a median-income four person household in the County.
Higher income occupations in the City could easily afford to purchase or rent housing based
on these estimates, however, lower wage occupations would still struggle to find affordable
housing in the City.
The median income required to afford an average apartment was 31 percent higher than the
median income required to afford an average home in 2012. There are a couple of possible
explanations for why rental housing was relatively more expensive than ownership housing
in El Centro. The discrepancy could reflect tight credit markets and high downpayment
requirements that may have forced otherwise income-qualified households out of the
ownership market. This, in turn, could have created higher demand for rental properties
with associated rental price increases. Furthermore, a general shortage of rental housing
options, especially apartment housing, may explain higher relative housing costs when
compared to ownership housing.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                Page 33

Table 28: Affordable Housing Costs by Household Size and Tenure (2013)
                                                                              Estimated
                                            Affordable Costs
                                                                         Utility Allowance,
                         Annual                 (All Costs)                                           Affordable         Affordable
  Household                                                              Taxes & Insurance
                         Income                                                                          Rent           Home Price
                                         Rental           Ownership
                                                                        Renters        Owners
                                          Costs              Costs
Extremely Low Income (0-30% AMI)
1-Person                   $12,150            $304                 $304       $85           $125               $219            $27,463
2-Person                   $13,900            $348                 $348     $103            $139               $245            $32,350
3-Person                   $15,650            $391                 $391     $127            $159               $264            $35,841
4-Person                   $17,350            $434                 $434     $166            $190               $268            $36,539
5-Person                   $18,750            $469                 $469     $202            $218               $267            $36,539
Very Low Income (31-50% AMI)
1-Person                   $20,300            $508                 $508       $85           $125               $423            $65,398
2-Person                   $23,200            $580                 $580     $103            $139               $477            $75,639
3-Person                   $26,100            $653                 $653     $127            $159               $526            $84,483
4-Person                   $28,950            $724                 $724     $166            $190               $558            $90,534
5-Person                   $31,300            $783                 $783     $202            $218               $581            $94,956
Low Income (51-80% AMI)
1-Person                   $32,450            $811                 $811       $85           $125               $726          $121,953
2-Person                   $37,050            $926                 $926     $103            $139               $823          $140,106
3-Person                   $41,700          $1,043               $1,043     $127            $159               $916          $157,096
4-Person                   $46,300          $1,158               $1,158     $166            $190               $992          $171,293
5-Person                   $50,050          $1,251               $1,251     $202            $218            $1,049           $182,231
Median Income (80-100% AMI)
1-Person                   $40,550          $1,014               $1,183       $85           $125               $929          $191,114
2-Person                   $46,300          $1,158               $1,350     $103            $139            $1,055           $219,081
3-Person                   $52,100          $1,303               $1,520     $127            $159            $1,176           $245,923
4-Person                   $57,900          $1,448               $1,689     $166            $190            $1,282           $270,205
5-Person                   $62,550          $1,564               $1,824     $202            $218            $1,362           $288,940
Moderate Income (100-120% AMI)
1-Person                   $48,650          $1,216               $1,419       $85           $125            $1,131           $235,101
2-Person                   $55,600          $1,390               $1,622     $103            $139            $1,287           $269,584
3-Person                   $62,550          $1,564               $1,824     $127            $159            $1,437           $302,671
4-Person                   $69,500          $1,738               $2,027     $166            $190            $1,572           $333,199
5-Person                   $75,050          $1,876               $2,189     $202            $218            $1,674           $356,821
Source: California Department of Housing and Community Development, 2013 Income limits; and Veronica Tam and Associates
Assumptions: 2013 HCD income limits; 30% gross household income as affordable housing cost; 20% of monthly affordable cost for taxes and
insurance; 10% downpayment; and 4.0% interest rate for a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage loan. Utilities based on Imperial Valley Housing
Authority Utility Allowance, 2012 assuming use of electric services.
                                                                                                                 City of El Centro
   Page 34                                                                                           2013-2021 Housing Element
Figure 5: Income Needed to Afford Housing Compared With Wages
Assumptions: 2013 HCD income limits; 30% gross household income as affordable housing cost; 20% of monthly affordable cost for
taxes and insurance; 10% downpayment; and 5.5% interest rate for a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage loan. Utilities based on Imperial Valley
Housing Authority Utility Allowance, 2012.
Sources:
     1. Average salary data obtained from the State Employment Development Department, 2012.
     2. Veronica Tam and Associates, 2013.
2.8. Affordable Housing
State law requires the City to identify, analyze, and propose programs to preserve existing
multi-family rental units that are currently restricted to lower income housing use and that
will become unrestricted and possibly be lost as lower income housing (i.e., “units at risk”
or “at-risk units”). State law requires the following:
          An inventory of restricted lower income housing projects in the City and their
           potential for conversion;
          An analysis of the costs of preserving and/or replacing the units at risk and a
           comparison of these costs;
          An analysis of the organizational and financial resources available for preserving
           and/or replacing the units “at risk”; and
          Programs for preserving the at-risk units.
The following discussion satisfies the first three requirements of State law listed above
pertaining to the potential conversion of assisted housing units into market rate housing for
the ten year period between October 15, 2013 and October 15, 2023. The Housing Plan
section includes a program for preserving the at-risk units, which meets the final
requirement of State law.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                   Page 35

A. Inventory of At-Risk Rental Housing Units
Table 29 includes the inventory of assisted housing developments within the City of El
Centro as of February 2013. The inventory includes 915 assisted units in 22 deed-restricted
affordable housing developments. Most of the properties and units are owned by the
Imperial Valley Housing Authority.
 Table 29: Assisted Housing In El Centro (2012)
                                                        Location        Ownership   # Assisted     Expiration
             Development
                                                                           Type        Units           Date
 Non At-Risk
 Fairfield Homes                                 Hope, Holt, Heil & 1st    IVHA              50     Perpetuity
 Green Gables                                         Park Avenue         IVHA               19     Perpetuity
 Imperialwood Homes                                    Holt & Heil         IVHA              32     Perpetuity
 Turnkey Units                                        680 Brighton        IVHA                6     Perpetuity
 Turnkey Units                                        580 Brighton        IVHA                6     Perpetuity
                                                     Commercial &
 Turnkey Units                                                             IVHA               7     Perpetuity
                                                        Brighton
 Turnkey Units                                   Barbara Worth Drive      IVHA                9     Perpetuity
                                                  300 Block of Holt &
 El Centro Homes                                                           IVHA              21     Perpetuity
                                                400 Block of Hamilton
 Casa de Anza                                       1690 W. Adams          IVHA              36     Perpetuity
 Tierra del Sol                                     1720 W. Adams         IVHA               40     Perpetuity
 El Centro Family Homes                               6th & Adams          IVHA               8     Perpetuity
 Cedar Homes Senior                                    650 Adams           IVHA              20     Perpetuity
 Boatwright Homes Senior                              590 Holt Ave        IVHA               20     Perpetuity
 Valley Apartments I, II, III & IV               970 Waterman Court        IVHA             105     Perpetuity
 Casa de Pajas                                         402 Adams           IVHA               3     Perpetuity
 El Centro Senior Villas                           515 Park Avenue        LIHTC              80        2032
 Countryside Apartments                          1751 Adams Avenue        LIHTC              72        2034
 Plaza Senior Apartments                         1755 W. Main Street      LIHTC            171         2035
 Imperial Gardens Family
                                                 1798 W. Main Street      LIHTC              76        2064
 Apartments
 Las Brisas Apartments                               2001 N. 8th St       LIHTC              72        2064
 El Centro Senior Villas II                          579 Park Ave         LIHTC              20        2067
 Total Non At-Risk Units                                                                    873
 At-Risk
                                                                           Profit
 Euclid Villas                                    1735 S Euclid Ave     Motivated –          42 June 28, 2013
                                                                         Section 8
 Total At-Risk Units                                                                         42
 Total Housing Stock Within the City of El Centro                                           915
 Source:
      1.   HUD, 2013
      2.   Imperial Valley Housing Authority (IVHA), 2013.
                                                                                                 City of El Centro
Page 36                                                                                2013-2021 Housing Element

B. Preservation of At-Risk Housing Units
State Housing Element law requires the analysis of government-subsidized housing that
may change from low-income housing to market-rate housing during the next ten years.
Thus, this at-risk housing analysis covers the period from October 15, 2013 through October
15, 2023. This section evaluates affordable housing in El Centro that may be at-risk of
converting to market rates and the estimated costs to preserve or replace the at-risk units.
Within the 2013-2023 “at-risk” housing analysis period, one of the City’s affordable housing
projects is considered at low risk of being converted to market rate because the owners have
continued to renew their HUD Section 8 contracts. While the HUD renewal process is
periodic, the approval is fairly automatic. Though unlikely, it is possible 42 of the City’s
affordable housing units could convert to market-rate at some point in the planning period.
Preservation Options
Depending on the circumstances of the at-risk projects, different options may be used to
preserve or replace the units. Preservation options typically include: 1) transfer of units to
non-profit ownership; and 2) purchase of affordability covenants. In terms of replacement,
the most direct option is the development of new assisted multi-family housing units. The
following discussion highlights ways that the City’s at-risk project could be preserved as
affordable housing. All of the presented alternatives are costly and beyond the ability of the
City of El Centro to manage without large amounts of subsidy from federal and/or State
resources. These options are described below.
Transfer of Ownership
One preservation option is to transfer the ownership of the at-risk units to a nonprofit
organization or purchase similar units by a nonprofit organization. This option is applicable
to the Euclid Villas Apartments, as it is a for-profit housing project. By transferring
property ownership to a non-profit organization, low income restrictions can be secure and
the project would become potentially eligible for a greater range of governmental assistance.
The cost of transferring ownership depends on a number of factors, including the market
conditions at the time, occupancy rate, and physical conditions of the building and units.
The estimated market value for the for-profit units at risk is provided in Table 30.
Current market value for the at-risk units is estimated on the basis of the units’ potential
annual income, and operating and maintenance expenses. As indicated, the estimated
market value of El Centro’s current stock of at-risk affordable housing is $3.9 million. This
estimate is provided for the purpose of comparison and understanding the magnitude of
costs involved and does not represent the precise market value of this project. The actual
market value at time of sale would depend on market and property conditions, lease-
out/turnover rates, among other factors.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                               Page 37

                             Table 30: Market Value of At-Risk Housing Units
                                         Unit Information                                    Total
                             Two-Bedroom Units                                                           14
                             Three-Bedroom Units                                                         28
                             Annual Operating Cost                                                 $204,750
                             Gross Annual Income                                                   $517,742
                             Net Annual Income                                                     $312,992
                             Market Value                                                        $3,912,405
                             Market value for at-risk units is estimated with the following assumptions:
                                  1. Average market rent based on Fair Market Rents (FY 2013)
                                       established by HUD (Two-bedroom unit = $822, and Three-
                                       bedroom unit = $1,211).
                                  2. Average size is assumed to be: 850 square feet for a two-bedroom
                                       apartment, and 1,200 square feet for a three-bedroom apartment.
                                  3. Annual income is calculated on a vacancy rate = 5%.
                                  4. Annual operating expenses per square foot = $4.50.
                                  5. Market value = Annual net project income*multiplication factor.
                                  6. Multiplication factor for a building in good condition is 12.5.
 Rental Assistance
 Tenant-based rent subsidies could be used to preserve the affordability of housing. Prior to
 the State’s dissolution of the Redevelopment Agency in 2012 the City could have used
 housing set-aside funds to provide direct rent subsidies to very low income households,
 similar to Housing Choice Vouchers. This option is applicable to all 42 units subsidized
 with Section 8.
 The level of the subsidy required to preserve the at-risk units is estimated to equal the Fair
 Market Rent (FMR) for a unit minus the housing cost affordable by a very low income
 household. Table 31 estimates the rent subsidies required to preserve the affordability of
 the 42 at-risk units. Based on the estimates and assumptions shown in this table,
 approximately $17,871 in rent subsidies would be required monthly (or $214,500 annually).
 Assuming a 20-year affordability, the total subsidy is about $4.3 million.
Table 31: Rental Subsidies Required
                                                                      Very Low           Affordable        Monthly           Total
                Total        Fair Market        Household
Unit Size                                                              Income               Cost –         Per Unit        Monthly
                Units           Rent1                 Size
                                                                     (50% AMI)2            Utilities3      Subsidy         Subsidy
2-br                  28             $822                       3         $26,100                 $448          $374          $10,461
3-br                  14           $1,211                       4         $28,950                 $682          $529           $7,410
Total                 42                                                                                                      $17,871
Notes:
     1.  Final FY 2013 Fair Market Rent (FMR) is determined by HUD.
     2.  Imperial County 2013 Area Median Household Income (AMI) limits set by the California Department of Housing and Community
         Development (HCD).
     3.  Affordable cost = 30% of household income minus utility allowance.
                                                                                                                    City of El Centro
 Page 38                                                                                                 2013-2021 Housing Element

Purchase of Affordability Covenants
Another option to preserve the affordability of at-risk projects is to provide an incentive
package to the owners to maintain the projects as affordable housing. Incentives could
include writing down the interest rate on the remaining loan balance, and/or
supplementing the subsidy amount received to market levels.
To purchase the affordability covenant on these projects, an incentive package should
include interest subsidies at or below what the property owners can obtain in the open
market. To enhance the attractiveness of the incentive package, the interest subsidies may
need to be combined with rent subsidies that supplement the HUD fair market rent levels.
Replacement Option
The construction of new lower income housing units is a means of replacing the at-risk units
should they be converted to market rate. The cost of developing new housing depends on a
variety of factors such as density, size of units, location and related land costs, and type of
construction. Euclid Villas is comprised of two- and three-bedroom family apartment units.
Assuming an average development cost of $158,000 per unit for multi-family rental housing,
replacement of the 42 at-risk units at Euclid Villas would require approximately $6.64
million, excluding land costs, which vary depending upon location.
                Table 32: Estimated New Construction Costs
                                                      (A)                 (B)               (C)             (D)
                                                                    Estimated           Estimated       Estimated
                        Unit Size                                     Average             Gross            Gross
                                                Total Units
                                                                      Unit Size          Building        Building
                                                                       (sq. ft.)           Size            Costs
                2-BR                                          14               850            14,280    $1,736,270
                3-BR                                          28             1,200            40,320    $4,902,408
                Total                                         42                              54,600    $6,638,678
                Average Per Unit Cost:                                                                 $158,063.75
                (C) = (A) x (B) x 1.20 (i.e. 20% inflation to account for hallways and other common areas).
                (D) = (C) x $97.27 (per square foot construction costs) x 1.25 (i.e. 25% factor to account for parking
                and landscaping costs).
Cost Comparison
The cost to build new housing to replace the 42 at-risk units is high, with an estimated total
cost of more than $6.64 million. This cost estimate is substantially higher than the cost
associated with transfer of ownership ($3.9 million) and providing rent subsidies similar to
Housing Choice Vouchers for 20 years ($4.3 million).
Resources for Preservation of At-Risk Units
A variety of potential funding sources are available for the acquisition, replacement, or rent
subsidies; however, due to the high costs of developing and preserving at-risk housing
relative to the amount of available local funds, multi-layering of local and non-local sources
may be required. A more thorough description of resources for the preservation of at-risk
units is presented in Section 4, Housing Resources. The City will continue to monitor the 42
at-risk units located in Euclid Villas and should a notice of intent to convert to market rate
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                              Page 39
be filed, work with potential purchasers to preserve the units, and ensure that tenants were
properly notified of their rights under California law (see Program 11).
                                                                                 City of El Centro
Page 40                                                                2013-2021 Housing Element
3. Housing Constraints
Although El Centro strives to ensure the provision of adequate and affordable housing to
meet the needs of the community, many factors can constrain the development,
maintenance and improvement of housing. These include market mechanisms, government
regulations, and physical as well as environmental constraints. This section addresses these
potential constraints that affect the supply and cost of housing in El Centro.
3.1. Market Constraints
Several local and regional constraints hinder the ability to accommodate El Centro’s
demand for affordable housing. The cost of land and development costs can make it
expensive for developers to build housing. Historically, these constraints have resulted in
housing that is often unaffordable to lower, and often moderate, income households, or may
render some potential residential projects economically infeasible for developers. Subsidies
are often necessary to bridge the gap between market rate and affordable housing costs by
lower income households. In fact, most affordable housing developments in El Centro
today often require multiple subsidy sources in order to make a project financially feasible.
The recent market downturn has depressed housing prices to a point that most moderate
income and even some low income households can afford homeownership in the City.
However, limited availability of mortgage financing is an issue. Furthermore, as the
economy recovers and home prices increase in response, an affordability gap may once
again affect moderate income households.
A.        Land Costs
Land costs vary significantly in the City depending on zoning, location of the property, and
proximity to services. As of 2009, when the 2008-2014 Housing Element was adopted, the
cost of subdivided and residentially-zoned land served by infrastructure cost approximately
$200,000 per acre. No undeveloped residential properties were listed for sale in January
2013 and therefore an updated comp-based estimate of land costs is not possible; however,
given prevailing market conditions over the past few years, it can be assumed that land
costs have moderated slightly since 2009.
Although restricted financing for construction and home purchases have reduced demand
for new residential construction in recent years, the cost of raw, developable land still
comprises a significant portion of overall housing costs. For this reason, developers often
seek City approval for the largest number of single-family lots or multi-family units allowed
on a given parcel. This allows the developer to distribute the costs for new infrastructure
improvements (e.g., streets, sewer lines, water lines, drainage, etc.) over a larger number of
units to be sold or rented.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                               Page 41

B.        Construction Costs
Construction cost is determined primarily by the cost of labor and materials. The relative
importance of each is a function of the complexity of the construction job and the desired
quality of the finished product. As a result, builders are under constant pressure to
complete a job for as low a price as possible while still providing a quality product. This
pressure has led (and is still leading) to an emphasis on labor-saving materials and
construction techniques.
The price paid for material and labor at any one time will reflect short-term considerations
of supply and demand. Between 2003 and 2008, residential construction costs rose in
response to an extremely active housing market. Since 2008, construction costs have
moderated due to the housing industry downturn. Future costs are difficult to predict given
the cyclical fluctuations in demand and supply that in large part are created by fluctuations
in the state and national economies. Such policies unilaterally impact construction in a
region and therefore do not deter housing construction in any specific community.
For the average home, the cost of labor is generally two to three times the cost of materials
and therefore represents a substantial component of the total cost of construction. Most
relatively small residential construction jobs in Imperial County are performed with
nonunion contractors; as a result, labor costs are responsive to changes in the residential
market. The relative ease by which a skilled tradesperson can get a contractor’s license
further moderates the pressures that force labor costs to rise. Construction costs in El
Centro are about the same as in other parts of Imperial County. For standard housing
construction, costs may average $106 to $122 per square foot for single family residences
depending on the level of amenities provided, and $96 to $124 per square foot for multi-
family residential structure, depending on construction type and excluding parking.3
A reduction in amenities and quality of building materials (above a minimum acceptability
for health, safety, and adequate performance) could result in lower sale prices. Economy
building techniques may reduce costs. In addition, prefabricated, factory-built housing may
provide for lower priced housing by reducing construction and labor costs. Another factor
related to construction costs is the number of units built at one time. As the number of units
is increased, construction costs over the entire development are generally reduced based on
economies of scale. This reduction in costs is of particular benefit when density bonuses are
used for the provision of affordable housing.
C.        Home Financing
The availability of financing can affect a person’s ability to purchase or improve a home.
Under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), lending institutions are required to
disclose information on the disposition of loan applications by the income, gender and race
of the applicants. This applies to all loan applications for home purchases, improvements
and refinancing, whether financed at market rate or with federal government assistance.
3 http://www.iccsafe.org/cs/Documents/BVD/BVD-0812.pdf, accessed January 16, 2013.
                                                                                             City of El Centro
Page 42                                                                            2013-2021 Housing Element

Locally assisted mortgages (such as first-time homebuyer programs) are not subject to
HMDA reporting.
Table 33 summarizes the disposition of loan applications submitted to financial institutions
for home purchase, refinance and home improvement loans within El Centro in 2011.4
Included is information on loan applications that were approved and originated5, approved
but not accepted by the applicant, denied, withdrawn by the applicant or closed for
incomplete information.
Table 33: Disposition of Home Loans (2011)
                                          Home Purchase
                                                                                                                Home
                               Government                                           Refinances
                                                         Conventional                                       Improvement
      Disposition                  Backed
                               # of                      # of                       # of                     # of
                                             %                           %                       %                      %
                              Appl’n                    Appl’n                    Appl’n                   Appl’n
Approved, Originated                 368     72%                99       61%            260      48%               8    24%
Approved, Not
                                      33      6%                 9         6%            25       5%               2     6%
Accepted
Denied                                40      8%                28       17%            153 28%                   23    68%
Withdrawn                             61     12%                21       13%             67 12%                    1     3%
Incomplete                             6      1%                 5         3%            32       6%               0     0%
Total                                508   100%               162       100%            537 100%                  34   100%
Appl’n = Applications
Source: HMDA data, 2011.
Home Purchase Loans
In 2011, a total of 508 households applied for government backed loans (e.g. FHA, VA) in El
Centro. The overall loan approval rate was 78 percent and eight percent of applicants were
denied. Only 162 households applied for conventional home purchase loans and 67 percent
of these applications were approved while 17 percent were denied.
To be eligible for government-backed loans, residents must meet the established income
standards and the price of the home is capped according to the specific funding program
regulations. For calendar year 2013, the FHA home price limit for Imperial County is
$325,000, well above the median home price in El Centro. FHA loans typically require a
lower downpayment and people with less than stellar credit history may still qualify.
Therefore, use of FHA in El Centro is popular when lending in the conventional market has
tightened.
Refinance Loans
The conversion of introductory low-interest rate loans prevalent until about 2007 into high
interest rates and subsequent changes in the housing market overall led El Centro residents
4 HMDA data for 2012 is not yet available.
5 An originated loan is one that is approved by the financial institution and accepted by the loan applicant.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                            Page 43

to file 537 refinance loan applications in 2011.                More than half of the applications (48
percent) of the refinance loans were denied.
Home Improvement Loans
Only 34 El Centro residents applied for home improvement loans in 2011. Of these
applicants, only 30 percent were approved and 68 percent were denied. The large
proportion of home improvement loan denials may be explained by the nature of these
loans. These loans are usually second loans and therefore, many households may have
already carried a high debt-to-income ratio to qualify for additional financing. This pattern
is also similar to the experience of residents living in other parts of California.
Foreclosures
Between 2000 and 2005, with low interest rates, “creative” financing (e.g., zero down,
interest only, adjustable loans), and predatory lending practices (e.g. aggressive marketing,
hidden fees, negative amortization), many households purchased homes that were beyond
their financial means. Under the false assumptions that refinancing to lower interest rates
would always be an option and home prices would continue to rise at double-digit rates,
many households were (and still are) unprepared for the hikes in interest rates, expiration of
short-term fixed rates, and decline in sales prices that set off in 2006. Suddenly faced with
significantly inflated mortgage payments, and mortgage loans that are larger than the worth
of the homes, many had to resort to foreclosing their homes.
While foreclosures remain an issue, the situation has improved dramatically in recent years.
In Imperial County, only 196 Notices of Default (NODs) and 132 Trustees Deeds
(foreclosures) were recorded in the third quarter of 2012, compared to 360 NODs and 264
foreclosure filed during the same period in the previous year (for a 45.6 percent and 43.6
decrease, respectively).6 In January 2013, 153 residential properties in El Centro were listed
as foreclosures for sale.7
6    http://www.dqnews.com/Articles/2012/News/California/CA-Foreclosures/RRFor121017.aspx, accessed January 16,
     2013.
7    http://www.homes.com, accessed January 16, 2013.
                                                                                                 City of El Centro
Page 44                                                                               2013-2021 Housing Element

3.2. Governmental Constraints
Housing affordability is affected by factors in both the private and public sectors. Actions
by the City can have an impact on the price and availability of housing in El Centro. Land
use controls, site improvement requirements, building codes, fees, and other local programs
intended to improve the overall quality of housing may serve as a constraint to housing
development. These governmental constraints can limit the operations of the public,
private, and nonprofit sectors, making it difficult to meet the demand for affordable housing
and limiting supply in a region.
A.         Land Use Controls
Local land use policies and regulations impact the price and availability of housing,
including affordable housing. The following discussion of land use controls demonstrates
that El Centro encourages the provision of residential land uses at various densities to
facilitate the provision of housing for all economic segments of the community.
General Plan Land Use Designations
The El Centro General Plan, currently in effect, was adopted in 2004 and has been amended
periodically. The General Plan Land Use Element establishes policies to designate the
general distribution and intensity of residential, commercial, industrial, and community
facilities uses of the land in the City. As summarized in Table 34, the Land Use Element
accommodates a wide range of housing types in the following land use designations.
Table 34: Land Use Designations that Allow Residential Uses
                                                Max. Density/
  Land Use Element Designation                                       Summary of Allowable Residential Uses
                                                     FAR
                                                               Single-family detached dwelling units, rural-oriented
Rural Residential                                   2 du/ac    residences, mobile and modular homes, and
                                                               accessory dwelling units.
                                                               Single-family detached dwellings units, mobile and
Low Density Residential                             6 du/ac
                                                               modular homes, and accessory dwelling units.
                                                               Single-family detached and attached dwelling units,
                                                               mobile home parks, duplexes, and multi-family
Medium Density Residential                         12 du/ac
                                                               dwelling units, such as townhomes and
                                                               condominiums.
                                                               Variety of multi-family dwelling units such as garden
                                                               style units, apartments, condominiums, and
High-Medium Density Residential                    25 du/ac    townhouses. Mobile home parks, mobile and modular
                                                               homes, and accessory dwelling units may also be
                                                               allowed.
Tourist Commercial                                1.0:1 FAR    Multi-family and mixed-use residential.
Downtown Commercial                               3.0:1 FAR    Multi-family and mixed-use residential.
Source: City of El Centro General Plan Land Use Element, 2013.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                    Page 45
Single-Family Neighborhood Overlay
The Land Use Element and Zoning Ordinance include an overlay to recognize and preserve
the historical character of El Centro’s older residential neighborhoods that were developed
in the early 1920s. As infill development occurs, the character of these neighborhoods has
the potential to change as older, smaller bungalows are replaced with larger, modern homes
or multi-family housing. The overlay will help facilitate the preservation of unique
examples of single-family architecture that contribute to the City’s heritage. In the event
that an older single-family unit within the overlay needs to be replaced, such as in the event
of a fire, owners are encouraged – but not required – to reconstruct in a similar style and
scale as the original home.
Urban Development Program
The General Plan incorporates an Urban Development Program, which was adopted to
direct and control growth in the City and sphere of influence (SOI). The goal of the program
is to create a community that is compact and pedestrian and transit-oriented development,
avoids removing more agricultural land from production than necessary, and can meet the
public service and infrastructure needs of existing and future residents. Development
“tiers” are established for the SOI and implementation of the program will ensure that a
variety of growth locations are available and timed to maintain reasonable housing costs
and promote economic development.
Development Tier 1 includes land within and adjacent to the existing City limits. All sites
identified to accommodate the RHNA and listed in the Residential Sites Inventory
(Appendix C) of this Housing Element are located within this tier. In most cases, new
development within Tier 1 can be served by gravity sewer lines to existing trunk sewers.
Generally, water lines and reservoirs are also adequate to serve new development; however,
payment of proportional impact fees to improve the facilities to accommodate the ultimate
buildout capacity of the tier will be required. Fire, police, schools, parks, library, medical,
roads, and other facilities and services are also in proximity to these areas. Limited
improvements to existing facilities and/or new facilities may be needed to accommodate
anticipated growth. Subdivisions and other development in this area are expected to follow
standard zoning, subdivision, and environmental review procedures.
Specific Plans
The General Plan anticipates and encourages the use of specific plans when designing new
projects, especially those that will include large areas of land. For example, future
development proposed within Urban Development Program Tiers II/III may benefit most
from the specific planning process. The specific plan process allows for a more
comprehensive planning process for the target area and can be a mechanism to allow for
flexibility in the design and location of future land uses. The City approved the Las Aldeas
Specific Plan in July 2009 consisting of 2,641 dwelling units on 683 acres of vacant land.
                                                                                   City of El Centro
Page 46                                                                  2013-2021 Housing Element

Airport Land Use Plan
Due to the close proximity of the Imperial County Airport, land use options are limited in a
portion of northern El Centro. The Imperial County Airport Land Use Commission is
responsible for maintaining an Airport Land Use Plan (ALUP), which includes a set of land
use compatibility criteria for lands surrounding the Imperial County Airport. Portions of
northern El Centro are located within the D zone, representing negligible risk from airport
activity, whereas other areas are in the approach and departure zones (B1/B2) and are
subjected to risk and noise exposure. In addition, there is a private airstrip, Douthitt Strip
Airport, located at the easternmost end of Olive Avenue, which has the potential to impact
surrounding land uses.
Although there is only one municipal airport and one small private airstrip with limited
potential to affect residential land uses in El Centro, the applicable ALUP has potential to
constrain residential development. A constraint is most likely if General Plan land uses or
any future residential development is deemed incompatible with the ALUP or if the ALUP
precludes a significant portion of the community being used for residential development.
No incompatibility has been identified with existing General Plan land uses and none is
anticipated in the future because the City’s Zoning Ordinance includes a Residential Airport
Zone (RAP) that regulates development consistent with the ALUP. Furthermore, the
Residential Sites Inventory (Appendix C) does not include any parcels within the RAP zone.
The ALUP is not considered a significant constraint in El Centro.
B.        Residential Development Standards
The City’s Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 29 of the El Centro Municipal Code) regulates the
type, location, density and scale of residential development for areas of the City. Zoning
regulations are designed to protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare of
residents as well as implement the policies of the General Plan. Table 35 below provides a
summary of the range of residential land uses and associated densities and Floor-Area-Ratio
(FAR) allowed in the City pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance. New residential construction
and alterations to existing structures and sites must conform to the development standards
summarized in Table 36.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                              Page 47

 Table 35: Zoning Districts that Allow Residential Uses
                                         Max.
      Zoning Category                                                          Notes
                                    Density/FAR
                                                 Allows for the development of residential uses within areas
                                                 designated as "extended approach/departure zone" under
                                                 the Imperial County Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan
 Residential Airport (RAP)             1 du/ac
                                                 where risk factors have been identified resulting in the need
                                                 for restricting density. A conditional use permit (CUP) is
                                                 required for residential development in this zone.
                                                 Provides for large lot rural residential uses and is intended to
 Rural Residential (RR)                2 du/ac   implement the Rural Residential general plan land use
                                                 designation.
                                                 Provides for the development of a single-family home (or
                                                 mobile home on a permanent foundation) and the protection
 Low Density (R1)                      6 du/ac   of these dwellings from incompatible uses. Intended to
                                                 implement the Low Density Residential general plan land use
                                                 designation.
                                                 Permits the development of medium density, single-family,
                                                 duplex, or multi-family dwellings and is intended to implement
 Medium Density (R2)                  12 du/ac
                                                 the Medium Density Residential general plan land use
                                                 designation.
                                                 Permits the development of medium high density apartment
                                                 and condominium dwellings and is intended to implement the
 High-Medium Density (R3)             25 du/ac
                                                 High Medium Density Residential general plan land use
                                                 designation.
                                                 Allows multi-family and mixed-use residential by CUP and is
 Tourist Commercial (CT)               1:1 FAR   intended to implement the Tourist Commercial general plan
                                                 land use designation.
                                                 Allows multi-family and mixed-use residential and is intended
 Downtown Commercial (CD)          3:1 FAR       to implement the Downtown Commercial general plan land
                                                 use designation.
 Source: City of El Centro Municipal Code, 2013.
                                                                                                  City of El Centro
Page 48                                                                                2013-2021 Housing Element
Table 36: Residential Development Standards by Zoning District
       Standard                  RAP            RR                R1             R2              R3            CT              CD
Min. Lot Size:
   Single-family               1 acre1        ½ acre           7,200 sf       3,600 sf       3,600 sf          N/A            N/A
   Multi-family                  N/A            N/A              N/A          7,200 sf       7,200 sf       7,200 sf         None
Max. Lot Coverage                35%           25%               50%            50%             60%           60%            None
Min. Lot Width                  150 ft         100 ft          50-60 ft       60-65 ft       60-65 ft       60-65 ft         None
Min. Lot Depth                  200 ft      150-200 ft        100-150 ft     100-150 ft     100-150 ft     100-150 ft        None
Max. Building Height2            35 ft          35 ft            35 ft          35 ft           45 ft         65 ft           65 ft
Open Space3
   2 units on a lot             400 sf        400 sf            400 sf         400 sf         400 sf          None           None
   >2 units on a lot            150 sf        150 sf            150 sf         150 sf         150 sf4         None           None
Setbacks:
   Front                         60 ft          40 ft            20 ft          20 ft           20 ft         20 ft          None
   Rear5                       20-50 ft      10-50 ft          10-50 ft        5-50 ft        5-50 ft        5-25 ft         0-25 ft
   Side                          30 ft          20 ft           5-15 ft        5-15 ft        5-15 ft        5-15 ft         0-10 ft
Source: El Centro Municipal Code, 2013.
Notes:
1 Density of one du/acre is required per the General Plan; however, densities consistent with the R1 zone may be allowed as a cluster
  development, subject to CUP and so long as the average densities within the designated “extended approach/departure” areas do not
  exceed one du/acre.
2 A CUP may be granted to authorize additional exceptions to height limits in any zone.
3 When a private open space area greater than ninety-six (96) square feet with a minimum width of eight (8) feet is provided for each
  dwelling unit, the total common open space requirements may be reduced by twenty-five (25) percent.
4 A minimum of 50 square feet of private of private open space required contiguous to each dwelling unit.
5 The top end of setback range applies to lots abutting a freeway.
Maximum density in the CT and CD zones is regulated by cumulative application of the
development standards, including maximum height, lot coverage, FAR, parking, and
setbacks. The City has not had much market interest in recent years to develop multi-family
or mixed-use projects in these zones due to the depressed housing market; however,
development application history prior to the market downturn demonstrates that at least 19
units per acre can be accommodated in these zones. In 2008, the City approved a CUP to
allow a two-story, 16-unit apartment complex on a 0.85-acre site in the CT zone. The project
would have yielded 18.8 units per acre; however, the developer elected not to move forward
with the project.
Multi-family and mixed-use projects proposed in the CD zone can accommodate
significantly greater density than 19 units per acre. In April 2013, the City amended the
General Plan and Zoning Ordinance to increase the FAR from 2.0:1 to 3.0:1 allowed for
shared parking in the CD zone. Furthermore, buildings can be up to 65 feet in height and
the zone does not have maximum lot coverage or minimum open space requirements.
Development within the CD zone must comply with the Downtown El Centro Design
Standards. The Design Standards incorporates recommendations from a study conducted
under a “Project SHAPE” grant.                                 The purpose of the study was to develop
recommendations “to foster a cohesive pattern of development that support pedestrian
activity and transit-oriented development in the downtown area.” As such, the Design
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                   Page 49

Standards incorporate smart growth principles and serve to encourage and facilitate, not
constrain, transit-oriented development.
The maximum height of residential buildings in the RAP, RR, R1 and R2 zones is 35 feet,
which is sufficient to accommodate two-story buildings. Maximum lot coverage ranges
from 25 percent in the RR zone to 50 percent in the R1 and R2 zones. Up to 45 feet (or 3
stories) and 60 percent lot coverage is allowed within the R3 zone.
Open space requirements apply within all residential zones. At least 400 square feet of
common open space is required per unit when two units are proposed on a lot and 150
square feet per unit is required when more than two units are proposed. In the R3 zone, a
minimum of 50 square feet of private of private open space required contiguous to each
dwelling unit. The Zoning Ordinance allows a 25 percent reduction in total common open
space when a development provides more than 96 square feet of private open space per unit
with a minimum width of eight feet.
A 48-unit apartment complex built in 2009 in the R3 zone achieved 21.8 units per acre
without a variance or the allowable 25 percent open space reduction. This recent project
demonstrates that at least 87 percent of the maximum allowable density in the R3 zone is
realistic and the cumulative application of development standards does not constrain multi-
family development. The developer did not seek to yield more units on the project site.
Moderate land costs in the Imperial Valley allow developers to emphasize project design,
unit size variation, and amenities that enhance market competitiveness. Maximizing unit
yield is not a developer’s primary concern when land cost pressure is low.
Density Bonus Ordinance
Density bonuses, together with the incentives and/or concessions, result in a lower average
cost of land per dwelling unit thereby making the provision of affordable housing more
feasible. In accordance with SB 1818 (enacted in 2005) and SB 435 (enacted 2006), developers
of qualifying affordable housing and senior housing projects are entitled to a density bonus
of up to 35 percent over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the
applicable zoning district. Developers of qualifying projects are also entitled to at least one
concession or incentive and may utilize the following parking ratios (inclusive of handicap
and guest parking):
        Zero to one bedrooms: one onsite parking space.
        Two to three bedrooms: two onsite parking spaces.
        Four and more bedrooms: two and one-half parking spaces.
El Centro’s Zoning Ordinance includes density bonus provisions that are consistent with
existing State law. The City will continue to work with developers on a case-by-case basis to
provide regulatory concessions and incentives to assist them with the development of
affordable and senior housing. Working alongside developers on a case-by-case basis is the
most effective method of providing technical assistance as each individual project can be
analyzed to determine which concessions and incentives would be the most beneficial to the
project’s feasibility. Regulatory concessions and incentives could include, but are not
limited to, reduced minimum lot sizes, lot dimensions, setbacks, distance between
                                                                                 City of El Centro
Page 50                                                                2013-2021 Housing Element

buildings, usable open space, increased maximum lot coverage and building heights, impact
fee deferral, and waived development standards as necessary to make the housing units
economically feasible.
Parking Requirements
Parking requirements for different types of residential uses in El Centro are summarized in
Table 37. The requirements for multi-family apartment developments are reasonably
adjusted for unit size and the requirements for multi-family or mixed use developments in
the CD zone and senior apartments are lower than ratios available to affordable housing
developers pursuant to State density bonus law.
                 Table 37: Off-Street Residential Parking Requirements
                               Use                                 Parking Spaces Required
                 Single-family                       2.0 / du
                 Duplex                              2.0 / du
                 Multi-family
                    Studio                           1.0 / du + 0.25 / du (guest)
                    1 BR                             1.5 / du + 0.25 / du (guest)
                    2 BR                             2.0 / du + 0.25 / du (guest)
                    3+ BR                            2.0 / du + 0.50 / br over 3, plus 0.25 / du (guest)
                 In CD Zone                          1.0 / du
                 Condos or Townhomes                 2.0 / du + 0.25 / du (guest)
                 Second Dwelling Unit                1.0 / du
                 Senior Apartments                   1.0 / du + 0.25 / du (guest)
                 Source: City of El Centro Zoning Ordinance, 2013.
In an effort to encourage and facilitate development, including mixed-use and multi-family
residential development in the downtown area, the City amended the General Plan and
Zoning Ordinance in April 2013 to relax parking requirements. Specifically, the City
provided a shared parking option within the CD zone. Areas where shared parking is
allowed are depicted in Figure 6.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                Page 51
              Figure 6: Shared Parking in the Downtown Commercial (CD) Zone
C.      Provisions for a Variety of Housing Types
State Housing Element law specifies that jurisdictions identify adequate sites to be made
available through appropriate zoning and development standards to encourage the
development of various types of housing for all economic segments of the population. This
includes single-family housing, multi-family housing, mobile homes, farm employee
housing, emergency shelters, transitional and supportive housing, among others. Table 38
summarizes the various housing types permitted and conditionally permitted under the
City’s Zoning Ordinance.
                                                                              City of El Centro
Page 52                                                             2013-2021 Housing Element

Table 38: Provision for a Variety of Housing Types
           Housing Type                        RAP         RR         R1           R2           R3         CT          CD    CG & CH
Single-Family                                   P            P         P             P          P           X           X       X
Manufactured Housing                            P            P         P             P          P           X           X       X
Mobile Home Park                                C            C         C             C          C           X           X       X
Second Dwelling Unit                            P            P         P             P          P           X           X       X
Duplex                                          X            X         X             P          P           X           X       X
Multi-Family                                    X            X         X             P          P           C           P       X
Mixed-Use                                       X            X         X             X          X           C           P       X
Group Dwellings                                 X            X         X             X          P           X           X       X
Single Room Occupancy (SRO)                     X            X         X             X          X           C           C       X
Residential Care Facility, Small                P            P         P             P          P           C           P       X
Residential Care Facility, Large                X            P         P             P          P           C           P       X
Transitional Housing                            P            P         P             P          P           C           P       X
Supportive Housing                              P            P         P             P          P           C           P       X
Emergency Shelter                               X            X         X             X          P           X           X       P
Farm Employee Housing
                                                X            P         X             X          X           X           X       X
(Incidental to Ag Use)
Source: El Centro Zoning Ordinance, 2013.
Notes: “P” = Permitted (ministerial review); “CUP” = Conditional Use Permit (discretionary review); and “X” = Not Permitted.
  Single-Family
  The term “dwelling, single-family” is defined in the Zoning Ordinance as a detached
  building or mobile home designed primarily for the use of a single family and no portion of
  which is to be rented separately. Single-family units are permitted by-right in all residential
  zones.
  Manufactured Housing
  The El Centro Zoning Ordinance includes “manufactured home” as defined in the
  California Health and Safety Code in the following definition of mobile home: A structure
  designed as a permanent dwelling unit to be used with or without a permanent foundation,
  and which is in excess of eight feet in width or in excess of 40 feet in length.
  A mobile home that was constructed after September 15, 1971, and was issued an insignia of
  approval by the state department of housing and community development or a mobile
  home that has been certified under the National Mobile home Construction and Safety
  Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. § 5401 et seq.), and located on a permanent foundation is
  permitted in all residential zones on lots where no other mobile home on a permanent
  foundation, single-family dwelling or multi-family dwellings are located, regardless of the
  lot size and the number of dwelling units otherwise permitted by the Zoning Ordinance.
  City of El Centro
  2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                   Page 53

Mobile Home Parks
Mobile home parks include an “area or tract of land where two (2) or more mobile home lots
are rented or leased or held out for rent or lease to accommodate mobile homes for human
habitation.” Mobile home parks are permitted in all residential zones with approval of a
CUP.
Second Dwelling Units
A second dwelling unit is defined in the Zoning Ordinance as “a separate residential unit
containing sleeping quarters, kitchen and bathroom facilities independent of the main
dwelling on the site.” The definition also references California Government Code section
65852.2.
Government Code section 65852.2 requires local jurisdictions to adopt ordinances that
establish the conditions under which second dwelling units are permitted. A jurisdiction
cannot adopt an ordinance that precludes the development of second units unless findings
are made acknowledging that allowing second units may limit the housing opportunities of
the region and result in adverse impacts on public health, safety and welfare. The ordinance
must facilitate ministerial review and approval (i.e. second units otherwise compliant with
local zoning standards can be approved without conditions or a public hearing).
The City allows second dwelling units in all residential zones, subject to ministerial Site Plan
Review. Projects that meet the following criteria will be approved, per State law and Section
29-168 of the El Centro Zoning Ordinance:
       The unit is not intended for sale and may be rented.
       The lot is zoned for single-family or multi-family use.
       The lot contains an existing single-family dwelling.
       The second unit is either attached to the existing dwelling and located within the
        living area of the existing dwelling or detached from the existing dwelling and
        located on the same lot as the existing dwelling.
       The increased floor area of an attached second unit shall not exceed 30 percent of the
        existing living area.
       The total area of floor space for a detached second unit shall not exceed 1,200 square
        feet.
       Requirements relating to height, setback, lot coverage, architectural review, site plan
        review, fees, charges, and other zoning requirements generally applicable to
        residential construction in the zone in which the property is located.
       Local building code requirements which apply to detached dwellings, as
        appropriate.
       Approval by the local health officer where a private sewage disposal system is being
        used, if required.
                                                                                   City of El Centro
Page 54                                                                  2013-2021 Housing Element

Duplexes
Duplexes are a multi-family dwelling “in which two (2) dwelling units are attached and
located together on a lot or building site.” Duplex buildings are allowed by-right in the R2
and R3 zones, subject to ministerial Site Plan Review.
Multi-Family
El Centro’s Zoning Ordinance defines “dwelling, multiple-family” as “a building or
buildings designed and used for occupancy by two (2) or more families, all living
independently of each other and having separate kitchen and toilet facilities for each
family.” Multi-family dwellings are allowed by-right in the R2, R3, and CD zones, subject to
ministerial Site Plan Review. Multi-family dwellings are also allowed in the CT zone with
approval of a CUP by the Planning Commission.
Mixed-Use
Mixed-use buildings and developments are allowed by-right in the CD district, subject to
ministerial Site Plan Review, and with approval of a CUP by the Planning Commission in
the CT zone. A mixed-use building is defined by the City as a “structure or project with
both residential and pedestrian-oriented commercial uses (including retail, restaurants,
offices, services and similar uses deemed compatible with residential uses). The commercial
use or uses are typically located on the ground floor of the structure with the residential
dwellings predominantly located on the second or higher floors.” The Zoning Ordinance
draws a distinction between mixed-use buildings and mixed-use developments. A mixed-
use development is defined as a “project with both residential and non-residential uses
located on the same lot or site. With this type of development, there is no requirement that
the residential and the non-residential uses be located in the same building.”
Group Dwellings
The City allows “group dwellings” by-right in the R3 zone, subject to ministerial Site Plan
Review. Per the Zoning Ordinance definition, this use includes “apartment hotels,
boarding, rooming or lodging houses consisting mainly of living units without individual
kitchens which are rented on a weekly basis or longer. Also includes student dormitories
and retirement homes providing congregate dining facilities.” Group dwellings can provide
a valuable form of affordable private housing for seniors, persons with disabilities, and
lower income households, including extremely low income households, and can serve as an
entry point into the housing market for formerly homeless people.
Single Room Occupancy (SRO) Buildings
The City revised the Zoning Ordinance in April 2013 to define SRO buildings and allow the
use with approval of a CUP by the Planning Commission in the CT and CD zones. The
Zoning Ordinance defines SRO buildings as “a building providing single-room units for one
or more persons with or without shared kitchen and bath facilities, including efficiency
units per Health and Safety Code Section 17958.1.” Like group dwellings, SROs can be
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                             Page 55

another source of affordable housing for lower-income households, including extremely low
income households.
Residential Care Facilities
The City of El Centro defines “residential care facility” to include “various types of facilities
operated by licensed staff that provide twenty-four (24) hour non-medical supportive and
custodial care for children, adults, and the elderly who need general assistance for everyday
living. The facilities are licensed by the state department of social services and are not
considered to be health facilities. The facilities are referred to by a variety of terms,
including: group homes, family care homes, foster family homes, small family homes,
special needs housing, adult residential facilities, social rehabilitation facilities, residential
board and care facilities, assisted living facilities, residential care facilities for the chronically
ill, and residential care facilities for the elderly. See California Health and Safety Code §
1502(a).”
The Zoning Ordinance distinguishes between small and large residential care facilities. The
Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act provides that state-licensed residential
care facilities serving six or fewer individuals must be treated no differently than any other
residential use. Consistent with State law, the City allows small residential care facilities
that serve six or fewer clients in all residential zones, subject to the same development
standards and permit processing requirements as other types of housing in the same zone.
In April 2013, the City amended the Zoning Ordinance to clarify that residential care
facilities are also allowed by-right and subject to ministerial review in the CD zone and with
approval of a CUP by the Planning Commission in the CT zone, the same as multi-family
residential developments in these zones.
The planning process for development of this Housing Element identified potential
constraints related to the City’s regulation of residential care facilities that serve seven or
more clients. Prior to April 2013, the City distinguished between “large” residential care
facilities (i.e., those that serve between seven and 14 clients) and “institutional” residential
care facilities (i.e., those that serve more than 14 clients). “Institutional” residential care
facilities were regulated more stringently than “large” residential care facilities. In April
2013, the City amended the Zoning Ordinance to eliminate the “institutional” residential
care facility use and the 14-person maximum client limit for “large” residential care
facilities. As a result, “large” residential care facilities serving seven or more clients are
now allowed by-right in the RR, R1, R2, and R3 zones. “Large” residential care facilities are
also allowed by-right in the CD zone and with a CUP in the CT zone. The April 2013
Zoning Ordinance amendments also reduced the minimum spacing requirement from 600
feet to 300 feet.
The Community Development Director may review applications as a nondiscretionary
permit under the administrative site plan review procedure; however, property owners
within 100 feet of a proposed large residential care facility must be noticed and an
administrative hearing is required upon request by an applicant or member of the public.
An exemption to the spacing requirement may be approved by the City if the existing
                                                                                         City of El Centro
Page 56                                                                       2013-2021 Housing Element

facility is at capacity or the applicant demonstrates that a need exists for a unique or
particular service not currently provided by the existing large residential care facility.
Transitional and Supportive Housing
In April 2013, the City amended the Zoning Ordinance to clarify provisions for transitional
and supportive housing consistent with SB 2 (enacted 2008). Transitional and supportive
housing are allowed by-right in all residential zones and the City has not adopted any
special or unique development standards, findings, or other criteria for either use.
Transitional housing is defined as “Buildings configured as rental housing developments,
but operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and
recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some
predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six months. Transitional
housing that is provided in single-family, duplex, manufactured housing, multi-family,
mixed-use units, or group dwellings shall be permitted, conditionally permitted or
prohibited in the same manner as the other single-family, duplex, manufactured housing,
multi-family, mixed-use units, or group dwellings under this Chapter. See California
Health and Safety Code §§ 50675.2(h) and 50801(i).”
Supportive housing is defined as “housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied
by the target population, and that is linked to onsite or offsite services that assist the
supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status,
and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community.
‘Target population’ per this section means persons, including persons with disabilities, and
families who are ‘homeless,’ as that term is defined by Section 11302 of Title 42 of the United
States Code, or who are ‘homeless youth,’ as that term is defined by paragraph (2) of
subdivision (e) of Section 11139.3 of the Government Code. Supportive housing that is
provided in single-family, duplex, manufactured housing, multi-family, mixed-use units, or
group dwellings shall be permitted, conditionally permitted or prohibited in the same
manner as the other single-family, duplex, manufactured housing, multi-family, mixed-use
units, or group dwellings under this Chapter. See California Health and Safety Code §
50675.14(b).”
Emergency Shelters
State law requires that local jurisdictions identify a zone or zones where emergency shelters
are allowed with a non-discretionary (i.e., ministerial) review. The Zoning Ordinance
defines “emergency shelter” as “a housing facility that provides temporary overnight
shelter for persons with no permanent housing with minimal support services in which
residency is limited to six (6) months or less and is not related to the person's ability to pay.
Such facilities may offer services to meet basic needs such as food, clothing, and limited
medical care. See California Health and Safety Code § 50801(e).”
Emergency shelters are allowed by right in the R3, CG, and CH zones, subject to ministerial
building permit review. The City has not adopted unique development standards or criteria
for this use. The City has more than 30 acres of vacant land within the R3 zone that could
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                  Page 57

accommodate at least one year-round emergency shelter for at least 17 homeless individuals
(identified unsheltered homeless population in El Centro as of January 2013). Additional
vacant parcels are located in the CG and CH zones. The R3, CG, and CH zones are located
primarily along the City’s transportation corridors and/or are located closest to public
transportation and services.
Farm Employee Housing
Although the General Plan does not include an agriculture land use designation,
commercial agricultural operations are allowed by-right within the RR, rural residential
zone. The City amended the Zoning Ordinance in April 2013 to define “farm employee
housing” as “Housing that is incidental or accessory to a permitted agricultural use and
provides accommodations for six or fewer employees within a single-family structure. See
Section 17021.5 of the California Health and Safety Code.” Farm employee housing that is
incidental to an agricultural use is allowed by-right within the RR zone, consistent with the
California Employee Housing Act.
D.      Site Improvements, Exactions and Development Fees
Site Improvements
 
The City requires on- and off-site improvements for all new residential subdivisions,
including single-family, multi-family, and mixed-use developments. Typical off-site
improvements include curb/gutter and drainage facilities, sidewalks, paved streets,
landscaping, and water/sewer service. On-site improvements could include necessary
extensions of utilities from the street to serve each individual unit, driveways, front yard
landscaping, and perimeter fencing. These minimal improvements are necessary to
promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the public. The costs of improvements
are the responsibility of developers and are applied uniformly to all projects within the City.
Table 39 summarizes roadway width standards contained in the General Plan Circulation
Element. The Circulation Element grants flexibility to reduce the overall right-of-way width
by using narrower shoulders, travel lanes, and/or parking strips for new streets through
areas with right-of-way constraints.
             Table 39: Circulation Element Roadway Standards
                             Roadway Type                           Right-of-Way Curb-to-Curb
             Principal/Prime Arterial                                   138’         114’
             Secondary/Minor 4-lane Arterial                            102’          78’
             Major 4-lane Collector                                      88’          64’
             Secondary 2-lane Arterial                                   76’          52’
             Residential Street                                          64’          40’
             Secondary Arterial Confined Right-of-Way                    60’          40’
             Source: El Centro General Plan Circulation Element, 2004.
                                                                                              City of El Centro
Page 58                                                                             2013-2021 Housing Element

Development Fees and Exactions
In addition to improvements and dedications of land for public purposes, housing
developers are subject to variety of fees and exactions to cover the cost of processing permits
and providing necessary services and facilities. In general, these fees can be a constraint on
housing development and compromise project feasibility because the additional cost borne
by developers contributes to overall increased housing unit cost. However, the fees are
necessary to maintain adequate planning services and other public services and facilities in
the City.
For new residential projects, developers in El Centro may be required to pay one or more of
the following fees depending on the location, type, and size of the project:
         Planning, Building, and Environmental Fees: The City of El Centro charges
          developers standard plan check fees, fees for processing applications, building
          permits, subdivision maps, environmental initial study, variance, conditional use
          permit, or other permits to pay for the cost of processing applications and
          conducting inspections for specific projects. This does not include additional fees
          paid by the developer for project-specific environmental impact reports.
         City Impact Fees: The City charges
                                                    Table 40: Permit Processing Fees
          impact fees to finance new or
          expanded infrastructure and public                             Type                            Amount
          facilities required to serve residents.   Planning Permits
          The fee must have a reasonable               Variance                                              $867
          relationship to the infrastructure           Conditional Use Permit                              $2,210
          costs and represent the marginal cost        General Plan Amendment                              $2,564
          of improvements required to serve            Zone Change                                         $2,074
          residents of the new residential             Site Plan Review                                      $620
          projects. The City charges fees to           Specific Plan                                       $4,148
          offset impacts to parks, libraries,
                                                       Development Agreement                               $1,806
          police, fire, sewer, streets, and
          general government facilities.
                                                       Administrative Committee Review                       $428
                                                    Subdivisions
         School Impact Fees: Impact fees are          Lot Line Adjustment                                   $315
          collected by school districts as
                                                       Parcel Map (<5 lots)                                $1,121
          allowed by State law to finance the
                                                       Subdivision Map (5+ lots)                           $2,793
          construction and expansion of
          schools to accommodate student            Environmental
          enrollment. The City of El Centro            Initial Study                                         $474
          does not set these fees and does not         Negative Declaration                                  $830
          have discretion to waive, reduce, or         Environmental Impact Report (Review)                $3,927
          defer these fees.                         Sources: City of El Centro, User Fee Schedule, 2012.
A summary of the City’s permit processing and development impact fee schedules are
included in Table 40 and Table 41.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                 Page 59

          Table 41: Development Impact Fees
                                                                    Single-             Mobile
                                 Type                                                                  Multi-Family
                                                                     Family             Home
          City Impact Fees
             Parks                                                      $1,288              $1,037               $921
             Library                                                      $714                $575               $510
             Police                                                       $377                $303               $269
             General Government                                           $932                $750               $666
             Fire                                                         $621                $500               $444
             Streets1                                             $283 - $383                 $267      $160 - $240
             Sewer2                                                                $9,174 - $9,674
             Water3                                                               $8,149 - $10,694
          School Impact Fees
             El Centro Elementary School District                                      $3.69/sf
             McCabe Union School District                                              $2.22/sf
             Meadows Union School District                                             $1.82/sf
             Central Union High School District                                        $0.66/sf
          Sources: City of El Centro, Impact Fee Schedule, 2006; City of El Centro Water and Sewer Connection
          Application, 2009; El Centro Elementary School District, 2013; McCabe Union School District, 2013;
          Meadows Union School District, 2013; and Central Union High School District, 2013.
          Notes:
          1 Streets fees for single-family and multi-family vary by number of bedrooms. A flat fee is assessed for
            mobile homes and duplexes.
          2 Sewer connection fees vary by size (4” or 6”).
          3 Water service fees vary by line size (3/4” to 6”).
Table 42 provides a fee worksheet for two prototypical housing projects based on
applications processed in the City. Altogether, developer fees for a prototypical single-
family dwelling total $23,952. Fees for a prototypical multi-family project are somewhat
lower on a per-unit basis at $19,745.
               Table 42: Development Fees for a Typical Unit
                                    Fee Type                            Single-Family            Multi-Family
               Permit Processing Fees                                              $4,534                $1,389
               Impact Fees                                                       $17,616                $18,356
               Total estimated fees per unit                                     $23,952                $19,745
               Typical estimated cost of development per unit                   $292,524               $236,328
               Estimated proportion of fee cost to overall
               development cost per unit
                                                                                    8.2%                   8.4%
               Sources: City of El Centro, 2013.
               Notes: Single-family prototype is a 2,200 square-foot home with 400 square-foot attached garage.
               Multi-family prototype is based on the pro-forma for the Las Brisas apartment complex with 72 units
               in five two-story buildings and one community building. The average unit size is 970 square feet
               with a range of 734 square feet for one-bedroom to 1,350 square feet for a three-bedroom.
Planning and permitting fees are charged on an at-cost basis to cover staff services and
administrative expenses for processing development applications. Development impact
fees are required to provide essential services and infrastructure to serve new residents.
Impact fees are governed by State law to demonstrate a nexus between development and
                                                                                                                 City of El Centro
Page 60                                                                                             2013-2021 Housing Element

potential impacts. State law also requires the proportionality test to ensure the pro rata
share of costs to provide services and infrastructure by individual developments is
reasonable.
The City recognizes that planning/permitting and development fees add to the cost of
residential development. To mitigate the impact of permitting and impact fees on the cost
of residential development, the City will consider deferment or waiver of fees on a case-by-
case basis (see Program 3).
E.         Development Permit Procedures
The City reviews all applications for development to ensure the construction of projects that
contribute in a positive manner to the community and improve quality of life. This section
describes the permitting requirements, procedures, and timeframes for Site Plan Review,
Conditional Use Permits (CUP), and Subdivisions. Given the housing growth experienced
by the City prior to the economic downturn in 2008, the City’s permit processing procedures
do not appear to unduly constrain the development of housing.
Site Plan Review
Site Plan Review applies to all projects involving two or more dwelling units on the same
lot, second dwelling units, and developments that require a CUP or rezone. Site Plan
Review does not apply to individual single-family dwellings proposed on existing legal lots.
The purpose of Site Plan Review is to:
          Provide a process for the reviewing official or body to verify a proposed project's
           compliance with Zoning Ordinance development, design, and use standards;
          Assure land owners, business owners and developers that proposed uses, structures,
           and site improvements comply with the Zoning Ordinance provisions before
           preparation of plans for building permits; and
          Provide a means of streamlining the development review process through
           administrative review of development proposals.
The Community Development Director has authority to complete Site Plan Review for
second dwelling units, duplexes, apartments, mixed use (in the CD zone), group dwellings,
residential care facilities, transitional housing, supportive housing, and emergency shelters,
if proposed on an existing legal lot and the project application does not involve another type
of discretionary approval (e.g., CUP, variance, or rezone). The Community Development
Director’s Site Plan Review is ministerial and no noticing or public hearing is required.8
The Planning Commission conducts Site Plan Review concurrently with review of
discretionary CUP, variance, or subdivision applications. Projects that are subject to
8    The Community Development Director may review applications as a nondiscretionary permit under the administrative
     site plan review procedure; however, property owners within 100 feet of a proposed large residential care facility must
     be noticed and an administrative hearing is required upon request by an applicant or member of the public.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                          Page 61

Planning Commission Site Plan Review include mobile home parks in residential zones,
multi-family and mixed-use in the CD zone, single-room occupancy (SROs) in the CT and
CD zones, and residential care facilities, supportive housing, and transitional housing in the
CT zone. The City Council conducts Site Plan Review concurrently with discretionary
applications that involve a rezone or general plan amendment.
Conditional Use Permits
Land uses that require a CUP generally have a unique and distinct impact on the area in
which they are located or are capable of impacts to adjacent properties unless given special
review and conditions. The Planning Commission reviews and decides CUP applications
for multi-family and mixed use in the CT zone, senior apartments (which typically request
density increase, parking reductions, and other flexibilities in development standards), and
retirement homes. CUP approval by the City Council is required to approve maximum
building height modifications, density bonuses, mobile home parks, planned unit
developments, and clustered single-family development within the RAP zone. The
requirement for a CUP for senior citizen apartment projects allows for the implementation
of the density bonus program and for a further reduction in required parking on a case-by-
case basis.
The Planning Commission or City Council must make the following findings prior to
approval of a CUP:
       The use applied for at the location set forth in the application is properly one for
        which a conditional use permit is authorized by the Zoning Ordinance;
       Said use is necessary or desirable for the development of the community, is in
        harmony with the various elements or objectives of the general plan, and is not
        detrimental to existing uses or uses specifically permitted in the zone in which the
        proposed use is to be located;
       The site for the intended use is adequate in size and shape to accommodate said use,
        and all yards, setbacks, walls or fences, landscaping and other features are required
        in order to adjust said use to those existing or permitted future uses on land in the
        neighborhood; and
       The site for the proposed use relates properly to streets and highways which are
        designed and improved to carry the type and quantity of traffic generated or to be
        generated by the proposed use.
The findings apply uniformly to all uses that require a CUP and conditions of approval
must be deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
Lot Line Adjustments
The City allows for ministerial lot line adjustments to facilitate the development of multi-
family and mixed-use buildings across property lines, so long as the adjustment does not
lead to an increase in the number of legal lots. The Community Development Director has
authority to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the lot line adjustment within 15 days
of receipt of a complete application.        A lot line adjustment will be approved upon
                                                                                  City of El Centro
Page 62                                                                 2013-2021 Housing Element

determination that the adjustment plat meets the requirements of the Subdivision
Ordinance and complies with the General Plan and Zoning Ordinance.
Subdivisions
The subdivision of land into multiple lots pursuant to the California Subdivision Map Act
requires discretionary approval by the City. The Planning Commission can review and
approve or recommend denial of tentative maps of four or fewer parcels. The Planning
Commission also recommends approval, conditional approval, or denial of tentative maps
of five or more parcels. The City Council has final authority to approve, conditionally
approve, or deny all tentative maps of five or more lots or parcels; and to approve,
conditionally approve or deny any tentative map of four or fewer parcels for which the
Planning Commission recommended denial or an appeal has been made.
The reviewing and approving body must deny approval of a tentative map if it makes any
of the following findings:
         That the proposed map is not consistent with the General Plan and applicable
          specific plans;
         That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with
          the General Plan and applicable specific plans;
         That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development;
         That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development;
         That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements is likely to cause
          substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or
          wildlife or their habitat;
         That the design of the subdivision or type of improvements is likely to cause serious
          public health problems; and
         That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with
          easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of property
          within the proposed subdivision; provided, however, the city council may approve a
          map if it finds that alternate easements, for access or for use, will be provided, and
          that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public.
Permit Processing Time Frames
Permit processing time frames vary depending on the type, location and environmental
review requirements of the proposed development. Ministerial Site Plan Review and land
use applications that are Categorically Exempt from CEQA typically take between one and
four months to process. Projects that require only a Negative Declaration can typically be
processed in a six month time frame. Large subdivisions may require a longer processing
time frame due to the information required and public comments received and projects
requiring an environmental Impact Report (EIR) typically take at least a year to process.
These time frames are estimates; actual processing time may vary due to the volume of
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                 Page 63

applications, the type and number of changes made to the project by the applicant to
address impacts, and the size and complexity of the projects.
F.      Building Codes
The City of El Centro adopted the 2010 edition of the following California Building
Standards Codes, which is a compilation of specialty codes: Building Code, Residential
Code, Electrical Code, Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code, Energy Code, Historical Building
Code, Existing Building Code, and Green Building Standards Code. The City also adopted
the 2010 edition of the Uniform Administration Code and Uniform Housing Code. These
codes establish minimum standards for residential construction and are structured to be the
minimum necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, while not unduly
constraining the development of housing. The codes are determined by the International
Conference of Building Officials and the state. Some of the codes have been adopted with
minor administrative amendments; no local amendment to the code has either been initiated
or approved that directly impacts housing standards or processes.
Code enforcement is conducted by the Code Enforcement Division of the Community
Development Department and is based upon systematic enforcement in areas of concern
and on a complaint basis throughout the City. The Code Enforcement Division works with
property owners and renters to assist in meeting state health and safety codes. If a violation
relates to residential rehabilitation, the inspector refers the property owner to the Economic
Development Department for potential housing rehabilitation aid.
G.      Housing for People with Disabilities
Persons with disabilities have a number of specific housing needs, including those related to
design and location. Design needs generally include the removal of architectural barriers
that limit the accessibility of dwelling units and construction of wheelchair ramps, railings,
etc. Location needs include accessibility to public transportation, commercial services,
healthcare, and supportive services. Some persons with disabilities need group housing
opportunities, especially those who are lower income or homeless.
California statutes require that the Housing Element include an analysis of the Zoning
Ordinance, permitting procedures, development standards, building codes, and permit
processing fees to identify potential constraints for housing for persons with disabilities. The
following discussion addresses these issues and determines that no specific City policy or
regulation serves to impede the access that persons with disabilities have to housing that
suits their specific needs.
Zoning and Land Use
The Lanterman Development Disabilities Service Act (Sections 5115 and 5116) of the
California Welfare and Institutions Code declares that mentally and physically disabled
persons are entitled to live in normal residential surroundings. The use of property for the
care of six or fewer people with disabilities is a residential use for the purposes of zoning.
As discussed earlier in this Chapter, State-authorized or certified residential care facility,
                                                                                    City of El Centro
Page 64                                                                   2013-2021 Housing Element
family care home, foster home, or group home serving six or fewer people with disabilities
or dependent and neglected children on a 24-hour-a-day basis is considered a residential
use that is permitted in all zones that allow residential uses, subject to the same application
process and development standards as other types of housing in the same zones.
The planning process for development of this Housing Element identified potential
constraints related to the City’s regulation of residential care facilities that serve seven or
more clients. Prior to April 2013, the City distinguished between “large” residential care
facilities (i.e., those that serve between seven and 14 clients) and “institutional” residential
care facilities (i.e., those that serve more than 14 clients). “Institutional” residential care
facilities were regulated more stringently than “large” residential care facilities. In April
2013, the City amended the Zoning Ordinance to eliminate the “institutional” residential
care facility use and the 14 person maximum client limit for “large” residential care
facilities. As a result, “large” residential care facilities serving seven or more clients are
now allowed by-right in the RR, R1, R2, and R3 zones. “Large” residential care facilities are
also allowed by-right in the CD zone and with a CUP in the CT zone. The April 2013
Zoning Ordinance amendments also reduced the minimum spacing requirement from 600
feet to 300 feet.
In addition to residential care facilities, the City encourages and facilitates group dwellings
and supportive housing. Group dwellings are permitted in the R3 zone and supportive
housing is permitted in all zones that allow residential uses. Group dwellings and
supportive housing can be important sources of affordable housing for persons with
disabilities.
Building Codes
The City enforces Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations that regulates the access and
adaptability of buildings to accommodate people with disabilities. Government Code
Section 12955.1 requires that ten percent of the total dwelling units in multi-family buildings
without elevators consisting of three or more rental units or four or more condominium
units be subject to the following building standards for people with disabilities:
         The primary entry to the dwelling unit shall be on an accessible route unless
          exempted by site impracticality tests.
         At least one powder room or bathroom shall be located on the primary entry level
          served by an accessible route.
         All rooms or spaces located on the primary entry level shall be served by an
          accessible route. Rooms and spaces located on the primary entry level and subject to
          this chapter may include but are not limited to kitchens, powder rooms, bathrooms
          or hallways.
         Common use areas shall be accessible.
         In common tenant parking is provided, accessible parking spaces are required.
No unique Building Code restrictions are in place that would constrain the development of
housing for people with disabilities. Compliance with provisions of the City’s Municipal
Code, California Code of Regulations, California Building Standards Code, and federal
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                Page 65

Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) is assessed and enforced by the Building & Safety
Division of the Community Development as part of the building permit submittal.
Definition of Family
Local governments may restrict access to housing for households failing to qualify as a
“family” by the definition specified in the Zoning Ordinance. Specifically, a restrictive
definition of “family” that could be interpreted to limit the number of or differentiates
between related and unrelated individuals living together may illegally limit the
development and siting of group homes for people with disabilities, but not for housing
families that are similarly sized or situated. Another potentially restrictive definition could
limit use of residential land uses for facilities that serve special needs populations, including
people with disabilities.
The City defines “family” as “two or more individuals related by birth, marriage, adoption
or convenience who occupy the same dwelling unit. A family also includes the residents of
residential care facilities and group homes for people with disabilities. A family does not
include larger institutional group living situations such as dormitories, fraternities,
sororities, monasteries or nunneries, nor does it include such commercial group living
arrangements as boardinghouses, lodging houses and farm labor camps.” The City’s
definition does not constrain or limit housing opportunities for the disabled because this
definition explicitly includes residential care facilities and group homes for people with
disabilities.
Boarding or Rooming Houses
While developing the draft Housing Element, the City determined its boarding or rooming
house regulations could be interpreted and applied in a manner that could limit housing
opportunities for persons with disabilities. In April 2013, the City removed the following
definition of “boarding, lodging or rooming house” from the Zoning Ordinance:                     “A
building containing a single dwelling and not more than five (5) guest rooms, where
lodging is provided with or without meals for compensation.”
Reasonable Accommodations
Both the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act
direct local governments to make reasonable accommodations (i.e., modifications or
exceptions) in their zoning laws and other land use regulations to allow disabled persons an
equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. For example, it may be a reasonable
accommodation to waive a setback requirement so that elevated ramping can be constructed
to provide access to a dwelling unit for a resident who has mobility impairments. Whether
a particular modification is reasonable depends on the circumstances and must be decided
on a case-by-case basis.
Reasonable accommodation refers to flexibility in standards and policies to accommodate
the needs of persons with disabilities. The City’s Reasonable Accommodation Ordinance
grants the City’s Administrative Committee administrative, but discretionary authority to
                                                                                     City of El Centro
Page 66                                                                    2013-2021 Housing Element

hear and decide applications for reasonable accommodation as provided by the federal Fair
Housing Amendments Act and California’s Fair Employment and Housing Act to allow
reasonable remedy from zoning standards for individuals with physical or mental
impairment. A request for reasonable accommodation may include a modification or
exception to the rules, standards, and practices for the siting, development, and use of
housing or housing-related facilities that would eliminate regulatory barriers and provide a
person with a disability equal opportunity to housing of their choice.
The Ordinance directs the Administrative Committee to approve the accommodation if it is
necessary to make housing available to an individual in accordance with the fair housing
acts, unless the Committee can present evidence that doing so would either create an undue
financial or administrative burden or result in a fundamental alteration of the Zoning
Ordinance. The Zoning Ordinance defines “fundamental alteration” as an alteration so far
reaching that it would change the essential scheme of the Zoning Ordinance.
The fee for Administrative Committee review of reasonable accommodation applications is
$428. Since adoption of the Ordinance in 2008, the City has not had any inquiries or
processed any requests for a reasonable accommodation. Although City staff has not
received any indication from residents or potential applicants that either the discretionary
review process or the fee constrain housing opportunities for persons with disabilities, the
City will revise the Reasonable Accommodation Ordinance to establish a ministerial review
process (see Program 6). The City will also study and review options for reducing or
eliminating the application fee.
Conclusion
The City has analyzed its Zoning Ordinance and development procedures to ensure that it
is providing flexibility in, and not constraining the development of, housing for persons
with disabilities. As part of this review, the City identified a potential constraint related to
the existing discretionary review process and fee for reasonable accommodation
applications. The City will amend the Reasonable Accommodation Ordinance to mitigate
these potential constraints (see Program 6).
3.3. Public Policy Constraints
State and Federal requirements may act as a barrier to the development or rehabilitation of
housing, and affordable housing in particular.
A.        State Prevailing Wage Requirements
The State Department of Industrial Relations (DIR) expanded the kinds of projects that
require the payment of prevailing wages. Labor Code Section 1720, which applies
prevailing wage rates to public works of over $1,000, now defines public works to mean
construction, alteration, installation, demolition, or repair work done under contract and
paid for in whole or in part out of public funds. For example, public transfer of an asset for
less than fair market value, such as a land write-down, would now be construed to be paid
for, in part, out of public funds and trigger prevailing wage requirements.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                 Page 67

While the cost differential in prevailing and standard wages varies based on the skill level of
the occupation, prevailing wages tend to add to the overall cost of development. In the case
of affordable housing projects, prevailing wage requirements could effectively reduce the
number of affordable units that can be achieved with public subsidies. The following types
of projects are exempt from the prevailing wage requirement:
       Residential projects financed through issuance of bonds that receive an allocation
        through the State; and
       Single-family projects financed through issuance of qualified mortgage revenue
        bonds or mortgage credit certificates.
B.      Environmental Protection
State law (California Environmental Quality Act, California Endangered Species Act) and
federal law (National Environmental Protection Act, Federal Endangered Species Act)
regulations require environmental review of proposed discretionary projects (e.g.,
subdivision maps, use permits, etc.). Costs resulting from the environmental review process
are also added to the cost of housing and are passed on to the consumer to the extent that
the market can bear. These costs include fees charged by local government and private
consultants needed to complete the environmental analysis, costs to mitigate impacts, and
costs from delays caused by the mandated public review periods. However, the presence of
these regulations helps preserve the environment and ensure environmental safety to El
Centro residents.
3.4. Utility and Public Service Constraints
The provision of utilities such as water and sewer as well as public services including police,
fire, and schools is costly to local governments and special districts providing municipal
services. New development must pay for much of these costs thereby increasing the overall
cost of housing. This section provides an overview of potential utility and public service
constraints in El Centro.
A.      Water Supply
The City Public Works Department receives and distributes potable water from the Imperial
Irrigation District (IID). The IID has senior water rights to the Colorado River water and
ranks urban supply higher than the agricultural supply. The City’s 2010 Urban Water
Management Plan reviewed the overall supply and demand of water for the City of El
Centro determined that there is “no foreseeable water shortage in the City of El Centro for
the next 25 years. The City of El Centro uses Colorado River water that can supply the City
with sufficient water to meet all projected demand.” The water demand projected in the
Urban Water Management Plan included development pursuant to the City’s General Plan
and there is adequate water supply and filtration capacity to accommodate 1,924 new
residential dwellings during the 2014-2021 RHNA period. The City charges a water
                                                                                  City of El Centro
Page 68                                                                 2013-2021 Housing Element

capacity fee that goes toward improvement/expansion of potable water filtration and
distribution facilities maintained by the Public Works Department.
Senate Bill 1087 (enacted 2006) requires that water providers develop written policies that
grant priority to proposed development that includes housing affordable to lower-income
households. The legislation also prohibits water providers from denying or conditioning
the approval of development that includes housing affordable to lower income households,
unless specific written findings are made. Although the City relies on the IID for its water
supply, the Public Works Department is responsible for providing local service to existing
and new development. Therefore, the City is responsible for complying with Senate Bill
1087 requirements should supply rationing or limited filtration capacity occur. To ensure
compliance, the City will develop and establish a formal procedure to grant water priority
to developments with units affordable to lower-income households pursuant to
Government Code Section 65589.7 (see Program 8).
B.        Wastewater Treatment
The City owns and operates a wastewater collection system and treatment facility that
receives wastewater from the entire city and a few entities outside of the City Limits. The
facility underwent a significant upgrade in the mid-1990s, increasing its capacity to eight
million gallons per day (mgd).
The City’s Public Works Department is planning large wastewater capital improvements
over the next five fiscal years. These improvements will both increase the capacity of the
collection and treatment systems to support the City's growth and to repair, replace, and
improve existing facilities to continue to reliably serve existing customers. A portion of the
City’s wastewater connection and monthly service fees is allocated to a Wastewater
Capacity Fee Fund, which is used to finance capital projects associated with growth
anticipated in the 2008 Wastewater Master Plan and Capital Improvements Plan. These
plans were developed and are implemented based on General Plan Land Uses and in
conjunction with the Urban Development Program. Implementation of these plans and
programs will ensure that adequate wastewater collection and treatment facilities are in
place to serve existing and planned growth, including the City’s 2014-2021 RHNA of 1,924
units. The City charges a sewer capacity fee to offset the cost of improving and expanding
wastewater collection and treatment facilities.
Senate Bill 1087 described above also mandates priority wastewater collection and treatment
service to housing developments providing units affordable to lower income households.
The City is responsible for complying with Senate Bill 1087 requirements should limited
wastewater treatment capacity force a moratorium on new development or rationing new
sewer connections. To ensure compliance, the City will develop and establish a formal
procedure to grant wastewater service priority to developments with units affordable to
lower-income households pursuant to Government Code Section 65589.7 (see Program 8).
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                              Page 69

C.      Urban Development Program
El Centro has adopted an Urban Development Program to facilitate residential, industrial,
and business growth in areas where public services are available and to provide a variety of
growth locations so that an adequate supply of developable land will maintain reasonable
housing costs and promote economic development. Specific geographic areas (referred to as
“Development Tiers”) have been delineated for new development based on existing or
planned public facilities, existing land use, and transportation corridors or other physical
barriers:
       Development Tier I - Current Urban Service Area: Includes land within and adjacent
        to the present City limits. In most cases, new development within this area can be
        served by gravity sewer lines to existing trunk sewers. Generally, water lines and
        reservoirs are also adequate to serve new development; however, easements and
        financial contributions to improve the ultimate sewer and water systems may be
        required. Fire, police, schools, parks, library, medical, roads, and other City services
        are also in proximity to these areas, though service capacities are likely to be limited
        and improvements to existing facilities and/or new facilities may be needed to
        adequately accommodate new development. Subdivisions of land and commercial
        or industrial development within this area would generally follow standard zoning,
        subdivision, and environmental review procedures and would not require a
        Community Facilities Study.
       Development Tier II - Planned Urban Service Area: Includes land both within and
        adjacent to the City limits, but differs from Development Tier I in that public
        infrastructure to serve new development is more limited. Essential required
        improvements may include sewer and water pump stations, water storage
        reservoirs, and sewer trunk lines or force mains. New schools, parks, roadway
        improvements, and fire stations may also be required to adequately serve
        development of Development Tier II areas. As with Development Tier I areas,
        additional service capacity for police, library, medical, and other City services may
        also be needed to accommodate new development. Preparation of a Community
        Facilities Study may be required for development projects within Development Tier
        II areas.
       Development Tier III - Future Urban Service Area: Encompasses unincorporated
        lands that are not anticipated to be developed for at least ten years.
All of the parcels included in the Residential Sites Inventory (Appendix C) are located
within Development Tier I - Current Urban Service Area. The Urban Development Program
is designed and implemented to encourage and facilitate the orderly and efficient provision
of utilities and public services concurrent with anticipated growth and is therefore not
considered a constraint on residential development.
                                                                                    City of El Centro
Page 70                                                                   2013-2021 Housing Element

3.5. Environmental Constraints
A community’s environmental setting affects the feasibility and cost of developing housing.
Environmental issues range from the conservation of biological resources to the suitability
of land for development due to potential exposure to environmental hazards. This section
summarizes potential biological and seismic constraints on residential development in El
Centro. None of the properties identified in the residential sites inventory (Table C-1 in
Appendix C) are known to be constrained by steep slopes, floodplains, or hazardous
materials.
A.        Biological Resources
The irrigation and drainage canals network within some portions of the City provides
habitat for saline adapted plant species. Populations of a number of fish species live in the
canals. The mosquito fish has been introduced by the Imperial County Health Department
for mosquito control, and species of Tilapia have been introduced to control aquatic weeds.
The canal system has created an aquatic habitat within a naturally arid environment and
provides opportunities for people to fish and observe wild species in a unique manmade
“natural” environment. Although the City must assess development proposals for potential
impacts to significant natural resources and habitat pursuant to the California
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), the canal system right-of-way is well defined and
related biological resources will not be a significant constraint on residential development
within the 2014-2021 RHNA period.
B.        Seismic Hazards
The Imperial Valley is one of the most tectonically active regions in the United States.
Branches of the San Andreas Fault form the eastern boundary of the basin (Salton Trough)
and the western edge is defined by the San Jacinto-Coyote Creek and the Elsinore-Laguna
Salada Faults. More small to moderate earthquakes have occurred in the area than along any
other section of the San Andreas Fault System. Since the City is generally flat, landslides are
not considered a major hazard. However, bluff failure and mudslides may occur along
slopes and embankments of the rivers and canals. Standard engineering practices,
including soils investigation and compaction techniques, are sufficient to mitigate most
seismic hazards in the City. Seismic hazards should not be a significant constraint to the
development of housing in El Centro.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                               Page 71


4. Housing Resources
This section of the Housing Element addresses the resources available to the City in
implementing the goals, policies, and programs contained in this Housing Element,
specifically regarding the potential for future residential development. Resources covered
in this section include potential development sites, financial resources, and administrative
resources.
4.1. Residential Development Potential
A.         Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA)
State Housing Element law requires that a local jurisdiction accommodate a share of the
region’s projected housing needs for the planning period. This share, called the Regional
Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA), is important because State law mandates that a
jurisdiction provide sufficient land to accommodate a variety of housing opportunities for
all economic segments of the community. Compliance with this requirement is measured
by the jurisdiction’s ability in providing adequate land with adequate density and
appropriate development standards to accommodate the RHNA. The Southern California
Association of Governments (SCAG), as the regional planning agency, is responsible for
allocating the RHNA to individual jurisdictions within the region.
SCAG assigned a RHNA of 1,924 units to the City of El Centro for the 2014-2021 RHNA
period9, in the following income distribution:
          Extremely Low/Very Low Income:10                                       487 units
          Low Income:                                                            300 units
          Moderate Income:                                                       297 units
          Above Moderate Income:                                                 840 units
The City must ensure the availability of residential sites at adequate densities and
appropriate development standards to accommodate these units by income category.
9    The Housing Element planning period covers from October 15, 2013 through October 15, 2021. However, the RHNA
     planning period does not commence until January 1, 2014 and extends through October 31, 2021. Therefore,
     residential units permitted prior to January 1, 2014, although fall within the Housing Element planning period, will not
     receive RHNA credits for this Housing Element.
10   The City has a RHNA allocation of 487 very low income units (inclusive of extremely low income units). Pursuant to
     AB 2634, the City must project the number of extremely low income housing needs based on Census income
     distribution or assume 50 percent of the very low income units as extremely low. According to SCAG (using CHAS
     data developed by HUD), the City had 3,471 households with incomes at or below 50 percent AMI (1,610 extremely
     low and 1,861 very low income) as shown in Table 8. Therefore the City’s RHNA of 487 very low income units may be
     split into 226 extremely low (46.4 percent) and 261 very low income units (53.6 percent). However, for purposes of
     identifying adequate sites for the RHNA, State law does not mandate the separate accounting for the extremely low
     income category.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                          Page 73

   B.         Future Residential Development Potential
   The City of El Centro has adequate land capacity to meet the needs of all income groups
   through the 2014-2021 RHNA period. The following Table 43 is a summary of the detailed
   parcel data included in Appendix C, Sites Inventory. Figures C-1 through C-5 in Appendix
   C depict the location of each parcel contained in Table C-1.
Table 43: Residential Sites Inventory (Summary)
                                                                                                    Average
                                                       Average
  Summary by Affordability Level and                                    Parcel                        Parcel         Realistic
                                                        Density                     Acreage                                            Status
               Land Use / Zoning                                        Count                          Size          Capacity
                                                        Factor
                                                                                                     (acres)
Lower Income (by Default)
  High-Medium Density Residential / R3                 19.0 dua              21           24.9                1.2            468       Vacant
  Tourist Commercial / CT                              19.0 dua              27           35.5                1.3          333*        Vacant
Low Income Sub-total                                                         48           60.4                1.3            801       Vacant
Moderate Income
  High-Medium Density Residential / R3                 19.0 dua              39             7.5               0.2            129       Vacant
  Tourist Commercial / CT                              19.0 dua                4            0.8               0.2              5*      Vacant
  Downtown Commercial / CD                             19.0 dua              22             3.7               0.2            26*       Vacant
  Medium Density Residential / R2                       8.0 dua              23           33.5                1.5            261       Vacant
Moderate Income Sub-Total                                                    88           45.5                0.5            421       Vacant
Above Moderate Income
  Low Density Residential / R1                          3.5 dua             115         264.1                 2.3            906      Vacant
  Rural Residential / RR                                1.0 dua                5          36.8                7.4             35       Vacant
                        Above Moderate Income Sub-Total                     120         300.9                 2.5            941       Vacant
                                                             Total          256         406.8                 1.6         2,163        Vacant
Note: (*) indicates mixed-use zones for which the realistic capacity is 50 percent of the calculated capacity of each parcel using the applicable
density factor. The 50 percent reduction is necessary to account for the possibility that approximately half of these parcels could be developed
with non-residential uses during the 2014-2021 RHNA period and represents a conservative estimate of anticipated development trends.
   Realistic Capacity Assumptions
   For purposes of calculating the realistic capacity of sites in Appendix C, Residential Sites
   Inventory, the following density factors were used to determine the realistic capacity of sites
   identified to meet the City’s RHNA:
             High-Medium Density Residential/R3 (maximum 25.0 units per acre): A density
              factor of 19.0 units per acre represents the realistic capacity of development within
              this land use designation/zone. This factor is only 76 percent of the maximum
              allowable density and is consistent with recent development applications. In 2009, a
              48-unit market rate apartment complex achieved 21.8 units per acre on a 2.2-acre R3.
              Las Brisas, a 72-unit affordable housing development constructed in 2012 on a 4.0-
              acre R3 lot achieved 18.0 units per acre. The affordable housing developer did not
              seek a density bonus and neither applicant sought waiver or modification of any
              development standard.
                                                                                                                           City of El Centro
   Page 74                                                                                                   2013-2021 Housing Element

         Downtown Commercial/CD (maximum density set by FAR): In April 2013, the City
          increased the maximum FAR from 1.5 to 3.0 and allowed for shared parking in the
          CD zone. Although the City has not received any applications for development of
          multi-family residential in the CD zone, a density factor of 19.0 units per acre is
          reasonable given that a multi-family project approved in the CT zone achieved 18.8
          units per acre despite being subject to much lower maximum FAR (1.0:1).
         Tourist Commercial/CT (maximum density set by FAR): A density factor of 19.0
          units per acre is reasonable given the City’s 2008 approval of a CUP to allow a two-
          story, 16-unit apartment complex on a 0.85-acre CT parcel. This project achieved
          nearly 19.0 units per acre despite the relatively small parcel size.
         Medium Density Residential/R2 (maximum 12.0 units per acre): A density factor of
          8.0 units per acre represents 67 percent of the maximum allowable density and is
          consistent with historic development patterns.
         Low Density Residential/R1 (maximum 6.0 units per acre): A density factor of 3.5
          units per acre represents 58 percent of the maximum allowable density and is
          consistent with historic development patterns.
         Rural Residential/RR (maximum 2.0 units per acre): A density factor of 1.0 unit per
          acre represents 50 percent of the maximum allowable density and is consistent with
          historic development patterns.
Affordability, Suitability, and Availability Analysis
This subsection describes the assumptions applied to each parcel in Appendix C, Residential
Sites Inventory, to determine affordability level and establish the suitability and availability
for development within the 2014-2021 RHNA period.
Lower Income
Zone districts in El Centro that allow at least 20 dwelling units per acre are considered
sufficient to accommodate housing that is affordable to lower income households “by
default” per Government Code Section 65583.2(c)(3)(B). The City’s R3 zone district allows
up to 25 units per acre and therefore meets this default affordability density threshold. The
City’s CT mixed-use district also meets this default affordability density threshold because
at least 20 units per acre are achievable given the maximum allowable FAR of 1.0:1 and
development history. The City identified 48 R3 or CT parcels covering 60.4 acres that are
vacant and available for development in the planning period. These parcels can
accommodate at least 801 lower income units assuming a density factor of 19.0 units per
acre. Each site is larger than 0.60 acre and the average parcel size is 1.3 acres.
Moderate Income
Another 45.5 acres on 88 parcels in the R3, R2, CD, and CT zones are vacant and available to
accommodate at least 421 moderate income units within the RHNA period. The average
size of these parcels is 0.50 acre. Based on the real estate market data presented in Section
2.7 of this Housing Element, it is reasonable to assume that new multi-family construction
on relatively smaller R3, R2, CD, and CT sites will be offered at market prices that are
affordable to moderate income households.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                Page 75

Above Moderate Income
El Centro’s remaining RHNA for above moderate income households will be
accommodated on 300.9 acres consisting of 120 parcels zoned for lower density residential
(R1 and RR). These sites are suitable to accommodate at least 941 single-family units. New
construction on these sites is assumed to produce units that are affordable to above
moderate income households.
Public Services and Infrastructure Availability
All sites identified in Appendix C are located within Tier I of the Urban Development
Program. As discussed in details in Section 3.4.C of this Housing Element, Tier I is the
“Current Urban Service Area” and no significant public service or infrastructure constraints
have been identified.
Adequacy of Sites to Meet the City’s RHNA
Table 44 summarizes the City’s accommodation of the RHNA for all income groups during
the 2014-2021 RHNA period. After accounting for the realistic capacity of vacant sites, the
City has identified surplus capacity of at least 239 units for the RHNA period, including a
minimum surplus of 14 lower income units, 124 moderate income units, and 101 above
moderate income units.
         Table 44: Adequacy of Sites to Accommodate the 2014-2021 RHNA
                                                              Sites
                      Income Level              RHNA        Inventory        Surplus
                                                             Capacity
         Very Low (<50% AMI)                         487
                                                                    801              +14
         Low (51 to 80% AMI)                         300
         Moderate (81 to 120% AMI)                   297            421            +124
         Above Moderate (>120% AMI)                  840            941            +101
         Total                                     1,924          2,163            +239
C.      RHNA for Previous Housing Element (2008-2014)
AB 1233 amended the State Housing Element law to promote the effective and timely
implementation of local housing elements. Specifically, the law states that if a jurisdiction
fails to provide adequate sites in the prior planning period, within one year of the new
cycle, the jurisdiction must rezone/upzone adequate sites to accommodate the shortfall.
This law affects the City of El Centro’s 2013-2021 Housing Element, requiring the City to
address its deficit in sites for the previous housing element cycle (2008-2014). In the 2008-
2014 Housing Element, the RHNA assigned to El Centro was 2,908 units, in the following
income distribution:
                                                                                   City of El Centro
Page 76                                                                 2013-2021 Housing Element

         Extremely Low/Very Low Income:               720 units
         Low Income:                                  483 units
         Moderate Income:                             467 units
         Above Moderate Income:                     1,238 units
Table 45 summarizes the City’s 2008-2014 Housing Element RHNA analysis, which
identified a shortfall capacity of 259 lower income units.
          Table 45: 2008-2014 Housing Element RHNA Analysis
                                          Built Jan.
                                                         Approved  Vacant     Surplus /
                Income Group     RHNA     2006- Apr.
                                                         Projects   Land       (Deficit)
                                            2008
          Extremely Low Income       360           31           60       192         (77)
          Very Low Income            360           32           62       198         (68)
          Low Income                 483           41           78       250       (114)
          Moderate Income            467           94          451       727         805
          Above Moderate Income    1,238          255          570     1,965       1,552
          Total                    2,908          453        1,221     3,332       2,924
To address the 259-unit lower income shortfall, City staff identified a 13.5-acre R2 (Medium
Density Residential) to rezone to R3 (High Density Residential) at a minimum density of 20
units per acre. Rezoning to R3 and applying a density factor of 20 units per acre, the site
could accommodate 269 lower income units and provide a 10-unit surplus for the lower
income RHNA category. However, the property owner opted not to pursue the rezone.
RHNA Penalty Analysis
Because the City did not rezone the 13.5-acre parcel a RHNA penalty would apply to the
2014-2021 RHNA cycle if the City cannot demonstrate that other sites have been available to
accommodate the lower income shortfall during the prior planning period. The following
analysis demonstrates that the City’s sites inventory was and remains adequate to
accommodate the lower income RHNA through 2014 (the end of the prior Housing Element
cycle) despite not pursuing the rezoning as originally proposed.
As part of this Housing Element update, the City conducted an exhaustive, parcel-by-parcel
investigation of sites to determine whether the 2008-2014 Housing Element omitted any
vacant parcels. The investigation identified 18 acres on 11 vacant High-Medium Density /
R3 parcels that were not included in the prior inventory and adequate sites analysis (Table
46). Of these vacant parcels, seven are larger than one acre in size and four contiguous
parcels held by the same owner total more than one acre. The 11 vacant parcels have a
realistic capacity to accommodate at least 283 units assuming a density factor of 16 units per
acre.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                 Page 77

Table 46: Vacant Parcels Omitted from 2008-2014 Housing Element RHNA Analysis
                                                         Parcel    Realistic
                          Land Use           Zoning
       APN                                                Size     Capacity              Notes
                        Designation         District
                                                        (Acres)   (@16dua)
                    High-Medium Density                                             Privately-owned
   064-470-103                                 R3            6.41         102
                         Residential                                                 vacant parcel
                    High-Medium Density                                             Privately-owned
   052-070-065                                 R3            2.81          45
                         Residential                                                 vacant parcel
                    High-Medium Density                                             Privately-owned
   044-331-006                                 R3            2.12          33
                         Residential                                                 vacant parcel
                    High-Medium Density                                             Privately-owned
   044-332-013                                 R3            1.70          27
                         Residential                                                 vacant parcel
                    High-Medium Density                                             Privately-owned
   064-560-002                                 R3            1.61          25
                         Residential                                                 vacant parcel
                    High-Medium Density                                             Privately-owned
   053-552-002                                 R3            1.12          17
                         Residential                                                 vacant parcel
                    High-Medium Density                                             Privately-owned
   052-061-055                                 R3            1.10          17
                         Residential                                                 vacant parcel
   053-211-009                                               0.52
   053-211-010                                               0.53                 Contiguous vacant
                    High-Medium Density
                                               R3                          17    parcels with the same
   053-211-011           Residential                         0.03                    private owner
   053-211-013                                               0.03
                                                 Total     17.98          283
 Because the R3 sites allow up to 25 units per acre, the vacant sites are considered sufficient
 to accommodate housing that is affordable to lower income households “by default” per
 Government Code Section 65583.2(c)(3)(B). The sites identified in Table 46 are suitable for
 development of lower income housing because they are larger than one acre in size and
 currently served by infrastructure and public services. Given the “default” affordability
 threshold, large parcel size, and realistic capacity to accommodate at least 283 units, the 11
 vacant R3 parcels give the City a surplus capacity of 24 lower income units through 2014.
 Therefore, no rezoning was necessary to accommodate the City’s previous RHNA and the
 2013-2021 Housing Element is not subject to a RHNA penalty pursuant AB 1233.
 4.2. Financial Resources
 The State’s dissolution of the El Centro’s redevelopment agency in 2012 eliminated the
 City’s primary source of affordable housing funding. Other funding resources available for
 affordable housing development are highly limited. These other financial resources include
 private contributions (including foundations or trusts), semi-public agencies and federal
 and state agencies. Listed below are some typical sources of funds used for affordable
 housing:
        State of California, Department of Housing and Community Development loan and
         grant programs
        California Housing Finance Agency financial assistance programs
        Federal/State Low Income Housing Tax Credits (LIHTC)
                                                                                      City of El Centro
 Page 78                                                                   2013-2021 Housing Element

         Rural Housing Administration (Farmers Home Administration or FHA) Programs
         U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Programs
The City of El Centro is an entitlement jurisdiction under the HUD Community
Development Block Grant (CDBG) program. For FY 2012, the City received an allocation of
approximately $470,000 for a range of housing and community development activities.
Specifically, the City has used CDBG funds to address lead-based paint and asbestos hazard
abatements, as well as to assist in off-site improvements for affordable housing projects.
4.3. Administrative Resources
The City collaborates with various agencies, developers, and organizations to provide
affordable housing and supportive services for lower and moderate income households and
households with special needs. Key agencies, developers, and organizations include:
         Imperial Valley Housing Authority: The Housing Authority administers the
          Housing Choice Voucher program in the Imperial Valley, including El Centro. The
          Housing Authority also owns and operates public housing located throughout the
          County, with units for seniors, farm workers, and the disabled in El Centro.
         Imperial County Regional Task Force on Homelessness: The Task Force serves as
          the lead agency for Imperial County homeless issues. The City will continue to
          participate in activities and outreach conducted by the Task Force.
         California Coalition for Rural Housing: The California Coalition for Rural Housing
          (CCRH) is a statewide nonprofit organization that works to ensure affordable
          housing opportunities for low-income households in California. CCRH supports the
          production and preservation of decent, safe, and low-cost housing for rural and low-
          income Californians. Supporters include nonprofit housing agencies, lending
          institutions, community advocacy organizations, consumer members, and local
          government officials. The Coalition advocates for housing at all levels of government
          before legislative and regulatory bodies. It also provides technical and
          organizational assistance to community groups and nonprofit agencies and educates
          the public on housing issues.
         Affordable Housing Developers: The City collaborates with a number of affordable
          housing developers and service providers to accommodate the housing needs of El
          Centro residents. The following are some of the housing developers and service
          providers active in southern California; several are included in the State’s list of
          entities with the legal and managerial capacity to acquire and manage at-risk
          projects: AMG, Affirmed Housing Group, Bridge Housing, Jamboree Housing, and
          Chelsea Investment Group.
         Supportive Services: Various non-profit groups that provide supportive services to
          the special needs population in El Centro. Some of the key groups operating in
          Imperial Valley include the Center for Family Solutions, Imperial County Family
          Resource Center, Campesinos Unidos, Catholic Charities, Independent Living
          Center, Neighborhood House, and Veteran Services.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                 Page 79

4.4. Opportunities for Energy Conservation
Two basic and interrelated approaches to creating energy conservation opportunities in
residences are conservation and development:
       Conservation: Conservation can be accomplished by reducing the use of energy-
        consuming items, or by physically modifying existing structures and land uses. The
        California Energy Commission first adopted energy conservation standards for new
        construction in 1978. These standards, contained in Title 24 of the California
        Administrative Code, contain specifications relating to insulation, glazing, heating
        and cooling systems, water heaters, swimming pool heaters, and several other items.
       Development: Solar energy is a viable alternate energy source for the City of El
        Centro. Two basic types of solar systems exist: active and passive. In passive solar
        systems, the structure itself is designed to collect the sun’s energy, then store and
        circulate the resulting heat similar to a greenhouse. Active solar systems typically
        collect and store energy in panels attached to the exterior of a house. This type of
        system utilizes mechanical fans or pumps to circulate the warm/cool air, while
        heated water can flow directly into a home’s hot water system.
        Additional conservation opportunities are found in new construction. Residential
        construction techniques for conservation and sustainability have been gaining in
        popularity and acceptance in recent years. The most widely recognized certifying
        agency with respect to such construction is LEED, the Leadership in Energy and
        Environmental Design (LEED) Green Building System. The intent of LEED is to
        encourage widespread implementation of development practices that further the
        concept of sustainability and environmental friendliness in the built environment.
The City strictly enforces Title 24 Energy Requirements. In addition, the local energy
company, the Imperial Irrigation District (IID), offers incentives to homeowners with
rebates to buy energy efficient air conditioners, appliances and thermostats. IID also
coordinates a Low Income Solar Rooftop Program offered by the Citizens Energy
Corporation. Using proceeds from their partnership on the Sunrise Powerlink transmission
line, Citizens Energy, a nonprofit corporation, works to install solar rooftop systems for low
income residents in Imperial Valley.
Also, air pollution control measures from the Imperial Air Pollution Control District require
new construction and development to include energy conservation measures (Imperial
County Air Pollution Control District rule 310).
                                                                                   City of El Centro
Page 80                                                                  2013-2021 Housing Element

5. Housing Plan
This section of the Housing Element contains the goals, policies, and programs the City of El
Centro intends to implement to meet its quantified objectives and address a number of
important housing-related issues through the 2013-2021 planning period. The Housing Plan
considers accomplishments under the 2008-2014 Housing Element (see Appendix B) and
builds upon the identified City’s housing needs, constraints on residential development,
and resources available to address El Centro’s existing and future housing needs. To make
adequate provision for the housing needs of all economic segments of the City and
consistent with statutory requirements, the Housing Plan aims to:
         Conserve, preserve, and improve the condition of the existing affordable housing
          stock [Government Code Section 65583(c)(4 & 6)];
         Assist in the development of housing for extremely low, very low, low, and
          moderate income households [Government Code Section 65583(c)(2)];
         Identify adequate sites to encourage the development of a variety of types of
          housing for all income levels [Government Code Section 65583(c)(1)];
         Address and, where appropriate and legally possible, remove governmental
          constraints to the maintenance, improvement, and development of housing
          [Government Code Section 65583(c)(3)]; and
         Promote housing opportunities for all persons [Government Code Section
          65583(c)(5)].
5.1 Goals and Policies
Goals are statements of community desires, which are broad in both purpose and aim, but
are designed specifically to establish direction. Policies provide specific standards and/or
end statements for achieving a goal. Essentially, goals represent desired outcomes the City
seeks to achieve through the implementation of policies. The goals and policies that guide
the City’s housing programs and activities are as follows:
A.        Housing Diversity and Opportunities
The diversity of housing opportunities in El Centro distinguishes the City from many other
California communities. Continuing to provide a balanced inventory of housing in terms of
unit type, tenure, cost, and style will allow the City to fulfill a variety of housing needs.
GOAL 1.0:         Adequate housing to meet the existing and future needs of El Centro
                  residents.
          Policy 1.1:    Maintain land use controls and development standards that can
                         accommodate a variety of housing opportunities, including single-
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                     Page 81

                     family homes, townhomes, apartments, condominiums, mixed-use
                     development, second dwelling units, and mobile homes to fulfill
                     regional housing needs.
        Policy 1.2:  Facilitate the development of affordable housing by offering
                     development incentives on a case-by-case basis.
        Policy 1.3:  Encourage the development of residential units intended to meet the
                     needs of extremely low income households, seniors, persons with
                     disabilities (including persons with developmental disabilities), farm
                     workers, and those in need of temporary shelter.
        Policy 1.4:  Work with developers to identify and, when feasible, remove or
                     reduce governmental constraints on affordable housing development.
        Policy 1.5:  Encourage the development of new housing units in close proximity
                     to public transportation and community services, including mixed-
                     use development in the Downtown Commercial (CD) and Tourist
                     Commercial (CT) zones.
        Policy 1.6:  Identify and pursue State and federal programs and funding to
                     facilitate development of housing that is suitable for extremely low
                     income households, including farm workers.
        Policy 1.7:  Support the provision of housing services in meeting the housing
                     needs of El Centro residents, including extremely low income
                     households, the homeless and near-homeless, farm workers, and
                     persons with disabilities.
        Policy 1.8:  Encourage the development of affordable home ownership housing
                     for first-time homebuyers.
        Policy 1.9:  Pursue state and federal funding sources to provide favorable home
                     purchase options to lower and moderate income households.
        Policy 1.10: Support the clustering of development where appropriate.
        Policy 1.11: Process permits concurrently as a means of streamlining development
                     review.
        Policy 1.12: Support efforts of non-profits, private developers, and the Imperial
                     Valley Housing Authority to expand the City’s supply of affordable
                     housing.
        Policy 1.13: Encourage developers that propose to subdivide more than 10 acres
                     to set aside a portion of the land for Medium to High Density
                     Residential uses.
                                                                               City of El Centro
Page 82                                                              2013-2021 Housing Element

          Policy 1.14:   Encourage developers of multi-family rental housing to include units
                         with three or more bedrooms to accommodate the needs of large
                         households.
B.        Maintenance, Preservation, and Conservation of Housing
The majority of El Centro’s housing stock is in good condition. However, some older single-
family neighborhoods and multi-family structures show evidence of deferred maintenance
and deterioration. As the City's housing stock continues to age, on-going maintenance is vital
to prevent further deterioration. Other housing conservation needs of the City include
existing affordable housing stock and rental units at risk of converting to market-rents or
condominiums, and the Housing Choice Voucher Program.
GOAL 2.0:         Maintenance and enhancement of the quality of residential neighborhoods
                  and living environments.
          Policy 2.1:    Improve the overall quality and conditions of existing housing in El
                         Centro.
          Policy 2.2:    Advocate and facilitate the conservation and rehabilitation of
                         substandard residential properties by homeowners.
          Policy 2.3:    As funds allow, continue to offer rehabilitation and home
                         improvement assistance to lower income homeowners.
          Policy 2.4:    Work to preserve restricted lower income housing in the City that is
                         at risk of converting to market rate use.
          Policy 2.5:    Review condominium conversions on a case-by-case basis to
                         minimize or mitigate impacts on displaced households.
          Policy 2.6:    Preserve important examples of El Centro’s architectural history
                         through      continued    implementation    of   the    Single-family
                         Neighborhood Overlay.
          Policy 2.7:    Continue to support Imperial Valley Housing Authority efforts to
                         preserve and expand rental assistance programs for extremely low
                         income households, including the Housing Choice Voucher Program.
          Policy 2.8:    Discourage smoking in homes that are occupied by children, the
                         elderly, and others with health issues to enhance living environment
                         quality.
          Policy 2.9:    Continue to use the General Plan and Municipal Code to ensure the
                         compatibility of residential areas with surrounding non-residential
                         uses.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                               Page 83

        Policy 2.10:  Avoid displacement of residents in carrying out City programs,
                      whenever possible, or provide relocation assistance subject to
                      available funds.
        Policy 2.11:  Conduct a Housing Conditions Survey during the planning period,
                      subject to available funds.
        Policy 2.12:  Preserve and maintain existing and future neighborhoods through
                      continued enforcement of City codes.
C.      Equal Opportunity
Promotion of equal housing opportunities for all existing and future El Centro residents is
necessary to make adequate provision for the housing needs of all socioeconomic segments
of the community.
GOAL 3.0:      Equal opportunity for all residents to reside in housing of their choice.
        Policy 3.1:   Prohibit discrimination in the sale, rental, or financing of housing
                      based on race, color, ancestry, religion, national origin, sex, sexual
                      orientation, gender identity, age, disability/medical condition,
                      familial status, marital status, source of income, or any other arbitrary
                      factor.
        Policy 3.2:   Accommodate persons with disabilities (including persons with
                      developmental disabilities) who seek reasonable waiver or
                      modification of land use controls and/or development standards
                      pursuant to procedures and criteria set forth in the Zoning Ordinance.
        Policy 3.3:   Encourage the provision of designs that support aging in place (such
                      as universal design) in new development.
        Policy 3.4:   Continue to support and participate with a fair housing service
                      provider that can receive and investigate fair housing allegations,
                      monitor compliance with fair housing laws, and refer possible
                      violations to enforcing agencies.
D.      Energy Conservation in Housing Development
Conserving energy is not only good for the environment, it can help reduce household costs
and enable households to allocate more disposable income to housing costs, which can
reduce the incidence of housing problems such as cost burden and overcrowding.
GOAL 4.0:      Housing that maximizes opportunities for energy conservation.
        Policy 4.1:   Promote passive energy conservation measures through site planning
                      and landscaping techniques.
                                                                                  City of El Centro
Page 84                                                                 2013-2021 Housing Element
          Policy 4.2:    Encourage developers to        exceed   minimum      Title 24   energy
                         conservation requirements.
          Policy 4.3:    Educate the public regarding simple energy conservation measures
                         that can be implemented in the home.
          Policy 4.4:    Encourage weatherization improvements, roofing repairs, window
                         replacement, and appliance upgrades to conserve energy.
5.2 Housing Programs
Programs identify specific actions the City will undertake toward putting each goal and
policy into action. Each program relates to one or more goals and policies and may overlap
the various issue areas.
El Centro offers a variety of housing opportunities to meet the needs of the community. This
section of the Housing Plan addresses the issues identified in the previous sections of the
Element and provides a strategy to achieve the City’s housing goals. The housing programs
designed to implement the City’s strategy are discussed in detail below.
A.        Facilitate the Provision of a Variety of Housing Types, Densities,
          and Opportunities
A key element in satisfying the housing needs of all segments of the community is the
provision for a variety of housing types and densities for renters and owners. This is an
important function of both the General Plan and zoning.
Program 1: Land Use Controls and Development Capacity
Planning and regulatory actions to achieve adequate housing sites are implemented through
the General Plan Land Use Element and Zoning Ordinance. These regulatory documents
provide for a variety of residential types, ranging from lower-density single-family homes to
higher-density apartments, condominiums, and mixed-use development.
El Centro’s residential sites inventory consists of over 400 acres of developable land with the
capacity to yield at least 2,163 new units by year 2021. As noted in Section 4 and Appendix C,
these sites are adequate to meet the City's share of regional housing needs for the 2014-2021
RHNA period.
     Responsible Agency:         Community Development Department
     Financing:                  Department budget
     2013-2021 Objectives:       Maintain and monitor the residential sites inventory to ensure
                                 adequate sites remain to accommodate the RHNA throughout
                                 the RHNA period. Provide sites inventory information to
                                 interested developers.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                Page 85

    Timeframe:                  Annual monitoring and reporting throughout the planning
                                period.
Program 2: Monitor Residential Capacity (No Net Loss)
City staff will monitor the consumption of residential acreage to ensure an adequate
inventory is available to meet the City’s RHNA obligations. To ensure sufficient residential
capacity is maintained to accommodate the RHNA, the City will develop and implement a
formal ongoing (project-by-project) evaluation procedure pursuant to Government Code
Section 65863. The City’s development application tracking software will notify staff when
an application has been submitted for development of a property included in the residential
sites inventory (Appendix C). Should an approval of development result in a reduction of
capacity below the residential capacity needed to accommodate the remaining need for
lower income households, the City will identify and, if necessary, rezone sufficient sites to
accommodate the shortfall and ensure “no net loss” in capacity to accommodate the RHNA.
    Responsible Agency:         Community       Development       Department;         Economic
                                Development Department
    Financing:                  Department budget
    2013-2021 Objectives:       Develop and implement a formal evaluation procedure
                                pursuant to Government Code Section 65863 by January 2014.
    Timeframe:                  Annual monitoring and reporting throughout the planning
                                period.
Program 3: Facilitate Affordable and Special Needs Housing Production
Developers of affordable and special needs housing face a number of hurdles, including
financing, development codes and standards, and in some cases, public opposition.
Dissolution of the City’s Redevelopment Agency by the State in 2012 eliminated the Low
and Moderate Income Housing Fund (LMIHF), formerly the City’s primary mechanism for
providing direct funding support of affordable housing development. Continuing
reductions in federal funding of HUD programs (e.g., CDBG) will constrain the City’s
ability to offer committed funding assistance to affordable and special needs housing even
further. The City can encourage and facilitate affordable and special needs housing through
financial assistance, removal of regulatory constraints, and administrative support. With
limited funding, the City will rely on the following non-funding-related actions to
encourage affordable and special needs housing production (including housing for
extremely low income households and the developmentally disabled) during the planning
period:
           Collaborate with Affordable and Special Needs Housing Developers: Affordable
            housing developers work to develop, conserve and promote rental and
            ownership affordable housing. Particularly in relation to senior citizen housing
            and housing for persons with disabilities (including persons with developmental
            disabilities), the affordable housing developer is often, but not always, a local
            organization interested in developing affordable housing. The affordable
            housing developer is often involved with what is called "assisted housing",
                                                                                 City of El Centro
Page 86                                                                2013-2021 Housing Element

              where some type of government assistance (such as Section 8 or Tax Credits) is
              provided to the individual household to keep rents affordable. An affordable or
              special needs housing developer can help meet the goals for additional housing
              by implementing or assisting with the implementation of programs described in
              this Element. The City will continue to collaborate with affordable and special
              needs housing developers to identify potential sites, write letters of support to
              help secure governmental and private-sector funding, and offer technical
              assistance related to the application of City incentive programs (e.g., density
              bonus).
             Regulatory Concessions and Incentives: The City will continue to work with
              developers on a case-by-case basis to provide regulatory concessions and
              incentives to assist them with the development of affordable and senior housing.
              In a relatively small city like El Centro, this is the most effective method of
              assisting developers, as each individual project can be analyzed to determine
              which concessions and incentives would be the most beneficial to the project’s
              feasibility. Regulatory concessions and incentives could include, but are not
              limited to, density bonuses, parking reductions, fee reductions or deferral,
              expedited permit processing, and modified or waived development standards.
     Responsible Agency:          Community Development Department
     Financing:                   Department budget
     2013-2021 Objectives:        Maintain contact information for affordable housing
                                  developers special needs service providers for the purposes of
                                  soliciting their involvement in development projects in El
                                  Centro. Participate with affordable and special needs housing
                                  developers to review available federal and State financing
                                  subsidies and apply as feasible on an annual basis. Assist and
                                  support developers of housing for lower income households,
                                  especially housing for extremely low income households and
                                  the disabled (including the developmentally disabled), with
                                  site identification, supporting applications, conducting pre-
                                  application meetings, assisting with design and site
                                  requirements, and providing regulatory incentives and
                                  concessions.     Collaborate with developers of affordable
                                  housing over the planning period to facilitate the construction
                                  of 100 affordable units over the planning period (five
                                  extremely low income, 25 very low income, 30 low income,
                                  and 40 moderate income units).
     Timeframe:                   Update list and contact information for affordable and special
                                  needs housing developers annually thereafter.          Provide
                                  ongoing participation and assistance to interested housing
                                  developers. Annual monitoring and reporting throughout the
                                  planning period.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                  Page 87

Program 4: First-Time Homebuyer Program
This First Time Homebuyer Program was established to offer downpayment assistance to
lower and moderate income first-time homebuyer residents of El Centro to purchase an
existing or qualifying new home in the City. Eligible participants must be able to qualify for
a permanent 30 year, fixed interest loan, contribute at least two percent to the
downpayment, and attend an eight hour Homeownership Education Workshop. Eligible
properties must be owner-occupied or vacant at the time of the purchase.
    Responsible Agency:       Economic Development Department
    Financing:                CalHFA
    2013-2021 Objectives:     Continue to pursue CalHFA and other available funding
                              programs to deliver the First Time Homebuyer Program.
                              Assist three low income and seven moderate income first-time
                              homebuyers annually during the planning period.
    Timeframe:                Ongoing implementation and annual             monitoring       and
                              reporting throughout the planning period.
Program 5: Farmland Mitigation Fee
The City will study options for the establishment of a farmland mitigation fee. Property
owners seeking to convert active agricultural land to an urban use could be required to pay
a fee to mitigate the conversion of farm land to non-farm use. Mitigation fees could be
used to purchase and improve farm lands for continued agricultural production, the
provision of research activities or ancillary uses necessary for the continued production of
agriculture, and farm worker housing and related supportive social services.
    Responsible Agency:       Community Development Department
    Financing:                Department budget
    2013-2021 Objectives:     Study farmland mitigation fund options and present to the
                              Planning Commission and City Council for initial
                              consideration.
    Timeframe:                Within one year of adoption of the Housing Element.
B.      Removal of Constraints
State law requires the Housing Element to address, and where appropriate and legally
possible, remove constraints affecting the maintenance, improvement, and development of
housing. During the prior Housing Element planning period the City updated the Zoning
Ordinance to:
       Establish a reasonable accommodation procedure;
       Adopt a density bonus ordinance that complies with current State law;
                                                                                 City of El Centro
Page 88                                                                2013-2021 Housing Element

         Allow shared parking to facilitate development (including mixed-use and residential
          development) within the Downtown Commercial (CD) zone;
         Accommodate residential care facilities, farm employee housing, single room
          occupancy (SRO) buildings, transitional housing, supportive housing, and
          emergency shelters consistent with State law.
The City will continue to monitor its development process, zoning regulations, and
infrastructure capacity to identify and remove constraints to the development of housing.
Program 6: Reasonable Accommodation
Both the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act
direct local governments to make reasonable accommodations (i.e., modifications or
exceptions) in their zoning laws and other land use regulations to allow disabled persons an
equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. The City adopted a Reasonable
Accommodation Ordinance in 2008; however, the discretionary review and $428 application
fee may constrain housing opportunities for persons with disabilities. The City will revise
the Reasonable Accommodation Ordinance to establish a ministerial review process and
reduce or eliminate the application fee.
     Responsible Agency:       Community Development Department
     Financing:                Department budget
     2013-2021 Objectives:     Modify the Reasonable Accommodation Ordinance to
                               establish a ministerial review procedure. Reduce or eliminate
                               the $428 application fee.
     Timeframe:                Within one year of adoption of the 2013-2021 Housing
                               Element.
Program 7: Monitor Changes in Federal and State Housing, Planning, and Zoning Laws
State law requires that Housing Elements address, and where appropriate and legally
possible, remove governmental constraints to the maintenance, improvement, and
development of housing. While the 2013-2021 Housing Element update did not identify any
significant governmental constraints to the development or maintenance of housing in El
Centro, the City will continue to monitor its development process and zoning regulations to
identify and remove constraints to the development of housing. The City will also continue
to monitor federal and State legislation that could impact housing and comment on,
support, or oppose proposed changes or additions to existing legislation, as well as support
new legislation when appropriate. Special attention will be given by the City in the
minimizing of governmental constraints to the development, improvement, and
maintenance of housing.
     Responsible Agency:       Community Development Department
     Financing:                Department budget
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                             Page 89

    2013-2021 Objectives:       Monitor State and federal legislation as well as City
                                development process and zoning regulations to identify and
                                remove housing constraints.
    Timeframe:                  Ongoing.
Program 8: Water and Sewer Service Priority for Affordable Housing
Senate Bill 1087 (enacted 2006) requires that water and sewer providers develop written
policies that grant priority to proposed development that includes housing affordable to
lower-income households. The legislation also prohibits water providers from denying or
conditioning the approval of development that includes housing affordable to lower income
households, unless specific written findings are made. The City will develop and establish a
formal procedure to grant water and sewer priority to developments with units affordable
to lower-income households pursuant to Government Code Section 65589.7.
    Responsible Agency:         Public Works Department
    Financing:                  Department budget
    2013-2021 Objectives:       Develop and establish a formal procedure to grant water and
                                sewer priority to developments with units affordable to lower-
                                income households within one year of adoption of the 2013-
                                2021 Housing Element.
    Timeframe:                  Ongoing.
C.      Provide Supportive Housing Assistance for Special Needs
        Population
Where there is a need for affordable housing, often there is also a need for supportive
services for lower income households, including extremely low income households. The
City assists service providers in meeting the immediate needs of persons with special needs,
including the homeless, near-homeless, and extremely low income households. Immediate
need includes the provision of food, temporary shelter, health care, and other social
services. The following programs intend to address the overall need for affordable housing
and supportive services in El Centro.
Program 9: Coordination with Social Service Agencies
A variety of social services agencies provide housing and supportive services to special needs
groups in El Centro. Several of these social service agencies receive CDBG funds from the
City to help administer these programs. The City determines its CDBG allocations to social
service agencies annually based upon applications received, whether the agency provides a
priority need in the City’s five-year Consolidated Plan, and if the agency meets Federal HUD
regulations. In a typical program year, funding is allocated to nonprofits that serve the
following needs of lower income individuals and households (i.e., those earning up to 80
percent AMI): food distribution, housing assistance, services and programs for the elderly and
youth, before and after school care programs, services for the disabled (including the
                                                                                  City of El Centro
Page 90                                                                 2013-2021 Housing Element

developmentally disabled), primary health care services, and fair housing advocacy and
counseling.
Similar to the Housing Element update, the Consolidated Plan involves comprehensive
outreach, citizen participation workshops, and assessment of community needs to develop a
road map for programs and activities to be pursued in the ensuing five years. The variety of
social service agencies that may be awarded CDBG are guided by priority needs articulated in
the Consolidated Plan. All CDBG-contracted and funded programs (emergency
housing/shelter, food distribution, primary health care services to the indigent or non-
insured, senior case-management services and home-delivered meals, and before-and-after
school youth programs for lower income families) address and assist the needs of lower
income and special needs persons and households of our community.
     Responsible Agency:       Economic Development Department
     Financing:                CDBG
     2013-2021 Objectives:     Continue to evaluate on an annual basis allocation of CDBG
                               funds to social service agencies to benefit El Centro residents.
     Timeframe:                Annual monitoring and reporting throughout the planning
                               period.
D.        Maintain and Conserve the Existing and Future Housing Stock
Market rents in El Centro are at a level which significantly limits the supply of housing
affordable to very low income households. Rental subsidies are necessary to prevent many of
the City's very low income residents from spending upwards of 30 percent of their incomes on
housing costs, and over-extending themselves financially. In addition to rent subsidies,
actions to conserve the 42 at-risk units at the Euclid Villas apartments will be necessary to
maintain affordability. Furthermore, although the majority of the City’s housing stock is in
good condition, the City seeks the continued maintenance and improvement of housing
during the planning period.
Program 10: Rental Assistance
The Housing Choice Voucher rental assistance program extends rental subsidies to extremely
low and very low income families and elderly (i.e., those earning up to 50 percent AMI) who
spend more than 30 percent of their income on rent. The subsidy represents the difference
between the excess of 30 percent of their monthly income and the actual rent. The Imperial
Valley Housing Authority (IVHA) administers the Federal Housing Choice Voucher Program
in the City of El Centro. According to the IVHA, 938 El Centro resident households received
voucher assistance as of March 2013, with approximately 800 applicants on the waiting list.
     Responsible Agency:       Imperial Valley Housing Authority
     Financing:                U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
     2013-2021 Objectives:     Continue to contract with the IVHA to administer the Housing
                               Choice Vouchers Program and assist an average of
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                 Page 91

                              approximately 900 extremely low and very low income
                              households annually during the planning period. Promote the
                              Housing Choice Vouchers program on City website.
                              Encourage landlords to accept Housing Choice Vouchers.
                              Support the IVHA’s applications for additional voucher
                              allocations and efforts to maintain and expand voucher use in
                              the City.
    Timeframe:                Ongoing implementation and annual monitoring throughout
                              the planning period.
Program 11: Conservation of Existing and Future Affordable Units
In order to meet the housing needs of all economic groups in El Centro, the City must guard
against the loss of housing units available to lower income households. As of April 2013, the
City’s affordable housing inventory consisted of 915 units, of which 42 units were at risk of
converting to market rate rents (see Table 29). The inventory includes 915 assisted units in 22
deed-restricted affordable housing developments.
    Responsible Agency:       Economic Development Department; Imperial Valley Housing
                              Authority.
    Financing:                Section 8 vouchers; other funding sources as available
    2013-2021 Objectives:     Monitor the status of the 42 at-risk units at Euclid Villas. The
                              City will work with property owners, interest groups and the
                              State and federal governments to implement the following
                              actions on an ongoing basis to conserve its affordable housing
                              stock:
                                  Monitor Units at Risk: Maintain contact with providers
                                   and owners to monitor the status of existing and future
                                   affordable units, including the 42 at-risk units at Euclid
                                   Villas since they may lose their subsidies due to
                                   discontinuation of the Section 8 program at the federal
                                   level or opting out by the property owner.
                                  Work with Potential Purchasers: Where feasible, provide
                                   technical assistance to public and non-profit agencies
                                   interested in purchasing and/or managing units at risk.
                                  Tenant Education: The California legislature extended
                                   the noticing requirement of at-risk units opting out of low
                                   income use restrictions to one year. Should a property
                                   owner pursue conversion of the units to market rate, the
                                   City will ensure that tenants were properly noticed and
                                   informed of their rights and that they are eligible to
                                   receive Section 8 vouchers that would enable them to stay
                                   in their units.
                                  Assist Tenants of Existing Rent Restricted Units to Obtain
                                   Section 8 Voucher Assistance: Tenants of housing units
                                                                                  City of El Centro
Page 92                                                                 2013-2021 Housing Element

                                     with expired Section 8 contracts are eligible to receive
                                     special Section 8 vouchers that can be used only at the
                                     same property. The City will assist tenants of "at-risk"
                                     units to obtain these Section 8 vouchers through the
                                     Imperial Valley Housing Authority.
     Timeframe:                 Ongoing implementation and annual monitoring and
                                reporting throughout the planning period. Within 60 days of
                                notice of intent to convert at-risk units to market rate rents, the
                                City will work with potential purchasers using HCD’s current
                                list   of    Qualified    Entities     (http://www.hcd.ca.gov/
                                hpd/hrc/tech/presrv/), educate tenants of their rights, and
                                assist tenants to obtain rental assistance in accordance with
                                this program.
Program 12: Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program
The City offers a low interest rate loan to lower income owner-occupants to rehabilitate their
single family dwelling. Eligible improvements include, but are not limited to, kitchen
cabinetry, roofing, air conditioning, windows/doors, plumbing, electrical, insulation/weather
proofing, paint, floor covering, additions to alleviate overcrowding, and total reconstruction
(in certain circumstances). Loans amortized at a three percent interest rate are secured with a
deed of trust for a maximum term of 15 years. The program also offers deferred loans at zero
percent interest, subject to review every 36 months (non-seniors) or 84 months (seniors). The
loan-to-value ratio of the property must not exceed 100 percent.
     Responsible Agency:        Economic Development Department
     Financing:                 CDBG, HOME, and CalHOME
     2013-2021 Objectives:      Assist two low-income homeowners and one very low-income
                                homeowner annually.
     Timeframe:                 Annual allocation of federal funds and annual monitoring and
                                reporting throughout the planning period.
Program 13: Code Enforcement
Code Enforcement officers respond to complaints related to substandard housing, property
maintenance, overgrown vegetation, trash and debris, illegal conversions, improper
occupancy and other nuisance and zoning complaints. Code enforcement staff will to inform
owner-occupants about the City’s Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program (see Program 11).
     Responsible Agency:        Community Development Department
     Financing:                 CDBG and Department budget
     2013-2021 Objectives:      Continue to implement the applicable sections of the El Centro
                                Municipal Code. Inform eligible owners about the City’s
                                Home Improvement Loan Program.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                   Page 93

    Timeframe:                 Ongoing implementation and annual             monitoring      and
                               reporting throughout the planning period.
E.      Equal Housing Opportunity
Promoting equal housing opportunities for all persons is an important City goal. The
following program is intended to help ensure El Centro residents have equal opportunity to
obtain and maintain decent and safe housing regardless of race, religion, sex, family size,
marital status, sexual orientation, ancestry, national origin, color, age, disability/medical
conditions, and source of income.
Program 14: Fair Housing Services
The City currently contracts with the Inland Fair Housing and Mediation Board (IFHMB) to
provide fair housing services and landlord/tenant counseling to City residents. Typically, fair
housing services include the investigation and resolution of housing discrimination
complaints, discrimination auditing/testing, and education and outreach including the
dissemination of fair housing information such as written material, workshops, and seminars.
Landlord/tenant counseling services involves informing landlords and tenants of their rights
and responsibilities under the California Civil Code and mediating conflicts between tenants
and landlords.
The City monitors and attempts to minimize discriminatory housing practices with the
assistance of the IFHMB that is annually funded by the City’s CDBG. The City advertises the
availability of fair housing services by posting IFHMB posters and provides IFHMB
informational flyers at public counters at City Hall and the Economic Development
Department offices. The City’s website also provides a link to IFHMB resources.
Furthermore, the City accommodates IFHMB meetings and workshops at Council Chambers
and distributes information at tabling events and includes articles about fair housing in a bi-
annual newsletter and period newspaper advertisements published in English and Spanish.
    Responsible Agency:        Economic Development Department; Inland Fair Housing and
                               Mediation Board
    Financing:                 CDBG
    2013-2021 Objectives:      Continue to contract with a fair housing service provider to
                               provide fair housing services. Maintain the link on the City
                               website providing information about fair housing services.
    Time Frame:                Annual allocation of funds to fair housing service provider.
                               Annual monitoring and reporting throughout the planning
                               period.
                                                                                 City of El Centro
Page 94                                                                2013-2021 Housing Element

5.3 Summary of Quantified Objectives
Table 47 summarizes the City’s objectives in housing production, rehabilitation, and
conservation/preservation based on the level of financial and administrative resources
anticipated during the 2013-2021 Housing Element planning period. Program objectives are
not cumulative as some overlap between programs can be expected given limited funding.
        Table 47: Quantified Objectives
                                     Extremely  Very               Above
             Objective Category                      Low Moderate            Total
                                        Low     Low               Moderate
        RHNA                            235     252  300   297       840     1,924
        New Construction                 5       20   35   340       500      900
        Rehabilitation                   0        8   16    0         0        24
        Conservation/Preservation              42           0         0        42
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                          Page 95


Appendix A: Outreach Efforts
A.1. Joint Study Session and Outreach List
In addition to municipal, regional, and state agencies, including school districts and utilities,
the following organizations and agencies were sent invitation to attend the Joint Planning
Commission/City Council Study Session held on January 28, 2013:
    Area Agency on Aging                          Turning Point Men’s Home
    Heart and Hand Assisted Living                Salvation Army
    Safe Haven Home Care                          IV Ministries
    Casa Elite                                    American Red Cross Imperial Valley
    Casa de Anza                                  United Farm Workers of America
    California United Homecare Workers            California Coalition for Rural Housing
    Dayout                                        Western Center on Law & Poverty
    Plaza Senior Apartments                       Community Catalysts of California
    Golden Joy Residential Care                   Center for Race, Poverty, and the
    ARC of the Imperial Valley                     Environment
    Able Disabled Advocacy                        Institute of Socio Economic Development
    Canizalez Associates                          USDA Rural Development Home Loans
    American Association of People with           Campesinos Unidos Administration
     Disabilities                                  California Rural Legal Assistance
    Tony Rouhotas, ADA Compliance                  Foundation
     Advocate                                      The Institute for Socio-Economic Justice
    El Centro Blind Center                        USDA Rural Development
    Imperial County Continuum of Care             Coachella Valley Housing Coalition
    Imperial County Department of Social          Imperial Valley Housing Authority
     Services                                      BIA/SC Desert Chapter
    Imperial County Work Training Center          Building Industry Institute
    Womanhaven                                    National Association of Home Builders
    Catholic Charities                            Center for Housing Policy
    Elli’s Homeless Unlimited                     I.C. Building & Construction Trades
    Imperial Valley Food Bank                      Council
    New Creations God’s Gang                      California BIA
    United Way of Imperial County                 California Housing Council
    El Centro Regional Task Force on              California Home Building Foundation
     Homelessness                                  GMAC Development Company
    Employment Development Department             Town Center Village LLC
    Imperial County Department of Mental          DR Horton
     Health                                        AMG & Associates
    Habitat for Humanity                          TWG General Contractors
    Court Appointed Special Advocates of          Victoria Place, LLC
     Imperial County                               Pacific West Development, L.P.
    Imperial         County       Workforce       Pioneer Manufactured Homes
     Development Office                            McMillan Homes
    Chelsea Investment Corporation                Slocum Investments, LLC
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                               Page A-1

Table A-1 summarizes comments received from the public during the Study Session and
provides a response to indicate how/if the 2013-2021 Housing Element addresses the issue.
Table A-1: Study Session Comments and Responses
Comment                                                        Response
The City Manager explained that the City recently completed    Quantified objectives for affordable housing construction
the meet and confer process with the California Department     contained in Table 47 reflect severe local funding
of Finance and commented that future City funding for          constraints caused by the State’s dissolution of the City’s
affordable housing will be highly constrained.                 Redevelopment Agency in February 2012.
Lack of funding was a recurring concern reiterated by several  Program 3 outlines actions the City can take to encourage
Study Session participants. Participants asked how the City    and facilitate affordable housing development without
can facilitate affordable housing following the State’s        direct financial contribution.
dissolution of the City’s Redevelopment Agency.
County of Imperial Public Health Department representative     Policy 2.8 discourages smoking in homes occupied by
advocated a smoke free housing policy per recent State law.    children, seniors, or others with health issues.
The County has received complaints from tenants about
smoking in apartment buildings and offered the City technical
assistance in drafting a smoke free policy.
A Study Session participant asked if the quality of healthcare The City’s Housing Element consultant explained that
is factored into the HCD review process and whether the City   healthcare facilities are not part of the Housing Element or
gets “points” for having healthcare facilities.                HCD’s review.
Study Session participants requested an overview of the        The City’s Housing Element consultant outlined the public
public participation process and wanted to know how the        participation program for the Housing Element update,
public was notified for the study session and how many         encouraged participants to forward additional comments
opportunities the public have to review/comment prior to       and questions to the City, and invited attendance at future
adoption of the Housing Element.                               public meetings.
The City’s Economic Development Director commented that        Program 3 contains actions and objectives for the
the existing wait list for affordable units exceeds 800        construction of new affordable housing during the planning
residents.                                                     period. Program 9 outlines the City’s commitment to
                                                               support IVHA’s efforts to administer, preserve, and expand
                                                               the Housing Choice Voucher rental assistance program in
                                                               El Centro.
A Study Session participant requested clarification of SROs    The City’s Housing Element consultant described SRO
units and whether there are other housing types that are       units and explained that emergency shelters, transitional
suitable for extremely low income households.                  housing, supportive housing, and some types of farm
                                                               worker housing are other housing types that can
                                                               accommodate extremely low income households.
After closure of the session, a member of the public           Policy 1.9 encourages the identification and pursuit of
commented that USDA Rural Development and Rental               funding sources that can facilitate the development of farm
Assistance programs can facilitate extremely low income        worker housing and extremely low income households.
housing.
                                                                                                           City of El Centro
Page A-2                                                                                      2013-2021 Housing Element

A.2. Public Service Provider Interviews
More than a dozen service providers were contacted via telephone to solicit input regarding
housing and supportive service needs in El Centro for the Housing Element update. Key
issues identified by the five organizations that responded include:
         Moderate increases in the number of clientele seeking services.
         Increased need for funding to provide services and expand programs.
         Increased need for senior assistance, including: accessibility to safe/affordable
          housing and general financial support.
         Increased need for independent living opportunities services for persons with
          disabilities.
The Housing Element addresses these needs through a variety of programs targeted to
conserve the existing and expand the future affordable housing stock (Programs 3 and 9)
and coordinate with and fund social service agencies, including organizations that support
persons with disabilities and seniors (Program 8).
Agency: ARC Imperial Valley
Contact: Maria Cristobal
ARC provides employment, transportation, and residential services to mentally and
physically challenged residents of Imperial County. The City allocates funding to the
organization to provide Dial a Ride services to its residents. Maria stated that the
paratransit services they offer in El Centro have seen moderate increases in the number of
clientele seeking services and that the program has proven to be effective in also linking
clientele to the services offered by other organization. She revealed that the organization
plans on expanding the programs it offers and that cooperating with the City would be
effective as it has been successful in the past and present.
Agency: Congregate Meals, Catholic Charities
Contact: Laurie Edwards
Catholic Charities provides a variety of services to El Centro residents, among which their
Senior Food Distribution and House of Hope programs receive CDBG funding from the
City to operate. The organization has received CDBG funding from the City off and on since
2004 and the amount of funding they have received during those years has continually
diminished. Laurie stated that during the last few years the number of clientele they have
served has fluctuated and that the majority of clientele served are very low income The
Senior Food Distribution program currently serves 54 residents and maintains a lengthy
waiting list, constricted primarily by the amount of funding available to the organization.
In addition to serving El Centro residents, the organization operates throughout the entire
Imperial Valley region, which makes it use of limited funding even more difficult to
disperse effectively into programs, given increased needs. She stressed the importance of
funding and suggested that the City could help by providing further support to the
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                            Page A-3

organization. Given the depleting amount of funding the organization has received over the
last few years, they have had a constant need to find new ways to find money and support
for their programs. In the process of helping their clientele, Laurie has noticed that
improvements are needed in terms of access to affordable homes in safe areas for seniors, as
it is often a difficult process for them to navigate.
Agency: Elder Law & Advocacy
Contact: Lourdes Ramirez
Through its Senior Legal Services program, the agency is able to provide counsel to senior
residents dealing with a wide range of issues. Lourdes revealed that over the last few years
there has been a moderate increase in the number of clientele seeking advice over housing
related issues. Overall, the demand for the services is high as the agency is already close to
fulfilling its FY 2012-2013 goal of serving 275 clients.
Agency: Imperial County Area Agency on Aging
Contact: Sherry Leon
Over the last few years the agency has continued to serve a growing demand of senior
residents who do not want to incur debt. In helping their clientele, Sherry revealed that the
agency regularly receives requests for assistance with paying utilities and other basic bills.
She explained the issue as a constant dilemma for seniors with such little income who, for
example, receive a social security check and are faced with the decision to pay for food or
utilities. It is a significant issue that needs to be addressed; however, the agency often
cannot help as they do not have enough funding to cover all of the requests they receive.
Agency: San Diego Regional Center
Contact: Bles Waldo
The San Diego Regional Center (SDRC) serves both San Diego and Imperial Counties. Bles
said that the center is generally able to provide for prospective clientele as long as they meet
the SDRC’s requirements, and most often before the age of 18. This clientele age group has
long been one of the SDRC’s most served. She revealed that within the clientele they serve,
there is a growing population seeking accessibility to independent living. When it comes to
housing, the center helps its clientele with accommodations as much as possible; however,
it’s extremely difficult to find the right place for them. There simply are not enough options
fit to serve their clientele and the growing demand.
A.3. Draft Housing Element – Public Meetings
The City conducted a public meeting before the Planning Commission on May 14, 2013 to
review to the draft Housing Element. Five members of the public attended the meeting and
a representative of California Rural Legal Assistance, Inc. offered comment (Table A-2). The
City conducted a second public meeting before the City Council on June 4, 2013 to review to
the draft Housing Element. More than a dozen members of the public attended the meeting;
however, no member of the public offered comment.
                                                                                    City of El Centro
Page A-4                                                                  2013-2021 Housing Element

Table A-2: Summary of Public Comments and Housing Element Response
                     Comment Themes                                        Housing Element Response
                                                             Craigslist and the Imperial Valley Free Press (IVFP) are the
                                                             only sources of on-line rental housing market data available
                                                             to El Centro residents. In April 2013, the IVFP had an
                                                             average of 20 rental housing listings, less than half of which
Is Craigslist a reliable source for rental market data in El
                                                             were located in El Centro. Craigslist included 93
Centro? Were any other data sources consulted? How
                                                             unduplicated listings within El Centro during the six week
often was the information checked?
                                                             period starting December 14, 2012 and ending January 28,
                                                             2013. A current or prospective resident would most likely
                                                             check Craigslist to find housing because it provides the
                                                             largest number of rental listings in one location.
The Draft Housing Element's sites analysis relies on a
density factor of 19.0 units per acre to demonstrate
                                                             The two projects are the only recent examples that
adequate capacity to accommodate the lower income
                                                             demonstrate that zoing and development standards do not
RHNA. The Draft Housing Element references two multi-
                                                             constrain the ability of developers to achieve 19.0 units per
family projects that achieved near or above 19.0 units per
                                                             acre in the R3 zone. Neither project requested or needed a
acre. One project achieved 21.8 units per acre and the
                                                             density bonus, waiver, or modification of any development
other achieved 18.0 units per acre. Are there any other
                                                             standard.
examples that can demonstrate 19.0 units per acre is a
feasible density factor?
                                                              SROs are regulated as commercial development and
                                                             therefore are not subject to residential land use controls,
                                                             including density. However, the City acknowledges that a
                                                             development with smaller units will achieve greater density
                                                             than a development with larger units (all other things being
                                                             equal). If a development proposal includes larger dwelling
                                                             units that would result in a density less than 19.0 units per
                                                             acre on a R3 or CT site, and the property was relied upon in
                                                             Table C-1 to demonstrate capacity to accommodate the
                                                             lower income RHNA, the City will identify and, if necessary,
                                                             rezone sufficient sites to accommodate the shortfall and
                                                             ensure “no net loss” in capacity to accommodate the RHNA
                                                             (see Program 2).
This is related to the previous comment. Approximately 22
percent of the City's households are large households
                                                             As noted on pg. 22 of the Draft Housing Element, according
(defined as households with five or more occupants). Is
                                                             to the U.S. Census Bureau's American Community Survey
19.0 units per acre achievable if a developer provides units
                                                             data, more than 7,000 units in El Centro contained three or
that are large enough to accommodate large lower income
                                                             more bedrooms; the minimum size considered appropriate
renter households? How many SROs will need to be
                                                             to avoid overcrowding for large households. However, a
included to achieve 19.0 units per acre? How are the needs
                                                             significant majority of these units are owner-occupied and
of large renter households be addressed?
                                                             only 1,742 of these large units were renter-occupied.
                                                             According to the 2010 Census, the City was home to 1,548
                                                             large renter-households. In response to this public
                                                             comment, the Draft Housing Element has been revised to
                                                             acknowledge that although the 1,742 rental housing units
                                                             with three or more bedrooms are numerically sufficient to
                                                             meet the needs of the City's 1,548 large renter-households,
                                                             lower income large renter-households may have difficulty
                                                             finding adequately sized and affordable housing in El
                                                             Centro. The Draft Housing Element was also revised to
                                                             include a new policy encouraging the development of rental
                                                             housing units with three or more bedrooms to address the
                                                             needs of large renter households (see Policy 1.14).
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                        Page A-5


  Appendix B: Review of Past Accomplishments
  Government Code Section 65588(a) requires each jurisdiction to review its housing element as
  frequently as appropriate to evaluate:
           The appropriateness of the housing goals, objectives, and policies in contributing to the
            attainment of the state housing goal;
           The effectiveness of the housing element in attainment of the community’s housing goals
            and objectives; and
           The progress of the city, county or city and county in implementation of the housing
            element.
  This section documents the City’s achievements under the 2008-2014 Housing Element with
  respect to the actions and objectives contained therein. This section describes the relative success
  of the City’s efforts to implement the 2008 programs, and contains recommendations for program
  retention, revision, deletion or addition to address current and projected needs and state
  requirements for the 2013-2021 planning period. Table B-1 compares quantified objectives and
  accomplishments during the 2008-2013 (through end of 2012); however, new construction
  objectives are reported for the RHNA cycle, which started in 2006. Table B-2 lists these housing
  programs and provides a summary of accomplishments during the prior period.
Table B-1: Objectives and Accomplishments
                         New Construction                 Rehabilitation            Conservation
     Income                 (2006-2012)                    (2008-2012)               (2008-2012)
    Category
                    Objective Accomplishment      Objective Accomplishment  Objective Accomplishment
Extremely Low             297                18            0              0         0                   0
Very Low                  308                33          25               7         0                   0
Low                       386                33          25               8       146                146
Moderate                  727              302             0              0         0                   0
Above Moderate          1,965              215             0              0         0                   0
Total                   3,683              601           50              15       146                146
  City of El Centro
  2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                    Page B-1

Table B-2: Review of Past Program Accomplishments
Objective and Associated Programs                                                        Accomplishments
Objective 1: Housing Availability and Production
1        Utilize the City’s Updated General Plan and Zoning ordinance to provide         The 2008-2014 Housing Element, which includes the City’s inventory of
         adequate, suitable sites for the construction of new housing, reflecting a      vacant land and affordable housing, was available to the public at City Hall
         variety of housing types and densities. The City will make the land             and on the City’s website during the planning period.
         inventory available to the public at City Hall and will also post the
         inventory on the City’s website. In addition, this will include an inventory    Continued Appropriateness: This program is retained, but modified for the
         of existing affordable housing units in the City, including density bonus       2013-2021 Housing Element (see Program 1).
         units and other publicly assisted units. The City will publish the availability
         of the updated inventory at least annually.
2        Continue to use zoning and other land use controls to ensure the                The City implemented the General Plan and Zoning Ordinance to ensure the
         compatibility of residential areas with surrounding commercial and other        compatibility of residential areas with surrounding commercial and other
         non-residential uses.                                                           non-residential uses.
                                                                                         Continued Appropriateness: Ensuring land use compatibility between
                                                                                         residential and non-residential uses is an important priority for the City.
                                                                                         However, this program is not included in the 2013-2021 Housing Element as
                                                                                         a separate housing program. Instead, a policy is included in the Housing
                                                                                         Element to affirm the City’s position regarding land use compatibility.
3        The City will use programs, such as the HOME and CDBG Programs for              As of April 2013, the Economic Development Department completed two
         the reconstruction and/or rehabilitation of lower income, including             reconstruction projects for two very low income families. It also completed
         extremely low income owner/renter occupied housing units in El Centro.          five rehabilitation projects under the very low income category and eight
         The City will take all action necessary to expedite processing and              rehabilitation projects for families at the low income category.
         approvals for such programs.
                                                                                         Continued Appropriateness: This program is not included in the 2013-
                                                                                         2021 Housing Element as a separate program; however, primary program
                                                                                         elements are included in the Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program (see
                                                                                         Program 12). The Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program will use a portion
                                                                                         of available CDBG funds to assist lower income homeowners reconstruct or
                                                                                         rehabilitate their dwellings.
                                                                                                                                                        City of El Centro
Page B-2                                                                                                                                      2013-2021 Housing Element

Table B-2: Review of Past Program Accomplishments
Objective and Associated Programs                                                      Accomplishments
4          Continue to utilize environmental and other development review              The City utilized environmental and other development review procedures to
           procedures to ensure that all new residential developments are provided     ensure that new residential developments were provided with adequate
           with adequate public and private facilities and services. The City shall    public and private facilities and services. The City worked cooperatively with
           continue to work cooperatively with school districts in monitoring housing, school districts to plan for future school facility needs.
           population, and school enrollment trends to plan for future school facility
           needs. Documentation that adequate services and facilities are or will be   Continued Appropriateness: This program is not included the 2013-2021
           provided shall be a condition for their approval.                           Housing Element. Primary program elements are included in the Urban
                                                                                       Development Program contained in the General Plan Land Use Element.
5          Housing data will be continuously posted on the City’s web site and         The City’s Building Division posts monthly construction data reports on the
           available in hard copy on request.                                          City’s website, which are also available in hard copy. The reports include
                                                                                       residential and non-residential construction data.
                                                                                       Continued Appropriateness: This program reflects routine functions of
                                                                                       City Building Division staff and is therefore not included in the 2013-2021
                                                                                       Housing Element as a separate housing program.
6          Continue to update elements of the General Plan, as needed.                 The City updated the General Plan Circulation Element in 2009.
                                                                                       Continued Appropriateness: Features of this program reflect routine
                                                                                       functions of City staff, the Planning Commission, and City Council. The
                                                                                       program is not included in the 2013-2021 Housing Element as a separate
                                                                                       housing program.
7          The City Zoning Ordinance permits clustered development in R-1 and R-2 Since 2008, the City has not received any applications for clustered
           zones of the City. Clustered housing development in R-1 and R-2 zones development.
           is subject to conditional use permits in order to evaluate each project
           individually and to preserve the low density residential character of Continued Appropriateness: Promoting clustered housing development
           adjacent neighborhoods. Clustered development is allowable by right in remains an important priority for the City. However, this program is not
           the R-3 zone. The Planning & Zoning Department will provide project included in the 2013-2021 Housing Element as a separate housing program.
           developers with the pertinent information during pre-application meetings Instead, a policy is included in the Housing Element to affirm the City’s
           to encourage the development of clustered housing. Where appropriate, position regarding clustered housing development.
           conditional use permit applications will also be expedited to further
           encourage clustered development.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                                                   Page B-3

Table B-2: Review of Past Program Accomplishments
Objective and Associated Programs                                                    Accomplishments
8        To encourage the development of affordable housing through density          The City revised the Zoning Ordinance during the planning period to update
         bonuses, the City will provide public announcements, at least once a        the density bonus provisions consistent with State law. The City has not
         year, in the local newspaper informing developers and the general public    processed any applications for density bonus projects since 2008.
         of the availability and benefits of residential density bonuses. Brochures
         will also be made available for distribution to developers seeking          Continued Appropriateness: The City’s density bonus ordinance is now
         information. The City processes density bonus applications through a        compliant with State law and therefore this program is not included in the
         conditional use permit procedure. Conditional use permit processing fees    2013-2021 Housing Element; however, the regulatory incentives and
         for density bonus projects will be waived and the application expedited to  concessions available to developers through the density bonus ordinance
         further encourage their use.                                                are included in an overall program to facilitate and encourage affordable
                                                                                     housing development (see Program 3).
         The existing City Zoning Ordinance regarding density bonuses is not in
         conformance with state law. The City will adopt an ordinance that is in
         compliance with Government Code Section 65915.
9        To encourage the development of affordable housing for low and              The City has not developed lot consolidation criteria or incentives. The
         moderate income households, the City will offer financial incentives to     State’s elimination of the City’s Redevelopment Agency in February 2012
         properties that consolidate multiple (2 or more) adjoining small lots into  removed the primary funding mechanism for incentives anticipated under
         larger more developable, more marketable parcels. Subject to funding        this program.
         availability, and with participation of the El Centro Redevelopment
         Agency, the City will offer below interest rate loans for construction      Continued Appropriateness: This program is not included in the 2013-
         financing and/or permanent financing. Funding participation levels will be  2021 Housing Element.
         evaluated on a project-by-project basis, and will be dependent on the
         level and extent of affordability offered.
10       The City will actively work with interested developers to identify sources  The “Las Brisas” project (formerly known as the “El Centro Family
         of funding for the construction of new affordable multi-family housing      Apartment” project) was completed in September 2012. Las Brisas provides
         targeting the needs of large family households in El Centro. Funding to be  72 affordable units, including 27 units with three or more bedrooms that can
         pursued includes tax-exempt mortgage revenue bonds; HCD’s Multi-            accommodate a five-person large family household without overcrowding.
         Family Housing Program; and tax credits. The City shall also assist the     This project was financed with different public funding sources including
         process by providing letters of support for funding applications during the HOME, LIHTC, MHP, and Redevelopment Set-Aside funds. The project
         application process to increase the chances of a project receiving a        was completed in September 2012.
         funding award.
                                                                                     Continued Appropriateness: This program is administrative in nature and
                                                                                     not included in the 2013-2021 Housing Element as a separate program;
                                                                                     however, the primary program components are in an overall program to
                                                                                                                                                  City of El Centro
Page B-4                                                                                                                                2013-2021 Housing Element

Table B-2: Review of Past Program Accomplishments
Objective and Associated Programs                                                      Accomplishments
                                                                                       facilitate and encourage affordable housing development (see Program 3).
11         To accommodate the remaining RHNA of 259 low-income units, the City         The property owner chose not to pursue a rezone of the 13.45-acre parcel.
           shall rezone Assessor’s Parcel Number 044-620-012, 13.45 acres, as          Instead the City identified 18 acres on 11 vacant High-Medium Density / R3
           show in Table 2.2-15 of the element from R-2 to R-3 at a minimum            parcels that were not included in the prior Housing Element’s inventory and
           density of 20 units per acre. Pursuant to subdivision (h) of Section        adequate sites analysis. These parcels have capacity to accommodate at
           65583.2 of the Government Code, the City shall ensure that owner-           least 283 units assuming a density factor of 16 units per acre. Because the
           occupied and multi-family residential housing development allowed “by       R3 sites allow up to 25 units per acre, the vacant sites are considered
           right”, without a conditional use permit, planned unit development permit,  sufficient to accommodate housing that is affordable to lower income
           or other discretionary review or approval that would constitute a “project” households “by default” per Government Code Section 65583.2(c)(3)(B).
           for the purposes of Division 13 of the Public Resources Code. Create an     Given the “default” affordability status and realistic capacity of these vacant
           opportunity for a minimum of 259 units of rental housing for lower income   sites, the City had (and still has) a surplus capacity of at least 24 lower
           households.                                                                 income units through 2014.
                                                                                       Continued Appropriateness: This program is not continued in the 2013-
                                                                                       2021 Housing Element.
Objective 2: Housing Conservation and Improvement
1          The El Centro Redevelopment agency administers a Home Improvement           As of April 2013, the Economic Development Department completed two
           Program to provide financial assistance in the form of low interest and     reconstruction projects for two very low income families. The department
           deferred payment loans for the rehabilitation of residences owned and/or    also completed five rehabilitation projects under the very low income
           occupied by lower income households. The City promotes the program          category and eight rehabilitation projects for families at the low income
           and provides detailed information on its website. Additionally, the City    category.
           does an annual mailing of a program brochure as an insert to the water
           bill, provides brochures at all City tabling events and details the program Continued Appropriateness: This program is retained, but modified for the
           in its quarterly newsletter. The program objective is the rehabilitation of 2013-2021 Housing Element (see Program 12). The Housing Rehabilitation
           10 units per year, or 90 units through the balance of the 2008-2014         Loan Program will use a portion of available CDBG funds to assist lower
           Housing Element.                                                            income homeowners reconstruct or rehabilitate their dwellings.
2          Condominium Conversions may have a negative impact on the supply of         The City did not receive any applications to convert rental apartments into
           rental housing, and the potential of displacing families from the converted residential condominiums; however, the City approved the conversion of a
           units may present special problems for the elderly, handicapped, or lower   46-unit motel (operating similar to a SRO) and a three-unit apartment
           income households. The Planning and Zoning Department shall review          building into office condominiums.
           condominium conversions on a case-by-case basis to minimize or
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                                                     Page B-5

Table B-2: Review of Past Program Accomplishments
Objective and Associated Programs                                                    Accomplishments
         mitigate impacts on displaced households and monitor condo                  Continued Appropriateness: Rental housing is an important source of
         conversions, housing demolitions, conversions of reserved housing units,    affordable housing in the City. However, this is not included in the 2013-
         and closure of mobile home parks, and recommend specific actions to the     2021 Housing Element as a separate housing program. Instead, a policy is
         City Council to avoid economic dislocations to affected households. The     included in the Housing Element to affirm the City’s position regarding
         staff will recommend written notification to all residents when dislocation condominium conversion.
         is likely in effect to minimize dislocations and to act as a resource to
         assist those dislocated from their homes to find permanent
         accommodations.
3        Allow for the construction of bedroom additions with financial assistance   The City did not receive any applications for bedroom additions during the
         from the City’s residential rehabilitation program, when needed to          planning period. A bedroom can be added if the Economic Development
         eliminate overcrowding and to address the needs of large family             Department determines that overcrowding exists in the course of working
         households. The City will engage in a public noticing campaign consisting   with an applicant for the Home Improvement Loan program.
         of publishing at least annually the availability of funds for bedroom
         additions as well as for other eligible activities. The campaign will also  Continued Appropriateness: This program is not included the 2013-2021
         involve the provision of ongoing program progress (and remaining funds      Housing Element as a separate program; however, primary program
         availability), to be posted in City Hall and be kept up to date.            elements are included in the Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program (see
                                                                                     Program 12). The Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program will use a portion
                                                                                     of available CDBG funds to assist lower income homeowners rehabilitate
                                                                                     their dwellings and add bedrooms to alleviate overcrowding.
4        Continue to monitor housing conditions throughout the City, while The City hired a consultant to complete a thorough survey of residential
         periodically (i.e. every 5 years) conducting formal housing condition property conditions. The consultant completed the housing condition survey
         surveys.                                                                    in January 2008 and the findings are summarized in the 2008-2014 Housing
                                                                                     Element. Although this program established a five-year time frame for
                                                                                     periodic updates to the 2008 survey, limited funding – in large part due to
                                                                                     the State’s elimination of the City’s Redevelopment Agency in 2012 – made
                                                                                     implementation of this program infeasible.
                                                                                     Continued Appropriateness: This program is not continued in the 2013-
                                                                                     2021 Housing Element. Instead, a policy is included in the Housing Element
                                                                                     to update the 2008 housing conditions survey during the planning period,
                                                                                     subject to available funds.
                                                                                                                                                 City of El Centro
Page B-6                                                                                                                              2013-2021 Housing Element

Table B-2: Review of Past Program Accomplishments
Objective and Associated Programs                                                      Accomplishments
5          If necessary, cause the removal and replacement of substandard units,       The City did not remove or replace any substandard units during the
           which cannot be rehabilitated, through enforcement of applicable            planning period.
           provisions of the Uniform Housing and Revenue and Tax Codes.
           Replacement of 5 dilapidated units per year or 25 units over the new 5-     Continued Appropriateness: This program is not continued in the 2013-
           year planning period.                                                       2021 Housing Element. Substandard units that fall under any particular
                                                                                       housing or building code violation are handled through the City’s Code
                                                                                       Enforcement division.
6          Continue and expand proactive code enforcement efforts, where possible, The City hired a full-time Code Enforcement Officer in 2009 to proactively
           and explore new methods of eliminating unsightly property conditions in identify poor housing conditions work toward the improvement thereof.
           residential areas as necessary, the City will continue to administer the
           complaint based system in a timely and efficient manner.                    Continued Appropriateness: Features of this program reflect routine
                                                                                       functions of City Code Enforcement staff. The program is not included in
                                                                                       the 2013-2021 Housing Element as a separate housing program. Instead, a
                                                                                       policy is included in the Housing Element to affirm the City’s position
                                                                                       regarding code enforcement.
7          Continue to provide information and technical assistance to local property The Economic Development Department promoted the City’s Housing
           owners regarding housing maintenance. The City provides information on Improvement Program, which encourages housing improvements.
           the program in its quarterly newsletter and at various City tabling events.
                                                                                       Continued Appropriateness: This program is not included in the 2013-
                                                                                       2021 Housing Element as a separate housing program. Instead, a policy is
                                                                                       included in the Housing Element to affirm the City’s position regarding
                                                                                       housing maintenance education.
8          Avoid displacement of residents in carrying out CDBG funded activities, No residents were displaced as a result of CDBG-funded activities during
           whenever possible, or otherwise provide appropriate relocation the planning period.
           assistance.
                                                                                       Continued Appropriateness: This program is not continued in the 2013-
                                                                                       2021 Housing Element. Instead, a policy is included in the Housing Element
                                                                                       to affirm the City’s position regarding displacement of residents when
                                                                                       carrying out City programs.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                                                Page B-7

Table B-2: Review of Past Program Accomplishments
Objective and Associated Programs                                                       Accomplishments
9        Continue to utilize the City’s General Plan and Zoning Ordinance to The City implemented the General Plan and Zoning Ordinance to help
         prevent the encroachment of incompatible uses into established prevent the encroachment of incompatible uses into established residential
         residential areas.                                                             areas.
                                                                                        Continued Appropriateness: Ensuring land use compatibility between
                                                                                        residential and non-residential uses is an important priority for the City.
                                                                                        However, this program is not included in the 2013-2021 Housing Element as
                                                                                        a separate program. Instead, a policy is included in the Housing Element to
                                                                                        affirm the City’s position regarding land use compatibility and encroachment
                                                                                        of incompatible land uses.
10       The City’s Director of Economic Development will annually report to the The City’s Director of Economic Development reported to the City Council
         City Council during annual budget and 5-year mid-progress reports of during annual budget and 5-year mid-progress reports of RDA Plans on the
         RDA Plans on the availability of Low and Moderate Income Housing availability of Low and Moderate Income Housing Fund (LMIHF), and
         Fund, and projects, which have been funded.                                    funded projects up until August 2011. The State eliminated the City’s
                                                                                        Redevelopment Agency in February 2012.
                                                                                        Continued Appropriateness: This program is not included in the 2013-
                                                                                        2021 Housing Element due to dissolution of the Redevelopment Agency.
11       The City has adopted a “Residential Anti-displacement and relocation No residents were displaced as a result of City-funded redevelopment
         Assistance Plan” under Section 104(d) of the Housing and Community activities or other publicly financed programs during the planning period.
         Development Act of 1974. The plan seeks to minimize disruption and
         displacement of targeted lower income households affected by dwelling Continued Appropriateness: This program is not continued in the 2013-
         unit demolitions or conversions under publicly financed redevelopment or 2021 Housing Element. Instead, a policy is included in the Housing Element
         other programs.                                                                to affirm the City’s position regarding displacement of residents when
                                                                                        carrying out City programs.
         In addition, the City adopted policies on impacted-tenant rights for
         residential conversions to apartments or cooperatives, and land use
         policies to avoid patterns of development, which concentrates
         displacement impacts on certain neighborhoods.
         Consistent with the overall goals and objectives of the project, the City will
         take the following actions to minimize the effects of displacement:
                                                                                                                                                      City of El Centro
Page B-8                                                                                                                                 2013-2021 Housing Element

Table B-2: Review of Past Program Accomplishments
Objective and Associated Programs                                                     Accomplishments
                   Staged rehabilitation of dwelling units so that residents can be
                    relocated within a project;
                   Temporary relocation facilities;
                   Establish relocation assistance centers; and
                   Develop displacement watch systems to review development
                    trends and identify displacement problems and solutions.
Objective 3: Opportunities for Energy Conservation
1          Utilize the development review process to incorporate energy The City enforces Title 24 energy efficiency provisions contained in the
           conservation techniques into the siting and design of proposed California Building Standards Code.
           residences.
                                                                                      Continued Appropriateness: Energy conservation is an important City
                                                                                      goal; however, this program is not continued in the 2013-2021 Housing
                                                                                      Element as a separate program. Instead, a policy is included in the Housing
                                                                                      Element to affirm the City’s position regarding the promotion of siting and
                                                                                      design techniques that conserve energy.
2          Continue to require that all new residential development complies with the The City enforces Title 24 energy efficiency provisions contained in the
           energy conservation requirements of Title 24 of the California California Building Standards Code. The Subdivision Ordinance was
           Administrative Code, and encourage developers through a revised updated in 2008; however, the focus of the update was to modify retention
           Subdivision Ordinance to employ additional energy conservation basin standards.
           measures in an effort to exceed the minimum required standards,
           including but not limited to the specific example below.                   Continued Appropriateness: Energy conservation is an important City
                                                                                      goal; however, this program is not continued in the 2013-2021 Housing
                  Sustainable site development;                                      Element as a separate program. Instead, a policy is included in the Housing
                                                                                      Element to affirm the City’s position regarding the promotion of energy
                  Water savings;                                                     conservation in new subdivisions.
                  Energy efficiency;
                   Material selection; and
                   Indoor environmental quality.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                                                Page B-9

Table B-2: Review of Past Program Accomplishments
Objective and Associated Programs                                                     Accomplishments
3       Continue to allow energy conservation measures as improvements                Energy conservation measures continue to be eligible improvements under
        eligible for assistance under the City’s Home Improvement program. The        the City’s Home Improvement Program. The Economic Development
        City promotes the program and provides detailed information on its            Department promotes the Housing Improvement Program on the City
        website. Additionally, the City does an annual mailing of a program           website, at tabling events, in newsletters, and in annual utility bill brochure
        brochure as an insert to the water bill, provides brochures at all City       inserts. Local banks are not involved as they are not part of the financing of
        tabling events and details the program in its quarterly newsletter. Program   a project.
        staff keeps in close contact with local banks to ensure their participation
        in the program.                                                               Continued Appropriateness: This program is not included the 2013-2021
                                                                                      Housing Element as a separate program; however, primary program
                                                                                      elements are included in the Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program (see
                                                                                      Program 12). The Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program will use a portion
                                                                                      of available CDBG funds to assist lower income homeowners rehabilitate
                                                                                      their dwellings. Energy conservation measures will continue to be eligible
                                                                                      improvements.
4       Assist in distributing information to the public regarding free home energy The City’s Building Division has placed a flyer from the IID at the public
        audits and other programs of the Imperial Irrigation District (IID).          counter about business incentives for their “New Construction Energy
                                                                                      Efficiency Program.”
                                                                                      Continued Appropriateness: Energy conservation is an important City
                                                                                      goal; however, this program is not continued in the 2013-2021 Housing
                                                                                      Element as a separate program. Instead, a policy is included in the Housing
                                                                                      Element to affirm the City’s position regarding public education of energy
                                                                                      conservation measures such as energy audits.
Objective 4: Equal Housing Opportunity
1       Provide outreach material on state and federal fair housing laws and          Since 2007 the City of El Centro has contracted with the Inland Fair Housing
        direct complaints of housing discrimination to appropriate enforcement        and Mediation Board (IFHMB) to conduct the necessary community
        agencies (i.e. State Department of Fair Employment and Housing and            outreach as it relates to fair housing laws and discrimination. The City
        Inland Fair Housing Mediation Board). The City will provide detailed          provides fair housing information on its website. During the planning period,
        information on its website and in its quarterly newsletter, including contact outreach material was primarily provided by the IFHMB. The City also
        phone numbers and email addresses.                                            distributes information at tabling events and includes articles about fair
                                                                                      housing in a bi-annual newsletter. The IFHMB has its own outreach efforts
                                                                                      they provide, such as public service announcements, distribution of
                                                                                      brochures at various sites within El Centro, fair housing community events,
                                                                                                                                                   City of El Centro
Page B-10                                                                                                                               2013-2021 Housing Element

Table B-2: Review of Past Program Accomplishments
Objective and Associated Programs                                                         Accomplishments
                                                                                          newsletter articles, and other activities. From 2008 to 2012, IFHMB
                                                                                          forwarded nine discrimination complaints to appropriate enforcement
                                                                                          agencies.
                                                                                          Continued Appropriateness: This program is retained, but modified for the
                                                                                          2013-2021 Housing Element (see Program 14).
2          Continue to allow the removal of architectural barriers with funding from The City funded two housing rehabilitation projects that included
           the City’s residential rehabilitation program in order to provide barrier-free accommodations for persons with disabilities during the planning period.
           housing for handicapped or disabled persons.
                                                                                          Continued Appropriateness: This program is not included in the 2013-
                                                                                          2021 Housing Element as a separate program; however, primary program
                                                                                          elements are included in the Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program (see
                                                                                          Program 12). Barrier-free housing improvements will continue to be eligible
                                                                                          improvements.
3          Specify procedures as part of the updated Zoning Ordinance to provide The City amended the Zoning Ordinance during the planning period to
           reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities that allow for establish an administrative, but discretionary procedure for the
           administrative approval of handicapped accessible features.                    review/approval of reasonable accommodation requests. The application fee
                                                                                          is $428.
                                                                                          Continued Appropriateness: This program has been modified for the
                                                                                          2013-2021 Housing Element to establish a ministerial review procedure and
                                                                                          reduce or eliminate the application fee (see Program 6).
4          Enforce the handicapped accessibility of Federal fair housing laws that The City’s Building and Safety Division enforced the handicapped
           apply to all new multi-family residential projects containing four (4) or accessibility of Federal fair housing laws that apply to all new multi-family
           more units.                                                                    residential projects containing four (4) or more units as part of plan check
                                                                                          review for compliance with the California Building Standards Code.
                                                                                          Continued Appropriateness: This program is not included in the 2013-
                                                                                          2021 Housing Element. Implementation of this program is a routine function
                                                                                          of Building and Safety Division during project review for compliance with the
                                                                                          California Building Standards Code.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                                                    Page B-11

Table B-2: Review of Past Program Accomplishments
Objective and Associated Programs                                                   Accomplishments
5       Process and approve requests for the establishment of residential care The City did not have an opportunity to process/approve requests for the
        facilities, in accordance with Section 1566.3 of the Health and Safety establishment of residential care facilities during the planning period.
        Code, as a means of providing long-term transitional housing for
        extremely low income and very low income persons.                           Continued Appropriateness: This program is not included in the 2013-
                                                                                    2021 Housing Element. The City’s Zoning Ordinance is compliant with the
                                                                                    Lanterman Act provisions for residential care facilities. The City will
                                                                                    continue to implement the Zoning Ordinance as routine function of municipal
                                                                                    government.
6       Pursuant to SB2, the Zoning Ordinance will be amended to identify that The City amended the Zoning Ordinance during the planning period to allow
        emergency shelters will be permitted by right in the R3, High Density emergency shelters, transitional housing, and supportive housing consistent
        Residential District. In accordance with SB2 requirements, the City shall with SB 2.
        also revise the Zoning Ordinance to ensure that transitional and
        supportive housing shall be treated as other proposed residential uses Continued Appropriateness: This program has been implemented and is
        and subject only to those restrictions applicable to other residential uses not included in the 2013-2021 Housing Element. The City’s Zoning
        of the same type in the same zone and the same type of structure.           Ordinance is compliant with SB2 provisions for emergency shelters,
                                                                                    transitional housing, and supportive housing. The City will continue to
                                                                                    implement the Zoning Ordinance as routine function of municipal
                                                                                    government.
7       The City shall establish streamlined permit processing procedures to The City amended the Zoning Ordinance during the planning period to allow
        expedite the development of homeless shelters as developments come emergency shelters by-right and subject to ministerial review consistent with
        under the consideration of the City by expediting the permitting process SB 2.
        for homeless shelters.
                                                                                    Continued Appropriateness: This program is not included in the 2013-
                                                                                    2021 Housing Element. Emergency shelters are permitted by-right and
                                                                                    applications will be reviewed with the same ministerial plan check review
                                                                                    process that applies to all other projects that require ministerial permits.
                                                                                                                                                    City of El Centro
Page B-12                                                                                                                               2013-2021 Housing Element

Table B-2: Review of Past Program Accomplishments
Objective and Associated Programs                                                        Accomplishments
8          The City will continue to support efforts of IVHA to target farm workers for  The City did not have an opportunity to support IVHA or assist developers
           housing improvement programs similar to those offered by FmHA.                with the provision of farm worker housing during the planning period. In
           Support will be in the form of expediting application and permit processing   April 2013, the City amended the Zoning Ordinance to specify that farm
           and letters of support, where applicable. To achieve, where possible,         worker housing serving six or fewer employees is an accessory use within a
           results similar to the Tierra Del Sol Project.                                single-family dwelling within residential districts that allow agriculture uses.
           In addition, progress reports by the Community Development Director, Continued Appropriateness: This program is not continued in the 2013-
           identifying and addressing farm worker housing conditions shall be 2021 Housing Element as a separate program. Instead, a policy is included
           provided to the City Council on an annual basis.                              in the Housing Element to affirm the City’s position regarding the importance
                                                                                         of housing that is affordable to farm employees.
Objective 5: Removing Constraints
1          Periodically reexamine the Zoning Ordinance (i.e., every 5 years) for The City re-examined the Zoning Ordinance as part of the 2013-2021
           possible amendments to reduce housing construction costs without Housing Element Update process. In April 2013, the City amended the
           sacrificing basic health and safety considerations.                           Zoning Ordinance to remove identified constraints related to the provision of
                                                                                         transitional/supportive housing, farm worker housing, large residential care
                                                                                         facilities, room and board limitations, and SRO units.
                                                                                         Continued Appropriateness: This program is retained, but modified for the
                                                                                         2013-2021 Housing Element (see Program 7).
2          Periodically review (i.e., every 2 years) the performance of local lending The Economic Development Department analyzes lending institution
           institutions with regard to the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) and performance during the periodic update to the City’s Analysis of
           the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA).                                         Impediments (AI).
                                                                                         Continued Appropriateness: Periodic review of local lending institution
                                                                                         performance is a routine function of the City during the AI update process.
                                                                                         This program is not included in the 2014-2021 as a separate program.
3          Periodically survey (i.e., every 5 years) other cities in the Imperial County City staff did not conduct a survey of fees charged in other cities; however,
           area to ensure that El Centro’s fees are reasonable.                          given the State’s elimination of the City’s Redevelopment Agency (and
                                                                                         associated revenue) and based on the analysis contained in this Housing
                                                                                         Element update, the City’s fees are reasonable and necessary.
                                                                                         Continued Appropriateness: This program is not included in the 2013-
                                                                                         2021 Housing Element.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                                                        Page B-13

Table B-2: Review of Past Program Accomplishments
Objective and Associated Programs                                                  Accomplishments
4       Continue the program to allocate funds to defray the cost of land and/or The City did not have an opportunity to allocate funds to defray the cost of
        required off-site improvements for low income and extremely low income land and/or off-site improvements for lower income projects during the
        housing projects.                                                          planning period.
                                                                                   Continued Appropriateness: Due to the State’s elimination of the City’s
                                                                                   Redevelopment Agency in 2012, this program is not included in the 2013-
                                                                                   2021 Housing Element. The City will evaluate assistance for future
                                                                                   affordable housing developments on a case-by-case basis to determine if
                                                                                   other sources of financial assistance are available (see Program 3).
5       The City shall encourage concurrent processing of entitlements allowing The City encouraged concurrent processing of entitlements by allowing
        various analyses and staff reports to be done at the same time, to various analyses and staff reports to be done at the same time. This
        facilitate faster overall processing times. Department staff will notify facilitated faster overall processing times during the planning period.
        applicants early in development process of this policy and place public
        notice of the City’s policy on the web site.                               Continued Appropriateness: Expeditious permit processing is an
                                                                                   important City goal; however, this program is not continued in the 2013-
                                                                                   2021 Housing Element as a separate program. Instead, a policy is included
                                                                                   in the Housing Element to affirm the City’s position regarding concurrent
                                                                                   permit processing as a means of streamlining development review.
6       LAFCO will not entertain annexation applications unless they indicate that This program was only partially-implemented during the planning period.
        the affected agencies have the capability to provide services and a Plan The City continued to process annexation requests; however, given the poor
        for Services is provided that describes how such services and state of the economy, overall interest in annexation for residential
        improvements will be financed. Therefore, the City will pursue annexation construction has been limited and the City has not required that
        when a development proposal includes financial assistance for extending development proposals of more than 10 acres set aside a portion of the land
        such services.                                                             for medium to high density housing.
        The City will work with LAFCO to expand its city limits to include acreage Continued Appropriateness: This program is not included in the 2013-
        pre-zoned in accordance with the needs for Low Density, Medium             2021 Housing Element. Processing annexation requests is a routine
        Density, and High Density as needed to satisfy the RHNA, contained in      function of City staff, the Planning Commission, City Council, and LAFCO.
        Table 2.2-18. To reach this goal, the City will require residential        Annexations are guided by established LAFCO procedures and the City’s
        development proposals of more than 10 acres that are subject to            General Plan (specifically the Urban Development Program of the Land Use
        annexation to set aside at least 10% of the land for High Density multi-   Element). However, the City has included a policy to encourage applicants
        family residential development and an additional 15% for Medium Density    for development of land over 10 acres to set aside a portion of the land for
        residential development, thus ensuring the availability of additional      medium to high density housing.
                                                                                                                                                City of El Centro
Page B-14                                                                                                                            2013-2021 Housing Element

Table B-2: Review of Past Program Accomplishments
Objective and Associated Programs                                                       Accomplishments
           dwelling units for lower and moderate income households. The City will
           create an action plan and timeline for requesting annexation approval
           from LAFCO, which will attract developers and encourage new
           construction. The City will cooperate with the project proponent by
           granting consultation meetings and by working with the proponent in
           providing City services to the site.
7          The Zoning Code shall be revised so that the definition of “Group Homes”     The City revised the Zoning Ordinance during the planning period to allow
           clearly permits the treatment of group homes and residential care facilities small residential care facilities serving six or fewer clients consistent with the
           for six or fewer residents in the same manner as other single family uses.   Lanterman Act.
           (Revisions shall be done to text portions of the Code in addition to Table
           29-53.1, including sections (a)(5) and (c)(3)(and (4) “small and large day   Continued Appropriateness: This program is not included in the 2013-
           care homes).                                                                 2021 Housing Element. The City’s Zoning Ordinance is compliant with the
                                                                                        Lanterman Act provisions for residential care facilities. The City will
                                                                                        continue to implement the Zoning Ordinance as routine function of municipal
                                                                                        government.
Objective 6: Housing Affordability
1          Explore the possibility that local lending institutions participate in the   The Economic Development Department did not have an opportunity to
           creation of a loan pool for the construction, rehabilitation and/or purchase reach out to local lending institutions during the planning period. As of April
           of housing affordable to low and moderate income households, as a            2013, the Economic Development Department completed two reconstruction
           means for them to fulfill their obligations under the Federal Community      projects for two very low income families. The department also completed
           Reinvestment Act. The City will also provide low interest loans to housing   five rehabilitation projects under the very low income category and eight
           projects in need of rehabilitation in exchange of affordability controls.    rehabilitation projects for families at the low income category.
                                                                                        Continued Appropriateness: This program is not retained in the 2013-
                                                                                        2021 Housing Element as a separate program; however, program elements
                                                                                        are included in two programs. Given the State’s elimination of the City’s
                                                                                        Redevelopment Agency, outreach to local lending institutions will be
                                                                                        included as part of an overall program to facilitate affordable housing
                                                                                        development. The provision of low interest loans for rehabilitation is
                                                                                        included in the Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program (see Program 12).
2          Continue to defer development fees for all proposed housing units The City did not receive any requests for fee deferment or applications for
           affordable to lower income households. The City will also continue its second dwelling units during the planning period.
           efforts to actively notify property owners that the construction of second
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                                                      Page B-15

Table B-2: Review of Past Program Accomplishments
Objective and Associated Programs                                                    Accomplishments
        units continues to be a viable opportunity to provide second units.          Continued Appropriateness: This program is not included in the 2013-
                                                                                     2021 Housing Element; however, the promotion of second dwelling unit
                                                                                     construction is included as a policy and fee deferment is one concession or
                                                                                     incentive included in an overall program to facilitate and encourage
                                                                                     affordable housing development (see Program 3).
3       The City will update the Zoning Ordinance to allow, where appropriate,       The General Plan Land Use Element allows developers to propose
        the use of innovative land use techniques and construction methods,          innovative land use techniques (such as clustering of units, density
        such as clustering of units, density transfers, and zero lot line lines to   transfers, and zero lot lines) as part of a Specific Plan or Planned Unit
        minimize housing development costs and to maximize development               Development.
        opportunities.
                                                                                     Continued Appropriateness: This program is not included in the 2013-
                                                                                     2021 Housing Element.
4       Inform private developers of the below market interest rate mortgage The City did not implement this program during the planning period. Private
        programs operated by the California Housing Finance Agency (CalHFA) developers who specialize in affordable housing construction are well-aware
        and direct interested homebuyers to CalHFA. During each funding cycle, of available funding sources.
        the Agency will execute a city-wide direct mailing to all residents of the
        City, advertising the City’s programs.                                       Continued Appropriateness: This program is not included in the 2013-
                                                                                     2021 Housing Element.
5       Support the efforts of non-profit organizations, private developers, and the The City did not have the opportunity to work with IVHA to complete
        Imperial Valley Housing Authority (IVHA) to obtain State and/or Federal affordable housing projects during the planning period; however, a positive
        funds for the construction of affordable housing for lower income working relationship between the two agencies has existed for many years.
        households. The City will be open to waiving fees where applicable, The City has supported the efforts of entities interested in providing
        expediting applications and permit processes, and providing letters of affordable housing in El Centro by providing letters of support and, in some
        support for funding applications; the City will also consider utilizing Code cases, preparing and/or submitting the grant application to the funding
        Enforcement staff and El Centro Redevelopment staff to help write and to source.
        review project applications.
                                                                                     Continued Appropriateness: This program is not included in the 2013-
                                                                                     2021 Housing Element; however, support of efforts by non-profits, private
                                                                                     developers, and IVHA to expand the City’s supply of affordable housing is
                                                                                     included as a policy. Furthermore, fee waiver/deferral, expedited permit
                                                                                     processing, and letters of support for funding applications are included in an
                                                                                     overall program to facilitate and encourage affordable housing development
                                                                                     (see Program 3).
                                                                                                                                                   City of El Centro
Page B-16                                                                                                                              2013-2021 Housing Element

Table B-2: Review of Past Program Accomplishments
Objective and Associated Programs                                                      Accomplishments
6          The City shall annually apply or support development and rehabilitation In 2004 the City of El Centro became an entitlement city and during this first
           applications for State and Federal funding for affordable housing, year the City received approximately $800,000 a year. However, throughout
           including the following funding sources:                                    the years the City’s allocation has been reduced substantially. In 2012, the
                                                                                       City received $472,973 in CDBG funds. It is anticipated that our annual
              Community Development Block Grant (CDBG): The State CDBG allocation will experience a 10% reduction every year.
                Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD)
                administers the federal CDBG program for non-entitlement cities and HOME funding is established on an annual basis and cannot be predicted
                counties. As an entitlement City, El Centro will participate in CDBG reliably. The City is a non-entitlement community under the HOME program
                annual funding programs. The City received $665,626 in CDBG funds and must submit a grant application to the State of California Department of
                in 2008.                                                               Housing and Community Development (HCD) and compete with other
              HOME: Under the HOME program, HUD will award funds to localities eligible agencies for funding.
                on the basis of a formula that takes into account the tightness of the
                local housing market, inadequate housing, poverty, and housing         The City is not eligible to apply for the Section 523 housing program as it is
                production costs. HOME funding is provided to jurisdictions to assist  only available for rural areas and the city is not considered rural.
                either rental housing or homeownership through acquisition,
                construction, reconstruction, and/or rehabilitation of affordable      Continued Appropriateness: This program is not included in the 2013-
                housing. Also possible is tenant-based rental assistance, property     2021 Housing Element as it is limited to a list of funding sources. Applying
                acquisition, site improvements, and other expenses related to the      for or supporting funding applications is included as part of an overall
                provision of affordable housing and for projects that serve a group    program to facilitate affordable housing development (see Program 3).
                identified as having special needs related to housing. The local
                jurisdiction must make matching contributions to affordable housing
                under HOME.
              Section 514/516 Farm labor Housing: Section 514 provides loans and
                Section 516 provides grants to developers for farm labor and migrant
                farm labor housing. The City of El Centro is eligible for Section
                514/Section 516 funding.
              Section 523 Mutual Self-Help Housing Program: Technical
                assistance and site grants are provided to homeowners who
                complete at least 65 percent of the work to build his or her own home
                through “sweat equity”. Once accepted into the Self Help program,
                each individual enrollee generally applies for a Single-Family Housing
                Direct Loan (Section 502). This program has been used in El Centro
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                                                   Page B-17

Table B-2: Review of Past Program Accomplishments
Objective and Associated Programs                                                   Accomplishments
              to provide many affordable homeownership opportunities for lower
              income households.
            Proposition 1C Funds: The Housing and Emergency Shelter Trust
              Fund Act of 2006 approved $2.85 billion in bonds to provide funding
              for a variety of housing programs. HCD administers these programs,
              which provide funding for the construction, rehabilitation and
              reservation of affordable rental and owner-occupied housing,
              homeless facilities, and funding for down payment assistance to low
              and moderate income first-time homebuyers.
7       The City offers assistance to first-time homebuyers through a “silent”      The purchase price of a home under this program cannot exceed the FHA
        second mortgage to secure financing toward the purchase of a single-        limits. Therefore, the $100,000 amount is no longer accurate. Also, the
        family home in El Centro. Applicants must be low income, defined as         maximum loan amount is currently $20,000. Since 2008, the City made 65
        having an income that does not exceed 80 percent of the area median         loans to families whose income limits were below the 120% AMI.
        income, adjusted for household size. Qualified properties must be
        structurally sound single-family detached units located within City Limits. Continued Appropriateness: This program is retained, but modified for the
        Purchase Price of the home cannot exceed $100,000. The buyer must           2013-2021 Housing Element (see Program 4).
        be able to qualify for a 30-year fixed rate FHA/CHFA loan from an
        approved federal or state program and have a two-percent down
        payment. A loan from the City can then be requested to provide for a
        minimum amount required for the balance of the down payment of up to
        18% of the sales price or a maximum loan amount of $50,000. Provide
        first-time homebuyer assistance to single-family detached units within the
        City limits, assisting a minimum of five low income units annually.
Objective 7: Preserving Affordable Housing
1       Section 8 rent subsidies are available to very low income households        The IVHA counted 938 El Centro households receiving Housing Choice
        (earning up to 50 percent of the County’s Median Family Income) to          Vouchers as of March 2013. Of these, 596 were elderly households and
        reduce housing payments to not more than 30 percent of their income.        374 were disabled. The IVHA estimates that approximately 800 of the 1,364
        This program is administered through the Imperial Valley Housing            households on its waiting list are El Centro residents.
        Authority. The City shall actively partner with the Imperial Valley Housing
        Authority to monitor the status of existing vouchers and work to secure     Continued Appropriateness: This program is retained for the 2013-2021
        additional Section 8 rental assistance to benefit lower income              Housing Element, but renamed “Rental Assistance” to eliminate reference to
        households.                                                                 Section 8 (see Program 10).
                                                                                                                                                 City of El Centro
Page B-18                                                                                                                              2013-2021 Housing Element

Table B-2: Review of Past Program Accomplishments
Objective and Associated Programs                                                        Accomplishments
2          Preservation of the identified 146 lower income rental units that are at risk No affordable housing development has converted to market-rate since
           of converting to market rate housing within the next 10 years; as other       2006.
           units are identified, the City will also actively engage property owners to
           take advantage of deferred loan programs for rehabilitation, mortgage         Continued Appropriateness: This program is retained, but modified for the
           refinancing, and acquisition to keep units affordable for a long term         2013-2021 Housing Element (see Program 12).
           (typically 50 years). The City will seek a partnership with the Imperial
           Valley Housing Authority to put in place a strategy enabling the City to
           move quickly to preserve units upon becoming aware of the need. The
           City will provide owners information regarding their opt-out requirements
           and 12 month tenant noticing.
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                                              Page B-19

Appendix C: Sites Inventory
Table C-1 presents a detailed list of parcels used in Chapter 4, Housing Resources, to
demonstrate that the City has adequate capacity to accommodate the 2014-2021 RHNA.
Figures C-1 through C-5 provide the geographic location of the parcels within El Centro.
          Figure C-1: Vacant Parcel Map – Quadrant Key
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                                                              Page C-1

Figure C-2: Vacant Parcel Map – Quadrant 1
                                                     City of El Centro
Page C-2                                   2013-2021 Housing Element

Figure C-3: Vacant Parcel Map – Quadrant 2
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                  Page C-3

Figure C-4: Vacant Parcel Map – Quadrant 3
                                                     City of El Centro
Page C-4                                   2013-2021 Housing Element

Figure C-5: Vacant Parcel Map – Quadrant 4
City of El Centro
2013-2021 Housing Element                  Page C-5

Table C-1: Residential Sites Inventory
                                Parcel     Land Use          Density           Capacity
               Assessor Parcel   Size  Designation / Zone    Factor  Site Size (Round
  Site #        Number (APN)   (Acres)       District        (du/ac) (Acres)    Down)               Ownership / Reason for Selection                     Status
Lower Income Sites
                                          High-Medium
    1             064-470-103    6.41  Density Residential /   19      6.41      121    Very large parcel owned by the City of El Centro.                Vacant
                                               R3
                  053-740-049    1.72     High-Medium
                                                                                        Two large contiguous parcels with the same private
    2                                  Density Residential /   19      2.91      55                                                                      Vacant
                  053-740-048    1.19                                                   owner.
                                               R3
                                          High-Medium
    3             052-070-065    2.81  Density Residential /   19      2.81      53     Large privately-owned parcel.                                    Vacant
                                               R3
                  064-560-002    1.61     High-Medium
                                                                                        Two contiguous privately-owned             parcels   with
    4                                  Density Residential /   19      2.42      45                                                                      Vacant
                  064-560-003    0.81                                                   consolidation potential.
                                               R3
                                          High-Medium
    5             044-331-006    2.12  Density Residential /   19      2.12      40     Large privately-owned parcel.                                    Vacant
                                               R3
                                          High-Medium
    6             044-332-013    1.70  Density Residential /   19      1.70      32     Large privately-owned parcel.                                    Vacant
                                               R3
                  052-061-041    0.90     High-Medium                                   Two contiguous parcels with consolidation potential. One
    7                                  Density Residential /   19      1.32      25     is privately-owned and the other is owned by the Imperial        Vacant
                  052-061-079    0.42          R3                                       Irrigation District (IID).
                                          High-Medium
    8             053-552-002    1.12  Density Residential /   19      1.12      21     Large privately-owned parcel.                                    Vacant
                                               R3
                                          High-Medium
    9             052-061-055    1.12  Density Residential /   19      1.12      21     Large privately-owned parcel.                                    Vacant
                                               R3
                  053-211-010    0.53
                                          High-Medium
                  053-211-009    0.52
   10                                  Density Residential /   19      1.11      21     Four contiguous parcels with the same private owner.             Vacant
                  053-211-013    0.03          R3
                  053-211-011    0.03
                                          High-Medium
   11             052-061-082    0.68  Density Residential /   19      0.68      12     Privately-owned parcel.                                          Vacant
                                               R3
                                          High-Medium
   12             053-291-012    0.60  Density Residential /   19      0.60      11     Privately-owned parcel.                                          Vacant
                                               R3
                                                                                                                                                City of El Centro
 Page C-6                                                                                                                          2013-2021 Housing Element
Table C-1: Residential Sites Inventory
                                Parcel      Land Use          Density            Capacity
              Assessor Parcel    Size  Designation / Zone     Factor   Site Size  (Round
 Site #        Number (APN)    (Acres)       District         (du/ac)  (Acres)     Down)               Ownership / Reason for Selection                 Status
                 053-136-024     0.26     High-Medium
                                                                                            Three contiguous privately-owned           parcels     with
   13            053-136-023     0.17  Density Residential /    19       0.60        11                                                                 Vacant
                                                                                            consolidation potential.
                 053-136-007     0.17           R3
                 053-740-040     9.74
                                                                                            Four contiguous privately-owned parcels with
                 053-740-041     1.25  Tourist Commercial /
   14                                                           19      13.17    250 (125)* consolidation potential. Three of the parcels have one      Vacant
                 053-740-042     1.11           CT
                                                                                            owner.
                 053-740-043     1.07
                 054-050-065     1.53
                 054-050-072     1.02
                 054-050-057     0.77
                                                                                            Eight contiguous parcels with consolidation potential. The
                 054-050-070     0.75  Tourist Commercial /
   15                                                           19       6.11    116 (58)*  City of El Centro owns APNs 054-050-073 & 054-050-          Vacant
                 054-050-063     0.71           CT
                                                                                            074. Three private owners hold the other six parcels.
                 054-050-074     0.63
                 054-050-071     0.44
                 054-050-073     0.27
                                       Tourist Commercial /
   16            053-740-014     3.87                           19       3.87     73 (36)*  Large privately-owned parcel.                               Vacant
                                                CT
                 053-810-004     1.28  Tourist Commercial /                                 Two large contiguous parcels held by the same private
   17                                                           19       2.55     48 (24)*                                                              Vacant
                 053-810-005     1.27           CT                                          owner.
                 053-011-024     1.63  Tourist Commercial /                                 Two contiguous privately-owned parcels with
   18                                                           19       2.11     40 (20)*                                                              Vacant
                 053-011-023     0.48           CT                                          consolidation potential.
                 053-810-012     0.70
                                       Tourist Commercial /                                 Three contiguous parcels held by the same private
   19            053-810-011     0.70                           19       2.10     39 (19)*                                                              Vacant
                                                CT                                          owner.
                 053-810-010     0.70
                 044-392-016     1.84  Tourist Commercial /                                 Two contiguous privately-owned            parcels      with
   20                                                           19       2.08     39 (19)*                                                              Vacant
                 044-392-005     0.15           CT                                          consolidation potential.
                                       Tourist Commercial /
   21            054-571-014     1.08                           19       1.08     20 (10)*  Large privately-owned parcel.                               Vacant
                                                CT
                 044-392-019     0.48  Tourist Commercial /
   22                                                           19       0.85      16 (8)*  Two contiguous parcels held by the same private owner.      Vacant
                 044-392-020     0.37           CT
                                       Tourist Commercial /
   23            044-391-066     0.82                           19       0.82      15 (7)*  Privately-owned parcel.                                     Vacant
                                                CT
                                       Tourist Commercial /
   24            054-573-005     0.77                           19       0.77      14 (7)*  Privately-owned parcel.                                     Vacant
                                                CT
                                          Lower Income Sites Sub-total  60.43       801
 City of El Centro
 2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                                              Page C-7
Table C-1: Residential Sites Inventory
                                Parcel     Land Use          Density           Capacity
              Assessor Parcel    Size  Designation / Zone    Factor  Site Size (Round
 Site #        Number (APN)    (Acres)       District        (du/ac) (Acres)    Down)              Ownership / Reason for Selection                     Status
Moderate Income Sites
                 052-062-018     0.23     High-Medium
  25                                   Density Residential /   19      0.45       8     Two contiguous parcels held by the same private owner.          Vacant
                 052-062-017     0.22
                                               R3
                                          High-Medium
  26             053-215-030     0.43  Density Residential /   19      0.43       8     Privately-owned parcel.                                         Vacant
                                               R3
                 053-136-020     0.26     High-Medium
                                                                                        Two contiguous privately-owned          parcels    with
  27                                   Density Residential /   19      0.43       8                                                                     Vacant
                 053-136-019     0.17                                                   consolidation potential.
                                               R3
                 053-135-034     0.26     High-Medium
                                                                                        Two contiguous privately-owned          parcels    with
  28                                   Density Residential /   19      0.43       8                                                                     Vacant
                 053-135-018     0.17                                                   consolidation potential.
                                               R3
                 053-292-007     0.23     High-Medium
                                                                                        Two contiguous privately-owned          parcels    with
  29                                   Density Residential /   19      0.39       7                                                                     Vacant
                 053-292-006     0.16                                                   consolidation potential.
                                               R3
                 053-283-006     0.19     High-Medium
                                                                                        Two contiguous privately-owned          parcels    with
  30                                   Density Residential /   19      0.39       7                                                                     Vacant
                 053-283-005     0.19                                                   consolidation potential.
                                               R3
                                          High-Medium
  31             044-351-004     0.38  Density Residential /   19      0.38       7     Privately-owned parcel.                                         Vacant
                                               R3
                 053-293-022     0.16     High-Medium
  32                                   Density Residential /   19      0.32       6     Two contiguous parcels held by the same private owner.          Vacant
                 053-293-021     0.15
                                               R3
                 053-291-009     0.17     High-Medium
  33                                   Density Residential /   19      0.26       6     Two contiguous parcels held by the same private owner.          Vacant
                 053-291-008     0.09
                                               R3
                                          High-Medium
  34             053-762-026     0.25  Density Residential /   19      0.25       4     Privately-owned parcel.                                         Vacant
                                               R3
                                          High-Medium
  35             053-043-035     0.24  Density Residential /   19      0.24       4     Privately-owned parcel.                                         Vacant
                                               R3
                                          High-Medium
  36             044-371-005     0.23  Density Residential /   19      0.23       4     Privately-owned parcel.                                         Vacant
                                               R3
                                                                                                                                               City of El Centro
 Page C-8                                                                                                                        2013-2021 Housing Element
Table C-1: Residential Sites Inventory
                                Parcel     Land Use          Density           Capacity
              Assessor Parcel    Size  Designation / Zone    Factor  Site Size (Round
 Site #        Number (APN)    (Acres)       District        (du/ac) (Acres)    Down)              Ownership / Reason for Selection Status
                                          High-Medium
   37            053-047-027     0.21  Density Residential /   19      0.21       3     Privately-owned parcel.                     Vacant
                                               R3
                                          High-Medium
   38            053-404-009     0.20  Density Residential /   19      0.20       3     Privately-owned parcel.                     Vacant
                                               R3
                                          High-Medium
   39            053-136-015     0.19  Density Residential /   19      0.19       3     Privately-owned parcel.                     Vacant
                                               R3
                                          High-Medium
   40            053-271-002     0.19  Density Residential /   19      0.19       3     Privately-owned parcel.                     Vacant
                                               R3
                                          High-Medium
   41            053-263-004     0.19  Density Residential /   19      0.19       3     Privately-owned parcel.                     Vacant
                                               R3
                                          High-Medium
   42            053-341-003     0.19  Density Residential /   19      0.19       3     Privately-owned parcel.                     Vacant
                                               R3
                                          High-Medium
   43            053-253-005     0.19  Density Residential /   19      0.19       3     Privately-owned parcel.                     Vacant
                                               R3
                                          High-Medium
   44            044-381-022     0.19  Density Residential /   19      0.19       3     Privately-owned parcel.                     Vacant
                                               R3
                                          High-Medium
   45            053-214-024     0.18  Density Residential /   19      0.18       3     Privately-owned parcel.                     Vacant
                                               R3
                                          High-Medium
   46            044-402-005     0.17  Density Residential /   19      0.17       3     Privately-owned parcel.                     Vacant
                                               R3
                                          High-Medium
   47            044-402-007     0.17  Density Residential /   19      0.17       3     Privately-owned parcel.                     Vacant
                                               R3
                                          High-Medium
   48            053-213-003     0.17  Density Residential /   19      0.17       3     Privately-owned parcel.                     Vacant
                                               R3
                                          High-Medium
   49            053-046-034     0.16  Density Residential /   19      0.16       3     Owned by the City of El Centro.             Vacant
                                               R3
 City of El Centro
 2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                          Page C-9
Table C-1: Residential Sites Inventory
                                Parcel      Land Use         Density           Capacity
            Assessor Parcel      Size  Designation / Zone    Factor  Site Size (Round
 Site #      Number (APN)      (Acres)       District        (du/ac) (Acres)    Down)              Ownership / Reason for Selection                     Status
                                          High-Medium
  50          053-292-002        0.16  Density Residential /   19      0.16        3    Privately-owned parcel.                                         Vacant
                                                R3
                                          High-Medium
  51          053-412-048        0.16  Density Residential /   19      0.16        3    Privately-owned parcel.                                         Vacant
                                                R3
                                          High-Medium
  52          053-134-002        0.15  Density Residential /   19      0.15        2    Owned by the City of El Centro.                                 Vacant
                                                R3
                                          High-Medium
  53          053-404-011        0.14  Density Residential /   19      0.14        2    Privately-owned parcel.                                         Vacant
                                                R3
                                          High-Medium
  54          053-262-019        0.10  Density Residential /   19      0.10        1    Privately-owned parcel.                                         Vacant
                                                R3
                                          High-Medium
  55          053-213-019        0.08  Density Residential /   19      0.08        1    Privately-owned parcel.                                         Vacant
                                                R3
                                          High-Medium
  56          053-043-008        0.08  Density Residential /   19      0.08        1    Privately-owned parcel.                                         Vacant
                                                R3
                                       Tourist Commercial /
  57          044-391-062        0.31                          19      0.31     5 (2)*  Privately-owned parcel.                                         Vacant
                                                CT
                                       Tourist Commercial /
  58          044-402-011        0.16                          19      0.16     3 (1)*  Privately-owned parcel.                                         Vacant
                                                CT
                                       Tourist Commercial /
  59          044-404-024        0.16                          19      0.16     3 (1)*  Privately-owned parcel.                                         Vacant
                                                CT
                                       Tourist Commercial /
  60          044-414-029        0.15                          19      0.15     2 (1)*  Privately-owned parcel.                                         Vacant
                                                CT
              053-047-024        0.16
                                            Downtown                                    Three contiguous privately-owned         parcels   with
  61          053-047-008        0.16                          19      0.49     9 (4)*                                                                  Vacant
                                        Commercial / CD                                 consolidation potential.
              053-047-012        0.16
                                            Downtown
  62          053-101-009        0.38                          19      0.38     7 (3)*  Privately-owned parcel.                                         Vacant
                                        Commercial / CD
                                            Downtown
  63          053-047-021        0.32                          19      0.32     6 (3) * Privately-owned parcel.                                         Vacant
                                        Commercial / CD
              053-113-023        0.16       Downtown
  64                                                           19      0.32     6 (3)*  Two contiguous parcels held by the same private owner.          Vacant
              053-113-031        0.16   Commercial / CD
                                                                                                                                               City of El Centro
 Page C-10                                                                                                                       2013-2021 Housing Element
Table C-1: Residential Sites Inventory
                                Parcel     Land Use       Density           Capacity
              Assessor Parcel    Size  Designation / Zone Factor  Site Size (Round
 Site #        Number (APN)    (Acres)      District      (du/ac) (Acres)    Down)              Ownership / Reason for Selection               Status
                                           Downtown
   65            053-101-001     0.28                       19      0.28     5 (2)*  Privately-owned parcel.                                   Vacant
                                        Commercial / CD
                                           Downtown
   66            053-036-015     0.19                       19      0.19     3 (1)*  Privately-owned parcel.                                   Vacant
                                        Commercial / CD
                                           Downtown
   67            053-113-040     0.19                       19      0.19     3 (1)*  Privately-owned parcel.                                   Vacant
                                        Commercial / CD
                                           Downtown
   68            053-036-021     0.19                       19      0.19     3 (1)*  Privately-owned parcel.                                   Vacant
                                        Commercial / CD
                                           Downtown
   69            053-103-020     0.19                       19      0.19     3 (1)*  Privately-owned parcel.                                   Vacant
                                        Commercial / CD
                                           Downtown
   70            053-033-012     0.18                       19      0.18     3 (1)*  Owned by the City of El Centro.                           Vacant
                                        Commercial / CD
                 053-193-021     0.08
                                           Downtown
   71            053-193-007     0.08                       19      0.32     6 (3)*  Three contiguous parcels with the same private owner.     Vacant
                                        Commercial / CD
                 053-193-008     0.16
                                           Downtown
   72            053-191-004     0.15                       19      0.15     2 (1)*  Owned by the City of El Centro.                           Vacant
                                        Commercial / CD
                                           Downtown
   73            053-104-005     0.15                       19      0.15     2 (1)*  Privately-owned parcel.                                   Vacant
                                        Commercial / CD
                                           Downtown
   74            053-112-037     0.11                       19      0.11     2 (1)*  Privately-owned parcel.                                   Vacant
                                        Commercial / CD
                                           Downtown
   75            053-043-030     0.09                       19      0.09     1 (0)*  Privately-owned parcel.                                   Vacant
                                        Commercial / CD
                                           Downtown
   76            053-047-011     0.08                       19      0.08     1 (0)*  Privately-owned parcel.                                   Vacant
                                        Commercial / CD
                                           Downtown
   77            053-047-014     0.08                       19      0.08     1 (0)*  Privately-owned parcel.                                   Vacant
                                        Commercial / CD
                                        Medium Density
   78            054-530-056    21.18                       8.0    21.18      169    Privately-owned parcel.                                   Vacant
                                        Residential / R2
                                        Medium Density
   79            054-573-006     5.20                       8.0     5.20      41     Privately-owned parcel.                                   Vacant
                                        Residential / R2
                 044-580-001     1.86
                                        Medium Density                               Three contiguous privately-owned          parcels   with
   80            044-580-002     1.15                       8.0     3.77      30                                                               Vacant
                                        Residential / R2                             consolidation potential.
                 044-580-003     0.76
                 052-456-003     0.27
                                        Medium Density
   81            052-456-002     0.27                       8.0     0.79       6     Three contiguous parcels with the same private owner.     Vacant
                                        Residential / R2
                 052-456-001     0.26
   82            052-453-049     0.25   Medium Density      8.0     0.74       5     Three     contiguous     privately-owned  parcels   with  Vacant
 City of El Centro
 2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                                    Page C-11
Table C-1: Residential Sites Inventory
                                Parcel     Land Use           Density            Capacity
               Assessor Parcel   Size  Designation / Zone     Factor   Site Size (Round
 Site #         Number (APN)   (Acres)      District          (du/ac)  (Acres)    Down)              Ownership / Reason for Selection                    Status
                 052-453-048     0.25   Residential / R2                                  consolidation potential. Two parcels held by the same
                 052-453-047     0.25                                                     owner.
                                        Medium Density
   83            044-580-004     0.19                           8.0      0.19       1     Privately-owned parcel.                                        Vacant
                                        Residential / R2
                                        Medium Density
   84            053-282-009     0.19                           8.0      0.19       1     Privately-owned parcel.                                        Vacant
                                        Residential / R2
                                        Medium Density
   85            053-216-009     0.19                           8.0      0.19       1     Privately-owned parcel.                                        Vacant
                                        Residential / R2
                                        Medium Density
   86            044-362-021     0.18                           8.0      0.18       1     Privately-owned parcel.                                        Vacant
                                        Residential / R2
                                        Medium Density
   87            053-174-012     0.16                           8.0      0.16       1     Privately-owned parcel.                                        Vacant
                                        Residential / R2
                                        Medium Density
   88            053-401-011     0.16                           8.0      0.16       1     Privately-owned parcel.                                        Vacant
                                        Residential / R2
                                        Medium Density
   89            053-222-019     0.16                           8.0      0.16       1     Privately-owned parcel.                                        Vacant
                                        Residential / R2
                                        Medium Density
   90            053-342-008     0.16                           8.0      0.16       1     Privately-owned parcel.                                        Vacant
                                        Residential / R2
                                        Medium Density
   91            044-401-019     0.14                           8.0      0.14       1     Privately-owned parcel.                                        Vacant
                                        Residential / R2
                                        Medium Density
   92            053-394-021     0.13                           8.0      0.13       1     Privately-owned parcel.                                        Vacant
                                        Residential / R2
                                        Medium Density
   93            053-281-011     0.10                           8.0      0.10       0     Privately-owned parcel.                                        Vacant
                                        Residential / R2
                                        Medium Density
   94            053-252-003     0.08                           8.0      0.08       0     Privately-owned parcel.                                        Vacant
                                        Residential / R2
                                       Moderate Income Sites Sub-total  45.58      421
Above Moderate Income Sites
                 052-270-002    27.06
                 052-270-026    19.46
                 052-732-016     9.27
                                                                                          17 contiguous parcels with consolidation potential. Two
                 052-744-008     9.01
                                          Low Density                                     parcels owned by the City of El Centro (APNs 052-270-
   95            052-270-029     7.77                           3.5     83.17      291                                                                   Vacant
                                        Residential / R1                                  030 & 052-732-011). Another seven parcels held by one
                 052-270-030     4.98
                                                                                          owner.
                 052-732-011     3.60
                 052-732-015     0.22
                 052-744-007     0.22
                                                                                                                                                City of El Centro
 Page C-12                                                                                                                         2013-2021 Housing Element
Table C-1: Residential Sites Inventory
                                Parcel     Land Use       Density           Capacity
              Assessor Parcel    Size  Designation / Zone Factor  Site Size (Round
 Site #        Number (APN)    (Acres)      District      (du/ac) (Acres)    Down)              Ownership / Reason for Selection               Status
                 052-732-014     0.22
                 052-744-001     0.21
                 052-744-003     0.20
                 052-744-005     0.20
                 052-731-068     0.20
                 052-744-002     0.18
                 052-744-006     0.18
                 052-744-004     0.18
                                          Low Density
   96            064-450-014    55.73                       3.5    55.73      195    Privately-owned parcel.                                   Vacant
                                        Residential / R1
                                          Low Density
   97            054-420-031    41.01                       3.5    41.01      143    Privately-owned parcel.                                   Vacant
                                        Residential / R1
                 044-440-001    14.23     Low Density
   98                                                       3.5    22.17      77     Two contiguous parcels held by the same private owner.    Vacant
                 044-440-022     7.94   Residential / R1
                 052-793-009     5.39     Low Density
   99                                                       3.5     8.45      29     Two contiguous parcels held by the same private owner.    Vacant
                 052-793-011     3.06   Residential / R1
                                          Low Density
  100            054-280-016     8.31                       3.5     8.31      29     Privately-owned parcel.                                   Vacant
                                        Residential / R1
                                          Low Density
  101            044-261-002     7.23                       3.5     7.23      25     Privately-owned parcel.                                   Vacant
                                        Residential / R1
                 044-254-026     2.83
                 044-254-024     1.50     Low Density                                Four contiguous privately-owned           parcels   with
  102                                                       3.5     5.45      19                                                               Vacant
                 044-254-031     0.60   Residential / R1                             consolidation potential.
                 044-254-029     0.52
                                          Low Density
  103            052-776-002     4.61                       3.5     4.61      16     Privately-owned parcel.                                   Vacant
                                        Residential / R1
                 052-791-012     0.25
                 052-791-014     0.23
                 052-794-021     0.18
                 052-794-030     0.18
                 052-794-022     0.17
                                                                                     25 contiguous privately-owned parcels with consolidation
                 052-794-031     0.17     Low Density
  104                                                       3.5     4.07      14     potential. 16 parcels are held by one owner. Another 5    Vacant
                 052-794-027     0.17   Residential / R1
                                                                                     parcels are held by another single owner.
                 052-794-035     0.17
                 052-794-033     0.16
                 052-794-026     0.16
                 052-794-029     0.16
                 052-794-017     0.16
 City of El Centro
 2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                                    Page C-13
Table C-1: Residential Sites Inventory
                                Parcel     Land Use       Density           Capacity
            Assessor Parcel      Size  Designation / Zone Factor  Site Size (Round
 Site #      Number (APN)      (Acres)      District      (du/ac) (Acres)    Down)              Ownership / Reason for Selection                      Status
              052-794-016        0.16
              052-794-012        0.16
              052-794-034        0.15
              052-794-018        0.15
              052-794-023        0.15
              052-794-028        0.15
              052-794-015        0.15
              052-794-024        0.14
              052-794-014        0.14
              052-794-025        0.14
              052-794-013        0.14
              052-794-020        0.14
              052-794-019        0.13
              052-270-034        1.17
                                          Low Density                                Three contiguous privately-owned parcels with
  105         052-270-035        1.16                       3.5     3.26      11                                                                      Vacant
                                        Residential / R1                             consolidation potential. Two parcels held by one owner.
              052-270-028        0.93
                                          Low Density
  106         044-264-017        2.35                       3.5     2.35       8     Privately-owned parcel.                                          Vacant
                                        Residential / R1
              044-252-008        0.81
              044-252-007        0.67
                                          Low Density                                Five contiguous privately-owned            parcels   with
  107         044-252-027        0.48                       3.5     2.28       7                                                                      Vacant
                                        Residential / R1                             consolidation potential.
              044-252-028        0.19
              044-252-009        0.13
              044-251-016        1.03     Low Density                                Two contiguous privately-owned             parcels   with
  108                                                       3.5     2.06       7                                                                      Vacant
              044-251-017        1.03   Residential / R1                             consolidation potential.
                                          Low Density
  109         044-252-018        1.44                       3.5     1.44       5     Privately-owned parcel.                                          Vacant
                                        Residential / R1
              052-743-014        0.23
              052-743-008        0.22
              052-743-010        0.21
                                          Low Density
  110         052-743-012        0.21                       3.5     1.41       4     Seven contiguous parcels with the same private owner.            Vacant
                                        Residential / R1
              052-743-009        0.18
              052-743-013        0.18
              052-743-011        0.18
                                          Low Density
  111         053-807-007        1.30                       3.5     1.30       4     Privately-owned parcel.                                          Vacant
                                        Residential / R1
              044-252-019        1.10     Low Density
  112                                                       3.5     1.24       4     Two contiguous parcels with the same private owner.              Vacant
              044-252-020        0.14   Residential / R1
                                                                                                                                             City of El Centro
 Page C-14                                                                                                                      2013-2021 Housing Element
Table C-1: Residential Sites Inventory
                                Parcel     Land Use       Density           Capacity
              Assessor Parcel    Size  Designation / Zone Factor  Site Size (Round
 Site #        Number (APN)    (Acres)      District      (du/ac) (Acres)    Down)               Ownership / Reason for Selection               Status
                 053-752-075     0.16
                 053-752-076     0.16
                 053-752-079     0.16     Low Density
  113                                                       3.5     0.94       3     Six contiguous parcels owned by the City of El Centro.     Vacant
                 053-752-078     0.16   Residential / R1
                 053-752-077     0.16
                 053-752-080     0.16
                                          Low Density
  114            044-253-017     0.78                       3.5     0.78       2     Privately-owned parcel.                                    Vacant
                                        Residential / R1
                 052-044-016     0.40                                                Two contiguous privately-owned parcels with
                                          Low Density
  115                                                       3.5     0.75       2     consolidation potential. APN 052-044-016 owned by the      Vacant
                 052-044-018     0.34   Residential / R1
                                                                                     City of El Centro.
                 053-761-009     0.23
                 053-761-008     0.16
                                          Low Density                                Five contiguous privately-owned parcels. Two separate
  116            053-761-007     0.10                       3.5     0.61       2                                                                Vacant
                                        Residential / R1                             owners hold four of the parcels.
                 053-761-006     0.07
                 053-761-017     0.05
                 052-791-008     0.19
                                          Low Density                                Three contiguous privately-owned parcels. Two parcels
  117            052-791-017     0.17                       3.5     0.54       1                                                                Vacant
                                        Residential / R1                             held by one owner.
                 052-791-016     0.17
                                          Low Density
  118            044-262-027     0.51                       3.5     0.51       1     Privately-owned parcel.                                    Vacant
                                        Residential / R1
                 052-732-005     0.26     Low Density                                Two contiguous privately-owned            parcels    with
  119                                                       3.5     0.48       1                                                                Vacant
                 052-732-006     0.22   Residential / R1                             consolidation potential.
                                          Low Density
  120            052-452-032     0.40                       3.5     0.40       1     Privately-owned parcel.                                    Vacant
                                        Residential / R1
                                          Low Density
  121            053-522-033     0.39                       3.5     0.39       1     Privately-owned parcel.                                    Vacant
                                        Residential / R1
                                          Low Density
  122            044-272-014     0.33                       3.5     0.33       1     Privately-owned parcel.                                    Vacant
                                        Residential / R1
                 053-231-010     0.16     Low Density
  123                                                       3.5     0.33       1     Two contiguous parcels with the same private owner.        Vacant
                 053-231-011     0.16   Residential / R1
                                          Low Density
  124            044-280-009     0.29                       3.5     0.29       1     Privately-owned parcel.                                    Vacant
                                        Residential / R1
                                          Low Density
  125            053-761-022     0.29                       3.5     0.29       1     Privately-owned parcel.                                    Vacant
                                        Residential / R1
                                          Low Density
  126            044-261-015     0.25                       3.5     0.25       0     Privately-owned parcel.                                    Vacant
                                        Residential / R1
 City of El Centro
 2013-2021 Housing Element                                                                                                                     Page C-15
Table C-1: Residential Sites Inventory
                                             Parcel          Land Use           Density                     Capacity
                Assessor Parcel               Size      Designation / Zone       Factor      Site Size       (Round
 Site #          Number (APN)               (Acres)           District           (du/ac)      (Acres)         Down)                   Ownership / Reason for Selection                         Status
                                                            Low Density
   127             053-752-061                0.21                                 3.5          0.21             0         Privately-owned parcel.                                             Vacant
                                                          Residential / R1
                                                            Low Density
   128             044-273-004                0.19                                 3.5          0.19             0         Privately-owned parcel.                                             Vacant
                                                          Residential / R1
                                                            Low Density
   129             053-143-012                0.17                                 3.5          0.17             0         Privately-owned parcel.                                             Vacant
                                                          Residential / R1
                                                            Low Density
   130             053-233-028                0.16                                 3.5          0.16             0         Privately-owned parcel.                                             Vacant
                                                          Residential / R1
                                                            Low Density
   131             053-231-014                0.16                                 3.5          0.16             0         Privately-owned parcel.                                             Vacant
                                                          Residential / R1
                                                            Low Density
   132             053-143-007                0.16                                 3.5          0.16             0         Privately-owned parcel.                                             Vacant
                                                          Residential / R1
                                                            Low Density
   133             053-143-005                0.16                                 3.5          0.16             0         Privately-owned parcel.                                             Vacant
                                                          Residential / R1
                                                            Low Density
   134             053-223-023                0.16                                 3.5          0.16             0         Privately-owned parcel.                                             Vacant
                                                          Residential / R1
                                                            Low Density
   135             053-152-022                0.16                                 3.5          0.16             0         Privately-owned parcel.                                             Vacant
                                                          Residential / R1
                                                            Low Density
   136             053-423-003                0.16                                 3.5          0.16             0         Privately-owned parcel.                                             Vacant
                                                          Residential / R1
                   054-360-007               15.37
                                                         Rural Residential /                                               Three contiguous privately-owned             parcels   with
   137             054-360-008               10.62                                  1           33.84           33                                                                             Vacant
                                                                RR                                                         consolidation potential.
                   054-360-038                7.84
                   054-360-049                2.49       Rural Residential /                                               Two contiguous privately-owned              parcels    with
   138                                                                              1            2.99            2                                                                             Vacant
                   054-360-067                0.50              RR                                                         consolidation potential.
                                                   Above Moderate Income Site Sub-total        300.95          941
                                                                   Sites Inventory Total       406.96         2,163
 *Indicates Mixed-Use and therefore 50 percent of the calculated capacity is assumed for the purposes of demonstrating adequacy to accommodate the 2014-2021 RHNA.
 Note: None of the sites identified in this table are known to be constrained by environmental factors. El Centro’s topography is generally flat and devoid of steep slopes that could limit development
 capacity. The sites are not located within the 100-year floodplain and are not known to be contaminated with hazardous materials.
                                                                                                                                                                                     City of El Centro
 Page C-16                                                                                                                                                             2013-2021 Housing Element

  Housing Element Implementation Program
                HOUSING
                ELEMENT
                E l    C e n t r o        G e n e r a l         P l a n
The text of the Housing Element contains the implementation programs
necessary to comply with State law. Please refer to the Housing Element for a
discussion of implementation programs.
                                  A-6








































                  Land Use Element Implementation Program
                   LAND USE
                   ELEMENT
                   E l    C e n t r o          G e n e r a l           P l a n
   This Implementation Program provides actions to implement the adopted
   policies and plans identified in the Land Use Element. The Land Use Element
   Implementation Program is a series of actions, procedures and techniques,
   and includes a description of the responsible agency/department, funding
   source, time frame and related policies in the Land Use Element.
Balance of Land Uses
   LU-1:       Annual Review of General Plan and Land Use Policy Map
   Implementation: Review implementation of the General Plan on an annual
   basis.
   Responsible Agency/Department: Planning & Zoning
   Funding Source: General Fund
   Time Frame: Ongoing on an annual basis
   Related Policies: 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.9, 1.11, 1.12, 1.13, 2.1, 2.2
   LU-2: Zoning and Subdivision Ordinances Update: Review and update the
   Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Ordinances to ensure consistency with the
   General Plan and to help implement the General Plan policies. Potential
   changes may include simplifying the zoning categories; adding additional
   flexibility where appropriate; including incentives to promote infill
   development; creating more specific enforcement guidelines for
   development requirements; and clarifying what improvements will be
   required for subdivision projects.
   Responsible Agency/Department: Public Works, Planning and Zoning
   Funding Source: General Plan
   Time Frame: 2003-2004
   Related Policies: 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8, 1.9, 1.10, 1.11, 2.4, 3.1, 3.2,
   3.3
                                          A-1
                   Land Use Element Implementation Program
Direct and Control Growth
   LU-3: Urban Development Program: Continue to implement the Urban
   Development Program and require applicable development in
   Development Tiers II and III to complete Community Facilities Studies to
   ensure adequate provision of public facilities and services, including the
   identification of future sites for public facilities such as parks and schools.
   Responsible Agency/Department: Public Works, Planning and Zoning
   Funding Source: General Fund, project proponent
   Time Frame: Ongoing
   Related Policies: 1.12, 1.13, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3
   LU-4: Airport Land Use Compatibility: Continue to review projects in areas
   subject to impacts from airport operations to ensure that new development
   will not be negatively impacted by noise and safety factors associated with
   public and private airports.
   Responsible Agency/Department: Planning and Zoning, Imperial County
   Airport Land Use Commission
   Funding Source: General Fund
   Time Frame: Ongoing
   Related Policies: 1.1, 1.2, 2.4
Community Design
   LU-5: Visual Enhancement Areas: Continue to implement the conceptual
   plan of visual enhancements shown in Figure LU-6 to improve the visual and
   economic environment of the community. Public funds can be used for
   projects such as landscape improvements and creating visual gateways to
   the community. New developments in the target areas can also be
   encouraged to design the projects to incorporate features to promote the
   Plan.
   Responsible Agency/Department: Planning & Zoning
   Funding Source: General Fund
   Time Frame: Ongoing
   Related Policies: 1.1, 3.1, 3.3
   LU-6: Façade Improvement Plan: Continue to implement the Façade
   Improvement Plan to enhance the visual appearance of the downtown
   business district.
   Responsible Agency/Department: Planning and Zoning, Redevelopment
   Funding Source: General Fund
   Time Frame: Ongoing
   Related Policies: 3.1, 3.3
                                          A-2

               Land Use Element Implementation Program
LU-7:     Rehabilitation of Residential, Commercial, Industrial Properties and
Buildings: Provide incentives such as deferred fees, streamlined permitting,
rehabilitation funding and formal recognition of contribution to overall City
development quality.
Responsible Agency/Department: Public Works, Planning and Zoning,
Redevelopment
Funding Source: General Fund, Redevelopment funds, state and federal
funds
Time Frame: Ongoing
Related Policies: 3.1, 3.2, 3.2
LU-8: Downtown Revitalization Plan:               Implement the Downtown
Revitalization Plan to enhance the visual and economic environment of the
area. Programs such as promoting the creation of business improvement
and lighting and maintenance districts will be used to improve the downtown
area.
Responsible Agency/Department: Public Works, Planning and Zoning,
Finance, Redevelopment
Funding Source: General Fund, state and federal funds
Time Frame: Ongoing
Related Policies: 3.1, 3.3
LU-9: Parks and Recreation Facilities Master Plan: Implement the Parks and
Recreation Facilities Master Plan to improve the quality and accessibility of
park, recreation and cultural facilities and programs for the community.
Responsible Agency/Department: Public Works, Planning and Zoning, Parks
and Recreation
Funding Source: General Fund, state and federal funds, mitigation fees
Time Frame: Ongoing
Related Policies: 1.14
LU-10: El Dorado Colonia: Create a circulation plan for the El Dorado
Colonia area. The plan will permit the subdivision of lots to allow for the
installation of additional local serving roads to improve the internal
circulation of the area and allow for better usage of property.
Responsible Agency/Department: Planning and Zoning, Public Works,
Redevelopment
Funding Source: General Fund, state and federal funds, Redevelopment
Funds
Time Frame: 2003-2004
Related Policies: 3.1, 3.3
                                      A-3
                                                                 Noise Element
                       TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION                                                                                                      PAGE
Introduction................................................................................................... N-1
         Purpose of the Noise Element ........................................................................N-1
         Scope and Content of the Noise Element ........................................................N-1
         Related Plans and Programs ...........................................................................N-2
         Relationship to Other General Plan Elements...................................................N-2
Issues, Goals and Policies ............................................................................... N-4
         Noise and Land Use Planning ........................................................................N-4
         Transportation Related Noise .........................................................................N-4
         Non-Transportation Related Noise ..................................................................N-5
         Related Goals and Policies.............................................................................N-6
Noise Plan .................................................................................................... N-7
         Noise and Land Use Planning ........................................................................N-7
         Transportation Related Noise .......................................................................N-10
         Non-Transportation Related Noise ................................................................N-14
                                        LIST OF TABLES
TABLE                                                                                                        PAGE
N-1      Related Goals and Policies by Element ............................................................N-6
N-2      Interior and Exterior Noise Standards ..............................................................N-8
N-3      Noise/Land Use Compatibility Matrix ..............................................................N-9
                                       LIST OF FIGURES
FIGURE                                                                                                       PAGE
N-1      Future Noise Contours.................................................................................N-11
N-2      Imperial County Airport Noise Impact Area....................................................N-13
                                                    N-i
                                                 Noise Element
                      NOISE
                      ELEMENT
                      E l     C e n t r o           G e n e r a l             P l a n
INTRODUCTION
  The quality of life experienced by residents of El Centro is affected by the levels of
  noise within the City. In addition to causing irritation, high noise levels can be a
  source of stress for those residing and working nearby. Creating effective strategies
  that reduce excessive noise and limit the community’s exposure to loud noise sources
  is central to the Noise Element.
Purpose of the Noise Element
  The Noise Element identifies sources of noise in the community and ways to reduce
  the impacts of these noise sources on the community. Contained in the Element are
  policies and programs to achieve and maintain noise levels compatible with various
  land uses. Additionally, the Noise Element identifies those land uses sensitive to noise
  and assures that noise generating land uses are located so as to minimize impact to
  those sensitive areas.
Scope and Content of the Noise Element
  The Noise Element satisfies the requirements of State planning law and is a mandated
  component of the General Plan. Government Code Section 65302(f) establishes the
  required components of the Noise Element. The Element also complies with
  California Health and Safety Code Section 56050.1 guidelines for Noise Elements.
  Noise exposure contours represent quantified projections of future noise conditions
  from short- and long-term growth. This noise information serves as the basis to
  develop guidelines for compatible uses.
  The Noise Element is comprised of three sections: 1) Introduction; 2) Issues, Goals
  and Policies; and 3) the Noise Plan. In the second section (Issues, Goals and
  Policies), major issues pertaining to noise sources are identified and related goals and
  policies are established. The goals reflect the overall desires of the City and comprise
  broad statements of purpose and direction. The policies are guidelines aimed to
  reduce or avoid adverse noise effects on residents. The Plan describes how the goals
  and policies will be achieved and implemented. Specific implementation programs
                                         N-1

                                                   Noise Element
   for the Noise Element are contained in the General Plan Implementation Program,
   which comprises Appendix A.
Related Plans and Programs
   A number of plans and programs directly relating to the goals of the Noise Element
   are in existence. These plans and programs have been enacted through State and
   local legislation and are administered by agencies with powers to enforce State and
   local laws.
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and Guidelines
   The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) was adopted by the State legislature
   in response to a public mandate for thorough environmental analysis of projects that
   might affect the environment. Excessive noise is considered an environmental impact
   under CEQA. The provisions of the law and environmental review procedure are
   described in the CEQA Statutes and the CEQA Guidelines. Implementation of CEQA
   ensures that during the decision making stage of development, City officials and the
   general public will be able to assess the environmental impacts associated with private
   and public development projects to the environment.
California Noise Insulation Standards (Title 24)
   The California Commission of Housing and Community Development officially
   adopted noise insulation standards in 1974. In 1988, the Building Standards
   Commission approved revisions to the standards (Title 24, Part 2, California Code of
   Regulations). As revised, the Title 24 establishes an interior noise standard of 45
   dB(A) for residential space (CNEL or Ldn). Acoustical studies must be prepared for
   residential structures to be located within noise contours of 60 dB(A) or greater (CNEL
   or Ldn) from freeways, major streets, thoroughfares, rail lines, rapid transit lines, or
   industrial noise sources. The studies must demonstrate that the building is designed to
   reduce interior noise to 45 dB(A) or lower (CNEL or Ldn).
City of El Centro Zoning Ordinance
   The City’s Zoning Ordinance provides controls for excessive and annoying noise from
   a variety of sources. Maximum hourly average sound levels (measured in decibels)
   have been established for each land use designation and these levels vary by time of
   day. Noise regulations identified in the Zoning Ordinance are discussed in this
   Element.
Relationship to Other General Plan Elements
   State planning law requires that the Noise Element be consistent with the other
   General Plan elements. Although independent, each element in the General Plan is
   interrelated to a degree; and certain goals and policies of the individual elements may
                                           N-2

                                               Noise Element
also address issues that are primary subjects of other elements. The integration of
overlapping issues throughout the General Plan elements provides a strong basis for
implementation of plans and programs, and achievement of community goals. The
Land Use and Circulation Elements are closely related to the Noise Element.
Noise Element policies and plans are designed to protect the existing and planned
land uses identified in the Land Use Element from excessive noise. Potential noise
sources are identified in the Noise Element and programs are established to avoid or
mitigate noise impacts from planned development. At the same time, the Land Use
Element contains policies to ensure that environmental conditions, including noise, are
considered in all land use decisions. Preventing the intrusion of incompatible land
uses in order to create a healthy environment is a central goal of the Land Use
Element.
The transportation policies found in the Circulation Element are directly linked to the
programs and policies developed in the Noise Element. Noise from transportation is
largely responsible for excessive noise levels in certain locations in urban
environments. Projected noise distribution identified in the Noise Element is corollary
to the Circulation Plan. Policies and plans contained in the Noise Element are based
on the Circulation Element and are aimed to minimize the effects of transportation
noise on existing and planned land uses. Noise exposure will be a key consideration
when locating and designing new arterials.
The Conservation & Open Space Element is also related to the Noise Element. The
intended enjoyment of parks and open space can be diminished by excessive noise,
and noise information should be considered in planning new recreational areas.
Open space areas can also be used to buffer noise sensitive land uses from noise
producers.
                                       N-3
                                                  Noise Element
                    ISSUES, GOALS, AND POLICIES
                    El Centro’s quality of life can be reduced by excessive noise levels.
                    The goals, policies and implementation actions of the Noise Element
                    address three major issues related to noise. These include: (1)
  avoiding the negative effects from noise through the use of land use planning and
  noise reduction techniques; (2) minimizing the impact of transportation-related noise;
  and (3) minimizing the impact of non-transportation related noise.
Noise and Land Use Planning
  High noise levels tend to concentrate in certain areas within the City of El Centro.
  Consideration of the sources and recipients of noise early in the land use planning
  process can be an effective method of minimizing the impact of noise on population in
  the community. Rehabilitative improvements are necessary to reduce the effects of
  noise in areas currently impacted by noise.
  Noise Goal 1: Minimize the effects of noise through proper land use planning.
  Policy 1.1: Use noise/land use compatibility standards as a guide for future
  planning and development decisions.
  Policy 1.2: Provide noise control measures and sound attenuating construction in
  areas of new construction or rehabilitation.
  Policy 1.3: Promote alternative sound attenuation measures, such as berms,
  embankments, landscaping, setbacks, and architectural design where appropriate,
  rather than wall barriers.
  Policy 1.4: Support changes in the Uniform Building Code that incorporate new
  technologies for reducing exterior noise intrusion into structures and the transmission
  of interior-generated noise within structures.
Transportation Related Noise
  Transportation related noise is the primary source of noise impacting the City of El
  Centro. Both Interstate 8 and the Union Pacific and San Diego & Arizona railroads,
  along with other major roadways, create high noise levels that affect the overall quality
  of life in the community. Reducing transportation related noise is necessary to off-set
  detrimental affects attributable to excessive noise.
  Noise Goal 2: Minimize transportation related noise impacts to preserve the City’s
  overall environment.
                                          N-4

                                                   Noise Element
  Policy 2.1: Reduce transportation related noise impacts to sensitive land uses
  through the use of noise control measures.
  Policy 2.2: Establish and maintain truck routes away from noise sensitive receptors.
  Policy 2.3: Incorporate sound-reduction design in development projects impacted
  by transportation related noise.
  Policy 2.4: Enforce motor vehicle laws and standards, as allowed by federal and
  State law, related to traffic flow and speed and vehicle equipment standards to control
  noise along City roadways.
  Policy 2.5: Continue to monitor noise levels of railroad operations and work with
  railway operators to minimize noise generated by rail operations.
  Policy 2.6: Require solid masonry walls to be installed at the time of new
  construction of a new dwelling unit (or units) along the side or rear property lines or
  lines adjacent to any operational railroad right-of-way.
  Policy 2.7: Continue to participate in the airport land use plan revisions for existing
  airport facilities and operations, future airports, and airport expansions to ensure that
  appropriate noise mitigation measures are implemented.
Non-Transportation Related Noise
  Noise sources such as construction noise, manufacturing or business operations noise,
  and property maintenance activities should be controlled to minimize exposure to
  excessive noise levels.
  Noise Goal 3: Minimize non-transportation related noise impacts to preserve the
  City’s overall environment.
  Policy 3.1: Reduce the impacts of noise producing land uses and activities on noise
  sensitive land uses.
  Policy 3.2: Incorporate sound-reduction design in new construction or rehabilitation
  projects impacted by non-transportation related noise.
  Policy 3.3: Require mitigation measures to ensure that noise resulting from public and
  private construction projects is reduced to an acceptable level.
Related Goals and Policies
                                           N-5

                                                   Noise Element
    The goals and policies found in the Noise Element are related to and support subjects
    included in other General Plan elements. Likewise, many goals and policies from
    other elements are supportive of the subjects included in the Noise Element. These
    supporting goals and policies are identified in Table N-1.
                                       Table N-1
                    Related Goals and Policies by Element
                                                     Noise Issue Area
  General Plan Elements      Noise and Land          Transportation   Non-Transportation
                              Use Planning           Related Noise      Related Noise
Land Use                      1.1,1.2,1.11                2.4
Economic Development                                                         1.5
Housing                            n/a                    n/a                n/a
Circulation                      1.1, 4.2                 4.2
Public Facilities
Conservation/Open Space            3.4                                       3.2
Safety                             5.5                  5.1,5.4
Noise
                                          N-6
                                                    Noise Element
                         NOISE PLAN
                         Like most urbanizing areas, El Centro is experiencing increased
                         noise levels associated with transportation and non-transportation
  related sources. The City must seek ways to safeguard the community from excessive
  noise levels as the ambient noise level in the community rises. Goals and policies
  listed in the previous section establish an agenda for the reduction of the overall noise
  levels within the City. The Noise Plan describes the approach for achieving the
  agenda and provides a general outline of action programs. Contained in Appendix A
  of this General Plan, the Noise Element Implementation Program is an extension of
  the Noise Plan and contains specific programs that the City will enact to protect the
  overall quality of life in the community.
Noise and Land Use Planning
  The cumulative effect of noise from transportation activities and stationary sources
  contributes to the overall noise environment of a planning area. Noise generated
  from automobile use, trucking, airport and rail operations are referred to as
  transportation related noise. Non-transportation noise typically refers to noise from
  stationary sources such as commercial establishments, machinery, air conditioning
  systems, compressors and landscape maintenance equipment. Noise levels are
  highest near the source and decrease with distance. Noise is problematic when noise
  sensitive land uses are affected. A noise sensitive land use is one in which normal
  activities associated with the use may be interrupted by noise, including, but not
  limited to, residences, schools, hospitals, religious meetings and recreational areas.
  Consideration of noise sources, sensitive land uses, and information regarding the
  future noise environment is an effective way to avoid noise impacts.
Noise Standards and Land Use Compatibility Guidelines
  The City uses land use compatibility standards when planning and making
  development decisions in order to ensure that noise producers do not adversely affect
  sensitive receptors. Table N-2 summarizes City noise standards for various types of
  land uses. The standards represent the maximum acceptable noise levels and are
  used to determine noise impacts.
                                            N-7
                                                       Noise Element
                                         Table N-2
                                    Noise Standards
                                                   One Hour Average Sound Level
           Zones                                               (decibels)
                                                       Outdoor            Indoor*
           Rural and Single-Family
                                                          60                45
           Residential Zones
           Multi-Family Residential Zones                 65                45
           Schools, libraries, churches,
           hospitals, nursing homes, and                  70                45
           parks and recreation areas
          * In the event that outdoor acceptable noise exposure levels cannot be
             mitigated by various attenuation mitigation measures, indoor noise levels
             shall not exceed 45 dB(A) CNEL.
These noise standards are the basis for development of the land use compatibility
guidelines presented in Table N-3. If the noise level of a project falls within Zone A or
Zone B, the project is considered compatible with the noise environment. Zone A
implies that no mitigation will be needed. Zone B implies that minor mitigation may
be required to meet the City’s and Title 24 noise standards. All development project
proponents are required to demonstrate that the noise standards will be met prior to
human occupation of a building.
If the noise level falls within Zone C, substantial mitigation is likely needed to meet
City noise standards. Substantial mitigation may involve construction of noise barriers
and substantial building sound insulation. Projects in Zone C can be successfully
mitigated; however, project proponents with a project in Zone C must demonstrate
that the noise standards can be met prior to issuance of a building permit.
If noise levels fall outside of Zones A, B and C, projects are considered clearly
incompatible with the noise environment and should not be approved.
                                             N-8

                                                          Noise Element
                                              Table N-3
                          Noise/Land Use Compatibility Matrix
                                                       Community Noise Exposure
Land Use                                                      (Ldn or CNEL)
                                50       55          60          65         70      75       80
Residential
Transient Lodging – Motel,
Hotel
Schools, Libraries,
Churches, Hospitals,
Nursing Homes
Auditoriums, Concert Halls,
Amphitheaters
Sports Arena, Outdoor
Spectator Sports
Playgrounds, Parks
Golf Course, Riding
Stables, Water Recreation,
Cemeteries
Office Buildings, Business
Commercial, and
Professional
Industrial, Manufacturing,
Utilities, Agriculture
Source: Modified by CBA from 1998 State of California General Plan Guidelines.
          ZONE A - Normally Acceptable: Specified land use is satisfactory, based upon the
          assumption that any buildings involved meet conventional Title 24 construction standards.
          No special noise insulation requirements.
          ZONE B - Conditionally Acceptable: New construction or development shall be
          undertaken only after a detailed noise analysis is made and noise reduction measures are
          identified and included in the project design.
          Zone C- Normally Unacceptable: New construction or development is discouraged. If
          new construction is proposed, a detailed analysis is required, noise reduction measures
          must be identified, and noise insulation features included in the design.
          ZONE D- Clearly Unacceptable: New construction or development clearly should not be
          undertaken.
                                                  N-9

                                                 Noise Element
Noise Contours and Noise Impact Areas
  The use of noise contours based on the major noise sources can describe the noise
  environment for the community. Noise contours outline areas of equal noise
  exposure. Future noise contours have been estimated with information about existing
  and projected land use development and transportation activity.
  The projected noise contours and noise impact areas for El Centro are displayed in
  Figure N-1. These contours will serve as a guide for land use and development
  decisions. Contours of 60 dB(A) or greater define noise impact areas. An acoustical
  analysis must be prepared when noise sensitive land uses are proposed within noise
  impact areas. The analysis must show that the project is designed to attenuate noise
  to meet the City’s noise standards as defined in Table N-2 in order to receive
  approval. If the project design does not meet the noise standards, mitigation can be
  recommended in the analysis. If the analysis demonstrates that the noise standards
  can be met by implementing the mitigation measures, the project can be approved
  conditioned upon implementation of the mitigation measures.
Construction Standards
  The provisions of the State Noise Insulation Standards (Title 24) will be enforced in El
  Centro. Title 24 specifies that combined indoor noise for multi-family living spaces
  shall not exceed 45 dB(A) CNEL. This standard must be implemented when the
  outdoor noise level exceeds 60 dB(A) CNEL. The future noise contour map (Figure N-
  1) can be used to determine the appropriate time to implement this standard. Title 24
  requires that the standard be applied to all new hotels, motels, apartments and multi-
  family development.
Transportation-Related Noise
  Noise generated by transportation activity is the central component of El Centro’s
  noise environment.      Transportation noise is primarily concentrated along the
  transportation corridors that traverse the community (such as Interstate 8, State Route
  80, major arterials and collector roads, the Union Pacific and San Diego & Arizona
  railroads, and aircraft flight patterns). A small portion of northern El Centro falls
  within the 55 CNEL noise contour of the Imperial County Airport Noise Impact Area
  (Figure N-2). The private airstrip located in the eastern portion of the City also
  generates aircraft noise that impacts surrounding land uses. Reducing noise at the
  source is the most efficient and effective way to control noise from transportation
  systems.
                                         N-10

                           Noise Element
FIGURE N-1
Future Noise Contours
                      N-11
               Noise Element
Back page
          N-12
                                         Noise Element
Figure N-2
Imperial County Airport Noise Impact Area
                                 N-13
                                                   Noise Element
  The City of El Centro has little direct control over noise produced by transportation
  sources because State and federal noise regulations preempt local regulations. The
  State is responsible for regulating motor vehicle noise, while the federal government
  regulates aircraft noise. Because the City is prevented from controlling noise at the
  source, City noise programs focus on reducing the impact of transportation noise on
  the community. Cost effective strategies to control noise impacts are an essential
  component of this Element.
  The most effective method for mitigation of transportation noise impacts on the
  community is by utilizing the site design review process and CEQA. Identification of
  potential impacts from transportation noise will occur during these stages of the
  development process and mitigation measures will be required as needed to meet the
  City’s noise standards. Site planning, landscaping, topography and the design and
  construction of noise barriers are the most common method of alleviating vehicular
  traffic and train noise impacts. Small noise reductions can be achieved by using
  setbacks and buffers.
  Noise barriers should be included in the design of roadway, freeway and rail
  improvements. The City will support efforts by Caltrans, railway operators, and other
  transportation providers to provide acoustical protection for noise sensitive uses.
  Additionally, the City will request that barriers will be included in freeway, railway and
  rail improvement projects to mitigate significant noise impacts. Interstate 8 is a prime
  candidate for alternative sound attenuation measures to protect the community from
  excessive transportation noise. The City will promote the use of berms, embankments,
  landscaping, setbacks, and architectural design where appropriate, rather than
  conventional wall barriers. The City will also continue to review projects proposed in
  areas impacted by aircraft noise to ensure that only appropriate development occurs.
Noise Control at the Source
  The California Vehicle Code contains noise regulations pertaining to the operation of
  all vehicles on public roads. These noise standards for cars, trucks and motorcycles
  are enforced through coordination with the California Highway Patrol and the El
  Centro Police Department. The City also regulates traffic flow and coordinates with
  the California Highway Patrol to enforce speed limits to reduce traffic noise.
Non-Transportation Related Noise
  Sensitive receptors must also be protected from excessive noise generated by non-
  transportation sources, such as commercial and industrial centers, agricultural
  activities, and restaurants and bars. City noise requirements are the best means to
  control noise from existing noise sources; while noise generated by new development
  is effectively controlled through the site design review process, compliance with CEQA,
  and compliance with City noise standards contained in the Noise Element of the
  General Plan and Zoning Ordinance. During the preliminary stages of the
                                           N-14

                                              Noise Element
development process, potential noise impacts must be identified and mitigation
measures can be imposed.
When reviewing proposed non-residential projects, noise generation and potential
impacts to surrounding development will be considered. Acoustical analyses will be
required for projects that will generate noise that could affect sensitive receptors.
Where significant impacts are identified, mitigation measures will be required.
Mitigation measures that could be applied when reviewing projects include
acoustically treated and/or quiet design: 1) furnaces; 2) fans; 3) motors; 4)
compressors; and 5) valves and pumps. The City may also require limited delivery
hours and hours of operation in order to minimize impacts to adjacent residential
uses.
In addition, all City departments must comply with State and federal OSHA standards.
Any new equipment or vehicles purchased by the City will comply with local, State and
federal noise standards.
                                     N-15
                                                                   Public Facilities Element
                               TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION                                                                                                                                  PAGE
Introduction .............................................................................................................. PF-1
   Purpose of the Public Facilities Element ............................................................................ PF-1
   Scope and Content of the Public Facilities Element ...................................................... PF-1
   Related Plans and Programs ............................................................................................... PF-2
       Quimby Act ...................................................................................................................... PF-2
       Southern California Association of Governments Plans and Programs (SCAG) ... PF-2
       Imperial Irrigation District Water Conservation/Transfer Programs .......................... PF-2
       Water Element of the Imperial County General Plan ............................................... PF-3
       Water and Sewer Master Plans .................................................................................... PF-3
       El Centro Parks and Recreation Facilities Master Plan ............................................. PF-3
       School District Master Plans ........................................................................................... PF-3
       Joint Use Agreements with the School District ........................................................... PF-4
   Relationship to Other General Plan Elements .................................................................. PF-4
Issues, Goals and Policies ....................................................................................... PF-5
    Parks and Recreation .......................................................................................................... PF-5
    Educational Facilities ........................................................................................................... PF-6
    Library Facilities ..................................................................................................................... PF-6
    Police Facilities ...................................................................................................................... PF-7
    Fire Stations ............................................................................................................................ PF-7
    Civic Center .......................................................................................................................... PF-8
    Cultural Facilities ................................................................................................................... PF-8
    Sewer System ........................................................................................................................ PF-8
    Water System ........................................................................................................................ PF-9
    Related Goals and Policies ................................................................................................ PF-9
Public Facilities Plan............................................................................................... PF-11
    Parks and Recreation ........................................................................................................ PF-11
          Parkland Standard and Future Park Needs .......................................................... PF-16
          Trail Network ............................................................................................................... PF-17
    Educational Facilities ......................................................................................................... PF-17
    Library Facilities ................................................................................................................... PF-18
    Police Facilities .................................................................................................................... PF-18
                                                                 PF-i
                                                                  Public Facilities Element
   Fire Stations .......................................................................................................................... PF-19
   Civic Center ........................................................................................................................ PF-20
   Cultural Facilities ................................................................................................................. PF-20
   Sewer System ...................................................................................................................... PF-20
   Water System ...................................................................................................................... PF-21
                                                  LIST OF TABLES
TABLE ................................................................................................. PAGE
PF-1     Related Goals and Policies by Element ................................................................ PF-10
PF-2     El Centro Public Parks Summary ............................................................................. PF-12
PF-3     School District Joint Use Facilities ........................................................................... PF-13
PF-4     Public Facilities .......................................................................................................... PF-14
PF-5     Existing and Future Park Acreage Needs ............................................................ PF-16
                                                 LIST OF FIGURES
FIGURE ................................................................................................ PAGE
PF-1     Public Facilities ........................................................................................................... PF-15
                                                               PF-ii
                                             Public Facilities Element
                   PUBLIC
                   FACILITIES
                   ELEMENT
                   E l    C e n t r o        G e n e r a l     P l a n
INTRODUCTION
  The Public Facilities Element addresses the community need for public services and
  utilities. The majority of the City of El Centro is developed and sufficiently served by
  existing public services and utilities. Future development of remaining vacant land
  within the Planning Area will require expansion of public services and utilities to meet
  the increase in demand for service. Planning for this future increase in demand will
  ensure that the needs of future residents for public services and infrastructure are
  met, while avoiding adverse impacts to existing community.
Purpose of the Public Facilities Element
  The purpose of the Public Facilities Element is to ensure that sufficient levels of public
  services are provided as El Centro develops. Working in conjunction with the Land
  Use Element, the Public Facilities Element plans for the necessary expansion of public
  services and infrastructure to coincide with new development. To ensure a sufficient
  level of public services, the City will work with service providing agencies to ensure
  that service to existing residents does not diminish with any future development and
  the resulting increase in population.
Scope and Content of the Public Facilities Element
  The Public Facilities Element is not a State-mandated element; however, included in
  this element are topics mandated by the State to be included in the General Plan.
  The issues addressed within the Public Facilities Element closely relate to the Land
  Use Element. The Element is comprised of three sections: (1) Introduction, (2) Issues,
  Goals and Policies, and (3) the Public Facilities Plan. In the Issues, Goals and Policies
  section, major issues related to the provision of public services and utilities are
  identified and related goals and policies are established to address these issues.
  The goals, which are overall statements of the community’s desires, are comprised
                                            PF-1

                                           Public Facilities Element
   of broad statements of purpose and direction. The policies serve as guides for
   working with local and regional agencies for planning infrastructure and facility
   improvements to provide sufficient levels of service. The Plan explains how the goals
   and policies will be achieved and implemented, while the General Plan
   Implementation Program, contained in Appendix A, identifies specific
   implementation programs for this Element.
Related Plans and Programs
   A number of existing plans and programs exist that directly relate to the goals of the
   Public Facilities Element. Enacted through State and local action, these plans and
   programs are administered by agencies with responsibility for their enforcement.
Quimby Act
   Section 66477 of the Government Code provides local jurisdictions with the authority
   to acquire park land in association with new land divisions. Commonly referred to
   as the Quimby Act, this provision of State law allows a city, by ordinance, to require
   the dedication of land, payment of an in-lieu fee, or a combination of both, for park
   and recreational purposes as a condition on approving a subdivision map. El
   Centro has adopted such an ordinance to require the dedication of land and/or
   the payment of in-lieu fees for the purpose of providing park and recreational
   facilities.
Southern California Association of Governments Plans and Programs (SCAG)
   The Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) is responsible for
   regional planning in Southern California. SCAG has prepared long range growth
   and development plans for the Southern California region since the early 1970’s as
   part of the ongoing Development Guide Program. This program provides a
   framework for coordinating local and regional decisions regarding future
   development and growth.         An important component of this process is the
   preparation of growth forecast policies at intervals ranging from three to five years.
   The adopted growth forecast policies become the basis for SCAG’s functional plans
   (transportation, housing, air and water) for the region. The population totals and
   growth distribution are used in planning the future capacity of highways and transit
   systems.
Imperial Irrigation District Water Conservation/Transfer Programs
   In 1988, a Water Conservation Agreement was forged between the IID and the
   Metropolitan Water District of Southern California (MWD). The agreement provides
   for the implementation of water conservation projects, which are funded by the
   MWD. In return, MWD is eligible to divert additional water that is equivalent to the
   amount of water conserved. The water conservation projects implemented through
                                         PF-2

                                             Public Facilities Element
    the agreement primarily focus on increasing the efficiency of the IID’s water
    conveyance system and conserving water in agricultural operations.
    More recently, the Imperial Irrigation District (IID) has approved an agreement with
    the San Diego County Water Authority (SDCWA) for the transfer of conserved water
    from the Imperial Valley to the San Diego region. Once approved by the other
    affected agencies, IID and its agricultural customers would conserve water and sell
    it to the SDCWA for at least 45 years. In addition, the SDCWA would pay the costs of
    conserving water incurred to Imperial Valley farmers plus an incentive to encourage
    participation. The water transfer could benefit California as a whole and stimulate
    the Imperial Valley economy.
Water Element of the Imperial County General Plan
    The purpose of the Water Element of the County General Plan is to identify the types
    of water resources within Imperial County and to establish goals and policies to
    preserve and enhance water availability and quality. Implementation of the
    policies of the Water Element will assure that water resources are conserved and
    utilized to enhance long-term availability, while providing for current supplies and
    demands. In addition, the Water Element facilitates the improved use and
    distribution of water in Imperial County, including the extension of current water
    conservation programs.
Water and Sewer Master Plans
    The Water and Sewer Master Plans are used to evaluate a development project’s
    water and sewer needs and the impact of those needs on the City’s water and
    sewer systems. The City of El Centro last updated its Water and Sewer Master Plans
    in 1994 which identified capital improvements necessary to meet the City’s water
    and sewer system service requirements of existing and future development.
El Centro Parks and Recreation Facilities Master Plan
    In 2008, the City adopted a Parks and Recreation Facilities Master Plan to further
    develop the projects, programs and investments necessary to implement General
    Plan goals. The Parks and Recreation Facilities Master Plan focuses primarily on parks
    and recreation facilities and joint use with the schools. The Parks and Recreation
    Facilities Master Plan recommended increasing the park acreage per 1,000 people
    in El Centro and provides specific recommendations around the Civic Center and
    other Cultural Facilities.
School District Master Plans
    Three different school districts serve El Centro: (1) El Centro Elementary School
    District; (2) Central Union High School District; and outside the City limits, (3) McCabe
    Union Elementary School District. El Centro Elementary School District is experiencing
                                           PF-3

                                           Public Facilities Element
   declining enrollment and currently has no Master Planning document, however
   the District has identified the need for several improvements to existing facilities.
   The Central Union High School District developed a Needs Assessment and Master
   Plan in 1997. Recently, the District commissioned a Yield Study that has identified
   the need for a new high school in El Centro and will serve as the basis of an
   application for a School Facility Program New Construction Grant made possible
   by SB 50. Additionally, the McCabe Elementary School District is in the process of
   creating a Master Plan which identifies efforts made by the District to acquire
   funds for additions to McCabe Elementary and identify sites for a proposed new
   school.
Joint Use Agreements with the School District
   The City and the School District have entered into Joint Use Agreements to allow
   for mutually beneficial use of playgrounds, sports fields and other amenities that
   serve the El Centro Community. These agreements to share facilities maximize the
   value of the public facilities that serve El Centro.
Relationship to Other General Plan Elements
   In accordance with State planning law, the Public Facilities Element is consistent
   with the other General Plan elements.              While all of the elements are
   interdependent, they are also interrelated to a degree. Certain goals and
   policies of each element may also address issues that are primary subjects of
   other elements. This integration of issues throughout the General Plan creates a
   strong basis for the implementation of plans and programs and achievement of
   community goals.
   The Public Facilities Element is most directly related to the Land Use, Safety, and
   Circulation Elements of the General Plan.
   Land use policies contained in the Land Use Element determine the pattern and
   intensity of future population growth and this in turn determines the type, size and
   location of certain public facilities. The Safety Element contains policies related
   to the location of public facilities that provide services such as police and fire to
   ensure the safety of El Centro residents. Additionally, the Element relates to the
   Safety Element in that is directs location and development of public facilities such
   as schools, libraries, and civic centers away from natural hazards such as
   floodplains and seismic faults. Transportation policies contained in the Circulation
   Element direct development in a way that provides efficient access to public
   facilities throughout El Centro.
                                           PF-4
                                                 Public Facilities Element
                    ISSUES, GOALS, AND POLICIES
                    Public facilities are necessary to support urban development. The
                    following nine issues are addressed by the goals and policies of the
                    Public Safety Element: availability of and access to adequate (1)
                    parks and recreation; (2) educational facilities; (3) library facilities; (4)
                    police facilities; (5) fire stations; (6) civic centers; (7) cultural facilities;
  (8) sewer system; and (9) water system. Each issue and the related goals, policies
  and implementation actions are identified and discussed in the following section.
Parks and Recreation
  Parks and recreational facilities serve a valuable purpose in the City of El Centro as
  they enhance quality of life and define community character. Maintenance of City
  parks is vital to the health and safety of El Centro residents. The City of El Centro’s
  park and recreation system exists within the context of the City’s overall
  development pattern. As the City grows, the inventory of park lands will have to be
  increased significantly.
  Public Facilities Goal 1: Provide for adequate year round recreational activities and
  facilities that serve all segments of the community.
  Policy 1.1: Provide accessible parks and recreational facilities within a ½ mile
  walking distance of all residential areas in El Centro as illustrated in the Parks and
  Recreation Facilities Master Plan.
  Policy 1.2: Require new development to provide for recreational facilities to the
  extent allowed by law.
  Policy 1.3: Plan for the appropriate expansion of existing parks and recreational
  facilities to meet Statewide and City parks standards.
  Policy 1.4: Provide an attractive low water-use design solution which addresses dust
  mitigation in retention basins.
  Policy 1.5: Develop cultural and recreational facilities oriented toward the special
  needs of the various ethnic and age groups within the City.
  Policy 1.6:     Continue to maintain parks and recreational facilities in an efficient
  manner.
                                               PF-5

                                             Public Facilities Element
   Educational Facilities
   El Centro residents are primarily served by the El Centro Elementary School District
   and Central Union High School District. Additionally, a small portion of the Planning
   Area is served by the McCabe Union Elementary School District. Future school
   enrollment will be affected by current and future birth rates and the extent of
   migration (both in and out) of families with school aged children. While the El
   Centro Elementary School District is experiencing declining enrollment and does not
   anticipate the need to site a new elementary school facility, current facilities are in
   need of rehabilitation. The Central Union High School District includes two high
   schools in El Centro and the District has identified the need for a new high school in
   the City.
   Public Facilities Goal 2: Support the local school districts by working with them to
   determine the most appropriate location and distribution for school facilities to serve
   the educational needs of the community.
   Policy 2.1: Work with the local school districts in investigating potential locations
   and funding sources for new schools.
   Policy 2.2: Encourage the joint use of school facilities to provide a range of
   recreational and educational opportunities for all segments of the community.
   Public Facilities Goal 3: Improve and increase Joint Use Agreements with the local
   school districts.
   Policy 3.1: Work with the local school districts to analyze existing joint-use
   agreements, plan and implement mutually beneficial use agreements.
Library Facilities
    The City of El Centro has a main library located on State Street, and a branch
    library located in the Community Center on South First Street. The main library was
    constructed in 1910 and is in need of rehabilitation. Increased population implies
    increased use; therefore the City’s library facilities will need to be rehabilitated and
    expanded. As El Centro grows in population and size, the City will need to identify
    locations for future branch libraries to serve the needs of the community.
    Public Facilities Goal 4: Ensure adequate, well located library facilities that are
    equipped with books, reference materials, and educational devices to serve all El
    Centro residents.
    Policy 4.1: Identify appropriate locations for future branch libraries, evaluating
    accessibility and location near to major activity centers, such as retail areas.
                                           PF-6

                                           Public Facilities Element
    Policy 4.2: Identify additional funding sources to allow for the expansion of the
    City’s library system and services.
Police Facilities
   The El Centro Police Department provides law enforcement services to the City. This
   service is essential to the safety of the population of El Centro. The primary
   determinant for police manpower is growth in the residential population; however
   the City’s large seasonal migrant worker and visitor populations complicate the
   matter. The Police Department prides itself on being a community-based, service-
   oriented, law enforcement agency that reflects and reinforces the values of the
   community.
   Public Facilities Goal 5: Ensure the highest standards of law enforcement by
   providing the Police Department with personnel, equipment, and facilities that assist
   them in protecting the health, safety, and general welfare of the community.
   Policy 5.1: Periodically evaluate the level of law enforcement service provided to
   identify any necessary improvements or changes, as well as additional funding
   sources.
   Policy 5.2: Utilize service areas when planning and designing new and expanded
   police facilities.
Fire Stations
   Fire protection services are an essential function of local government. As El Centro
   expands, planning for new fire stations needs to be compatible with the City’s
   growth plan. Included in planning for the expansion of fire services are fire stations,
   equipment, and essential and supportive personnel.
   Public Facilities Goal 6: Ensure adequate standards of fire protection are met by
   providing the Fire Department with personnel, equipment, and facilities that assist
   them in protecting the health, safety, and general welfare of the community.
   Policy 6.1: Establish and maintain the optimum fire insurance rating for the
   community.
   Policy 6.2: Periodically evaluate the level of fire protection service provided to
   identify any necessary improvements or changes, as well as additional funding
   sources.
                                         PF-7

                                             Public Facilities Element
   Policy 6.3: Utilize service areas when planning and designing new and expanded
   fire protection facilities.
Civic Center
   City Hall, the Police Station, County Government Complex, County Courthouse, and
   the Imperial Irrigation District Headquarters comprise a central civic complex in the
   City of El Centro. Grouping of governmental agencies in a civic center facilitates
   efficient service to the public.
   Public Facilities Goal 7: Provide for and maintain a variety of buildings in the Civic
   Center to satisfy the requirements of the many diverse governmental agencies
   within the City and allow the agencies to adequately serve the public.
   Policy 7.1: Develop and adopt a precise plan to direct future development and
   improvements within the Civic Center area.
Cultural Facilities
   It is important that available cultural facilities continue to reflect El Centro’s diverse
   community. By encouraging a range of facilities to be provided in El Centro, the
   quality of life for residents is improved since they will have a wider range of
   recreational opportunities within the community.
   Public Facilities Goal 8: Provide for a range of cultural facilities that serve the
   community’s diverse cultural groups and activities.
   Policy 8.1: Coordinate with residents and community groups to identify needed
   facilities and improvements to existing facilities and explore funding sources to meet
   these needs.
   Policy 8.2: Identify a site for a Cultural Arts Center, ideally located close to or within
   the downtown commercial area due to its central location and revitalization
   benefit.
Sewer System
   The City of El Centro presently has full sewage treatment capabilities. New facilities
   will need to be planned, however, as future growth causes existing facilities to reach
   capacity. Additional collection infrastructure will also need to be extended to serve
   areas as they develop.
   Public Facilities Goal 9: Provide for a sewer system that continues to serve existing
   development as well as future City growth.
                                           PF-8

                                          Public Facilities Element
  Policy 9.1: Plan and design new sewer facilities to provide adequate capacity to
  serve new growth, while continuing to provide a high level of service to existing
  development.
  Policy 9.2: Allow new development to occur outside the existing service area only if
  new sewer services will be provided by the developer or City.
  Policy 9.3: Continue to monitor the existing sewer system to identify any needed
  improvements to ensure adequate levels of service.
  Policy 9.4: Ensure that waste water treated at the El Centro treatment center fulfills
  the minimum secondary treatment standards.
Water System
  A well maintained water system is a prerequisite for future development to occur.
  The system will need to be expanded to increase the available water supply and
  distribution system to meet the needs of the future population.
  Public Facilities Goal 10: Provide for a well maintained water system that continues
  to serve existing development as well as provides for future City growth.
  Policy 10.1: Plan and design new water facilities to provide adequate capacity to
  serve new growth, while continuing to provide a high level of service to existing
  development.
  Policy 10.2: Continue to correct low water pressure in older portions of the City and
  use “looping” of water lines to maintain pressure and adequate water delivery
  when expanding or upgrading the water delivery system.
Related Goals and Policies
  The goals and policies described in the Public Facilities Element are related to and
  support subjects included within other General Plan elements. In turn, many goals
  and policies from other elements directly or indirectly support the goals and policies
  of the Public Facilities Element. These supporting goals and policies are identified in
  Table PF-1.
                                         PF-9

                                                       Public Facilities Element
                                                 Table PF-1
                                  Related Goals and Policies by Element
General Plan                                        Public Facilities Issue Area
Elements        Parks and    Educational    Library      Police          Fire     Civic    Cultural  Sewer     Water
               Recreation      Facilities  Facilities Facilities      Stations Center     Facilities System   System
              1.12, 1.13,    1.12, 1.13,   1.12,       1.12,         1.12,       1.12,    1.12,      1.12,    1.12,
              1.14,2.2, 2.3  2.2, 2.3      1.13,       1.13, 2.2, 1.13, 2.2, 1.13,        1.13,      1.13,    1.13,
Land Use
                                           2.2, 2.3    2.3           2.3         1.14,    1.14, 2.2, 2.2, 2.3 2.2, 2.3
                                                                                 2.2, 2.3 2.3
                                                                                                     1.1, 1.3 1.1, 1.3
Economic
Development
Housing
              3.1, 3.2       2.3, 3.1, 3.2 2.3, 3.1,   3.2           3.2         2.3,     2.3, 3.1,
Circulation                                3.2                                   3.1, 3.2 3.2
Public
Facilities
              2.5, 3.1, 3.3,                                                                         2.4, 3.3 2.2, 2.3,
Conservation/
              4.1, 4.2                                                                                        2.4, 2.5,
Open Space
                                                                                                              3.3
                             1.3, 1.4      1.3, 1.4    1.3, 1.4,     1.3, 1.4,   1.3, 1.4            1.3,1.4  1.3, 1.4,
                                                       4.1, 4.2,     3.1, 3.2,                       2.2, 2.3 2.5, 2.7
Safety                                                 6.1, 6.2      3.3, 3.4,                       2.4, 2.5
                                                                     6.1, 6.2                        2.6, 2.7
Noise
                                                     PF-10
                                              Public Facilities Element
                      PUBLIC FACILITIES PLAN
                      The provision of sufficient public facilities to its residents is a primary
                      function of a City. The City of El Centro currently provides basic
  services and facilities, contracts with appropriate agencies to serve the City, or is
  served by special districts. Community services and facilities provided to the
  community include: parks and recreation, educational facilities, library facilities,
  police facilities, fire stations, civic center, cultural facilities, sewer system, and water
  system. Figure PF-1 shows the location of public facilities within El Centro.
Parks and Recreation
  The City of El Centro Community Services provides a wide range of recreational
  activities and facilities for the City residents. There are currently 13 parks and several
  retention basins within the community. Table PF-2 depicts the acreage, location,
  and amenities of the existing parks. Table PF-3 depicts the school district facilities
  subject to Joint Use Agreements with the City. Table PF-4 depicts the size, location,
  and amenities associated with other public facilities.
  The parks are utilized for structured and unstructured activities and special events
  such as: Children’s Fair at Buckling Park, POA Circus at Big Stark, and Cesar Chavez
  Festivities at Stark Field. Other recreational facilities include a Community Center
  located at 375 South First Street, Conrad Harrison Youth Center at 750 Park Avenue,
  and City Plunge at 401 N. Eighth Street. The Community Center offers a variety of
  summer recreation programs, senior programs, day camps, and many specialized
  classes including dance, art, and crafts. Conrad Harrison Youth Center offers sports
  programs for the youth as well as for the adults. City Plunge Aquatics Program offers
  public swim hours, swim lessons, lifeguarding, and other classes.
  The City’s goal is to provide for adequate year round recreational activities and
  facilities that serve all segments of the community, including the various ethnic and
  age groups within the community. Accessible parks and recreational facilities
  should be located within a ½-mile distance of all residential areas in El Centro. While
  retention basins may not be substituted for useable parks to meet the Quimby Act
  requirements, retention basins my be utilized to a limited extent for recreational uses;
  The City will work with developers to ensure developed and usable recreational
  facilities are provided as allowed under the Quimby Act. Additionally, new
  developments are required to provide for recreational facilities to the extent
  allowed by law. The City will plan the expansion of existing parks and recreational
  facilities to meet statewide parks standards.
                                            PF-11

                                              Public Facilities Element
                                         Table PF-2
                          El Centro Public Parks Summary
          Park      Acres               Location                              Amenities
Adams Park           7.00    4th and 8th Streets          Open space, restrooms, shelter/picnic areas,
                                                          children’s playground, gymnasium,
                                                          swimming pool, ramada, and roller hockey
                                                          area.
Bucklin Park        20.00    8th and Aurora/Ross          Open space, restrooms, shelter/picnic areas,
                                                          children’s playground, lake, pavilion area,
                                                          horseshoe pit, and walking path.
Buena Vista            -     8th Street and Manuel Ortiz  Open space/non-structured (7.96 acres not
(retention basin)                                         included in total developed park acreage).
Carlos Aguilar Park  4.75    W. Pico Ave and Imperial     Open space, restrooms, shelter/picnic area,
                             Avenue                       children’s playground, soccer fields, and
                                                          basketball courts. Lighted facility.
Countryside North    2.00    Countryside North            Open space / non-structured. 5.90 acres of
Park                         Subdivision                  retention basin not included in total
                                                          developed park acreage.
Debbie Pittman Park  4.73    La Brucherie and Orange      Girls youth softball fields, BBQ areas,
                             Avenue                       restrooms and off street parking. Lighted
                                                          facility.
Farmers Park         1.29    18th Street and Whitney      Shaded picnic area and picnic area.
Frazier Field        5.41    North 6th Street             Little league baseball fields and restrooms.
                                                          Lighted facility.
Gomez Park           5.09    South Hope Street            Open space, 2 ramadas with BBQ and
                                                          restrooms. Lighted facility.
Legacy Ranch         1.50    New park in Countryside      Play structure, shade structure and walking
Memorial Plaza               North Subdivision            path.
Leeper Park            -     250 S. Lotus Ave.            Open space/non-structured (3.71 acres not
(retention basin)                                         included in total developed park acreage).
Lotus Park             -     650 S. Lotus Ave.            Open space/non-structured (3.85 acres not
(retention basin)                                         included in total developed park acreage).
                                                          Used for motor cross.
McGee Park           5.31    Brighton and Fairfield Drive Community Center, children’s playground,
                                                          soccer field, shelter/picnic area, and
                                                          basketball courts. Lighted facility.
Stark Field         11.44    4th and Lenrey Avenue        Baseball complex (bleachers, lights),
                                                          practice fields, restrooms, shelter/picnic
                                                          areas, and children’s playground.
Swarthout Field     15.49    4th and Euclid Avenue        Adult softball fields, soccer fields, basketball
                                                          courts, restrooms, shelter/picnic areas,
                                                          children’s playground, and volleyball area.
Town Square          0.50    Main Street                  Stage, Marquee, Water Feature and lawn.
Wildflower Park        -     950 S. Lotus Ave.            Open space/non-structured (3.96 acres not
(retention basin)                                         included in developed park acreage). Used
                                                          for soccer.
Subtotal            84.51
                                           PF-12

                                                        Public Facilities Element
                                Table PF-3 School District Joint Use Facilities
       School           Acres Not        Acres Included in              Location                Amenities
                        Available      Joint Use Calculations
Central Union High                              17.50             1001 Brighton Ave.  Pool access, gym baseball,
       School                                                                         football, softball, soccer
                                                                                      fields, basketball, volleyball,
                                                                                      tennis courts, and track
                                                                                      field.
 De Anza Magnet                                 14.73             1530 S. Waterman    Baseball field, joint use
       School                                                                         during baseball season
   Desert Garden                                13.32             1900 6th Street     Track, two backstops
Elementary School
  Harding School                                 8.13             950 S. 7th Street   Baseball, soccer fields, two
                                                                                      backstops
Hedrick Elementary                              10.93             550 S. Waterman     Play structure, softball field,
       School                                                                         two backstops
      Kennedy                                   16.65             900 N. 6th Street   Gym, basketball court,
Elementary-Middle                                                                     back fields are available for
       School                                                                         City use
  King Elementary          12.20                                  1950 Villa Avenue   No recent joint use at this
       School                                                                         location
   Lincoln School                                7.67             200 N. 12th Street  Baseball field, play structure,
                                                                                      two backstops
  McKinley School                               10.38             1177 N. 8th Street  Two backstops, two soccer
                                                                                      goals
  Southwest High                                16.50             2001 Ocotillo Drive Baseball, football and
       School                                                                         soccer fields, basketball,
                                                                                      volleyball and tennis courts,
                                                                                      lighted facilities, all weather
                                                                                      track.
      Sunflower             4.15                                  2450 Main Street    Lighted facility , play
Elementary School                                                                     structure
   Sunflower Park                               16.65             Lotus and Evan      Owned by ECUSD with joint
                                                                  Hewes Highway       use agreement, drinking
                                                                                      fountain, dirt parking area,
                                                                                      lighted facility, two
                                                                                      backstops, two soccer fields
                                                                                      and a play structure.
     Washington                                  9.37             223 East 1st Street
Elementary School
 Wilson Junior High                             14.40             600 S. Wilson Ave.  Gym and basketball courts
       School
   Total Joint Use                             156.23
      Acreage
 Subtotal for City’s                            39.06
    Calculations
    (25% of total)
   Source: The City of El Centro Parks and Recreation Facilities Master Plan 2008
                                                      PF-13

                                                                    Public Facilities Element
                                                  Table PF-4 Public Facilities
        Facility             Building          Site             Location                           Amenities
                             Square         Acreage
                            Footage
Conrad Harrison               26,000           1.48          750 Park Avenue     Gymnasium with one full
Youth Center                 (approx)                                            basketball/volleyball court, small
                                                                                 conference facility, summer camps, open
                                                                                 gym, Special Olympics, outdoor restrooms
El Centro Community            8,450           2.50         375 S. First Street  Main office for Parks & Recreation
Center                       (approx)                                            Department, play structure, community
                                                                                 building with full-size kitchen, restrooms,
                                                                                 senior lunches, migrant head start, day
                                                                                 camps, after school programs
El Centro Library             13,660           1.00          539 W. State St.    Library, offices, restrooms
                             (approx)
336 First Street               1,400           0.15         336 S. First Street  Summer Arts Program , classrooms, full-
                             (approx)                                            size kitchen, restrooms, storage, parking
                                                                                 lot
Old Post Office               10,000           0.02         230 S. Fifth Street  Building of historic significance, theatre,
Pavillion                    (approx)                                            lobby, classrooms and restrooms
Plunge Swimming                                1.03          750 Park Avenue     25 meter pool, ramada, restrooms, BBQ
Pool                                                                             facility with shade structure
Posada del Sol                                                                   Private facility. Pool used for recreation
Apartment Complex                                                                activities
Ryerson Center                 6,000           2.00         1100 North 4th St.   Banquet facility, gym, Quinceanera, youth
                                                                                 athletic league programs
Additional City owned                          8.18
acreage for recreation
  Source: The City of El Centro, Parks and Recreation Facilities Master Plan 2008
  Public Facilities include 6 acres of developed park land.
                                                             PF-14
                    Public Facilities Element
Figure PF-1
Public Facilities
                  PF-15
                                                      Public Facilities Element
Parkland Standard and Future Park Needs (based upon build-out to full capacity)
     To ensure sufficient parks and recreational opportunities to meet the community’s
     needs, the City’s goal is to provide five acres of developed public parkland per 1,000
     residents. This standard is useful in determining existing parkland deficiencies and
     predicting the demand from future population growth.
     Using the adopted park standard, future demand for parkland facilities at buildout has
     been estimated as part of this General Plan update. Table PF-5 summarizes the
     parkland requirements for the existing population and the anticipated population from
     development of planned land uses as established by the Land Use Policy Map, based
     on the parkland standard of five acres of parkland per 1,000 residents. The City
     currently exceeds three acres per 1,000 resident but an additional 80 acres of park
     land should be developed to meet the 5 acre per 1,000 resident standard.
     Additionally, some of the existing facilities require improvement and maintenance to
     provide adequate and safe facilities for the population.
     As indicated in Table PF-5, the City will need to provide an additional 500 acres of
     parkland to meet the needs of the population at buildout. New development shall be
     conditioned to provide all the land and improvements required to achieve the
     parkland standard of five acres of developed parkland per 1,000 residents generated
     by the proposed project in order to meet park acreage needs (See Table PF-5).
                                                Table PF-5
         Existing and Future Park Acreage Needs (based upon buildout to full capacity)
                      Population       Park Acreage       Park Acreage          Available         Additional
                                          Required           Required         Acreage from         Parkland
                                       ( 3-acs/1,000)     ( 5-acs/1,000)         Existing       Required for
                                                                                Parkland         5-ac/1,000
                                                                                                  Standard
                                                                                                  (Surplus)
Existing            43,316 (a)        129.95             216.58              131.75            84.83
Future              134,238 (b)       402.70             671.20              131.75            539.54
Notes:
a Existing population based on Parks and Recreation Facilities Master Plan, page 33 (Golden Associates 2008).
b Based on future land use plan and 3.23 persons per household.
                                                  PF-16

                                            Public Facilities Element
Trails Network
   The City is continuing to promote an extensive pedestrian and bicycle trails network
   to link major activity centers, parks and recreational facilities, and transit nodes
   within the City (Figure C-3 in the Circulation Element). This network encourages the
   use of bicycles and walking for commute, recreational, and other trips. The City
   seeks to maintain and improve the biking and walking environment by providing
   safe and attractive sidewalks, walkways, and bike lanes and paths for both
   recreational and commuting purposes. The pedestrian and bicycle classification
   system and requirements are discussed in more detail in the Circulation Element.
Educational Facilities
   Three school districts serve the community of El Centro: the El Centro Elementary
   School District and the Central Union High School District serve school age residents
   living within City limits. McCabe Union Elementary School District provides K-8
   education to students residing outside the City limits, but within the Planning Area.
   The El Centro Elementary School District serves approximately 6,350 students in nine
   elementary schools, one middle school and one junior high school. The Central
   Union High School District comprises three high schools, including one alternative
   education school (Desert Oasis Continuation School), El Centro High School, and
   Southwest High School. The Central Union High School District serves approximately
   3,600 students.
   El Centro Elementary School District is experiencing declining enrollment and
   currently has no Master Planning document, however the District has identified the
   need for several improvements to existing facilities. The Central Union High School
   District developed a Needs Assessment and Master Plan in 1997. Recently, the
   District commissioned a Yield Study that has identified the need for a new high
   school in El Centro and will serve as the basis of an application for a School Facility
   Program New Construction Grant made possible by SB 50. Additionally, the
   McCabe Elementary School District is in the process of creating a Master Plan which
   identifies efforts made by the District to acquire funds for additions to McCabe
   Elementary and identify sites for a proposed new school.
   New residential development in the City will create additional demand for schools.
   To meet this demand, additional school facilities will be required. Future school
   enrollments will also be affected by current and future birth rates and the extent of
   migration of families with school aged children. The City continues to work with the
   El Centro Elementary School District, the Central Union High School District, and the
   McCabe Union Elementary School District to determine the most appropriate
   locations and funding sources for new school facilities and will coordinate with them
   in updating relevant Master Plans. Additionally, the City encourages the joint use of
   school facilities to provide a range of recreational and educational opportunities for
   all segments of the community.
                                          PF-17
                                            Public Facilities Element
Library Facilities
   Public libraries serve several community purposes including, education, recreation,
   and dissemination of public information. The City of El Centro is served by two
   public libraries. The main El Centro Public Library is located at 539 State Street and
   the Community Center Branch Library is located at 375 South First Street. The main
   library has more than 14,000 square feet of space and owns more than 111,000
   books, magazines, and audiovisual materials. Additionally, the library owns a total
   of 11 public access computers to connect to the internet or for general word-
   processing functions.
   The City will continue to work through the Library Administrative Board to ensure the
   public participates in the identification of service deficiencies and funding sources
   for library system and service expansion. As development occurs, the City will
   ensure that adequate library facilities are provided and equipped with books,
   reference materials, and educational devices to serve all El Centro residents.
Police Facilities
   Sufficient law enforcement is necessary to ensure the public health and safety. The
   City provides its own law enforcement. The El Centro Police Department was
   formed in 1908. The department is located at 150 North 11th Street and is made up
   of 47 officers, including: Chief of Police, one Captain, three Lieutenants, six
   Sergeants, and 36 Police Officers. The department also has an active Reserve
   Officer program, a Police Auxiliary Team (PAX) program, and an Explorer program.
   Currently there are 23 civilian employees assigned to Records, Communication,
   Evidence, Animal Control, Crime Prevention, Community Service Officer, Crime
   Analysis Unit, Computer Information Services, and Parking Enforcement.
   In August 1996, the El Centro Police Department expanded and started using space
   provided by the El Centro Community Center, at 375 South First Street. Due to the
   expansion, the department now has a Community Oriented Police Office, Crime
   Prevention Specialist, Training Office, and Volunteer Services office located at the
   Community Center sub station.
   In addition to the Community Center sub station, the department has a sub station
   at Posada del Sol, 1400 North Imperial Avenue. The station is primarily used for
   report writing. The department’s active police Athletic League is located at 1100
   North 4th Street. In addition to the auxiliary sites, the department has two School
   Resource Officers. One officer is permanently assigned to the high schools (Central
   and Southwest) and the second officer is assigned to the junior high schools.
   In 1999, the department re-constituted their Traffic Unit, which consists of one
   Sergeant, one Motor Officer, and a Community Service Officer. The Community
   Service Officer is also in charge of the PAX Team. Additionally, an Active
   Emergency Response Team and a Special Enforcement Unit has been assigned for
   gangs.
                                          PF-18

                                              Public Facilities Element
   The Police Department’s goal is to have 1.75 police officers per 1,000 population.
   Response to calls for service is prioritized based on urgency and need. Average
   response time for routine calls is currently 5 to 10 minutes, while for emergency calls
   the response time is about three to five minutes. An average of 4,070 calls is made
   per month to the City of El Centro Police Department, as of July 2001.
   For law enforcement, ensuring public safety requires maintaining adequate staffing,
   equipment, and facilities.       The City periodically evaluates the level of law
   enforcement service provided in order to identify any necessary improvements or
   changes, as well as additional funding sources. The City will continue to ensure the
   highest standards of law enforcement by providing the Police Department with
   personnel, equipment, and facilities that assist them in protecting the health, safety,
   and general welfare of the community.
Fire Stations
   As with law enforcement, fire protection is necessary to ensure the public health
   and safety. The City of El Centro Fire Department provides service within the City
   limits, as well as some unincorporated areas adjacent to the City limits. The El Centro
   Fire Department was established in May 1908, as a Volunteer Fire Department. The
   volunteer program ended in the early seventies and El Centro became a full service
   department. The City currently operates two fire stations: Fire Station No.1, located
   at 775 State Street and Fire Station No.2, located at 900 Dogwood. The Department
   consists of 33 safety members and three administrative assistants. The Department is
   led by a Chief and four Battalion Chiefs.
   The Fire Department provides a full range of services, including: 1) fire prevention, 2)
   company inspections, 3) plan review, 4) nuisance abatement, 5) public education,
   6) school inspections, 7) public relations, 8) flammable liquid storage tank program,
   9) fire investigations, 10) juvenile firesetter program, 11) fire suppression operations,
   12) emergency medical services (paramedic level), 13) hazardous materials, 14)
   technical rescue, 15) public assistance, 16) disaster preparedness, 17) bomb unit, 18)
   information management citywide, 19) 9-1-1 data base, and 20) CPR and first aid
   training.
   The Department currently responds to an average of 10.5 emergency calls per 24-
   hour shift. The standard response time is approximately 7 to 10 minutes for
   emergencies and 10 to 15 minutes for non emergencies.
   The provision of adequate fire protection staffing, equipment and facilities is
   necessary to ensure the public’s safety. As growth continues, the City will need to
   construct two new fire stations: one along the eastern side of La Brucherie Road,
   south of Wake Avenue; and one at Cruickshank Drive, east of Imperial Avenue and
   west of 8th Street. The City will periodically evaluate the level of fire protection
   service provided to identify any necessary improvements or changes, as well as
   additional funding sources.
                                            PF-19

                                             Public Facilities Element
Civic Center
   The City’s Civic Center, centered on and around Main Street, has a City Hall, County
   Government Complex, County Court House, Imperial Irrigation District Headquarters,
   and a Police Station. This area’s structures constitute an important feature of the
   City’s basic structure. There is an intimate relationship between the public buildings,
   schools, commercial, and residential blocks in this area. In order to maintain a high
   level of visual quality of the Civic Center area, the City plans to develop and adopt
   a precise plan to plan for new structures and improvements within the area. The
   City’s goal is to provide for and maintain a variety of buildings in the Civic Center to
   satisfy the requirements of the many diverse governmental agencies within the City
   and allow the agencies to adequately serve the public.
Cultural Facilities
   Presently the City supports an archaeological museum, a Community Center, a
   variety of informal theatre and recreation groups, and a number of community
   groups. A state of the art Southwest High School auditorium provides the facility for
   theatrical plays, master choral performances, and concerts.
   In order to provide for a range of cultural facilities that serve the community’s
   diverse cultural groups and activities, the City plans to coordinate with residents and
   community groups to identify needed facilities and improvements to existing
   facilities and explore funding sources to meet these needs.
Sewer System
   The City of El Centro provides wastewater collection, treatment, and disposal
   services within the City limits and to some unincorporated areas of Imperial County.
   The City owns and operates a wastewater treatment plant with a capacity of eight
   million gallons per day (mgd) that provides secondary level treatment of
   wastewater generated within the service area. Treated water is discharged to the
   Alamo River. The City also owns and operates a wastewater collection and
   transmission system comprising collector sewers, trunk sewers, lift stations, and force
   mains. The City will continue to ensure that waste water treated at the El Centro
   treatment center fulfills the minimum secondary treatment standards.
   The City will continue to monitor the existing sewer system to identify any needed
   improvements to ensure adequate levels of service. Additionally, the City will plan
   and design new sewer facilities to provide adequate capacity to serve new growth,
   while continuing to provide a high level of service to existing development. New
   development is allowed to occur outside the existing sewer service system only if
   new sewer services will be provided by the developer or City. The City will also
   implement and update the 1994 Sewer Master Plan as needed.
                                           PF-20

                                           Public Facilities Element
Water System
  The City of El Centro provides water treatment and distribution services within the
  City limits and to some unincorporated areas of Imperial County. The City owns and
  operates a water treatment plant that provides clarification, filtration, and
  disinfection of water from the Colorado River. Untreated water is delivered to the
  plant via the Imperial Irrigation District (IID) All American Canal and Date Canal.
  Treated water is then pumped from storage tanks to users via a grid of distribution
  pipelines and water mains.
  According to the City’s Water Master Plan Update, completed in 1994, the existing
  raw water storage and treatment facilities have adequate capacity to meet the
  demands of the existing service area as well as several years of future development.
  The Water Master Plan estimated that the treated water storage facilities would
  reach capacity when the City’s population grows to 42,600, while the existing
  distribution system would reach capacity when the population grows to 49,700. The
  Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) projects that the population
  of El Centro will reach 52,362 by the year 2020. Therefore, the water storage and
  piping capacity are adequate to meet the projected population through 2020.
  However, water system improvements identified in the Water Master Plan will be
  needed in order to provide potable water service for all Tier I and Tier II Growth
  Areas.
  The City of El Centro will continue to plan and design new water facilities to provide
  adequate capacity to serve new growth through the Master Planning process, while
  continuing to provide a high level of service to existing development. Additionally,
  the City will continue to correct low water pressure in older portions of the City and
  use ”looping” of water lines to maintain pressure and ensure adequate delivery
  when expanding or upgrading the water delivery system.
                                        PF-21

                     Public Facilities Implementation Program
                  PUBLIC
                  FACILITIES
                  ELEMENT
                  E l   C e n t r o     G e n e r a l    P l a n
  This Implementation Program provides actions to implement the adopted
  policies and plans identified in the Public Facilities Element. The Public
  Facilities Element Implementation Program is a series of actions, procedures
  and techniques that includes a description of the responsible
  agency/department, funding source, time frame and related policies in the
  Public Facilities Element.
Parks and Recreation
  PF-1: Improve Existing Parks: Work through all City Departments to share
  resources and activities to improve existing parks by:
              Providing funds to improve infrastructure of the existing fields in
                accordance with the recommendations of the Parks and
                Recreation Facilities Master Plan;
               Providing funds to upgrade and improve restrooms, concession
                stands, shade structures, drinking fountains, ADA access and
                parking;
               Providing funds in increase staff maintenance levels and security;
               Providing funds to increase recreational programming staff.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Parks and Recreation, Finance
  Funding Source: General Fund, Development Impact Fees
  Time Frame: Ongoing
  Related Policies: 1.6
  PF-2:      Maximize the Value Provided by Future Parks and Recreation
  Facilities: Require new development to provide usable parkland or pay in-
  lieu fees to provide five acres of parkland for every 1,000 residents. Leverage
  future planning efforts to:
                                       A-10

                 Public Facilities Implementation Program
           Purchase additional land adjacent to existing parks to enable
            the expansion of programs;
           Secure 40 to 60 acres (through purchase or agreements with
            developers) to accommodate a Sports Athletic Complex to
            provide tournament quality fields and practice fields;
           Provide additional baseball, softball, soccer and football fields;
           Provide additional play structures and a swimming pool.
Responsible Agency/Department: Parks and Recreation, Planning & Zoning,
Public Works
Funding Source: Project proponents, Development Impact Fees
Time Frame: Ongoing
Related Policies: 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4
PF-3: Create Standards for Parks: Work through the appropriate City
Departments to establish standards for parks and recreation. The standards
should provide the following:
          A comprehensive list of park features and standards taken into
            account the special needs of the desert climate including
            shaded play structures, water fountains at all parks, night lighting
            to maximize use and indoor facilities;
           A standard set of operating schedules;
           A recommended list of materials.
Responsible Agency/Department:           Parks and Recreation, Public Works,
Planning and Zoning
Funding Source: General Fund
Time Frame: Ongoing
Related Policies: 1.3, 1.6
PF-4: Maximize Funding Dollars: Work with developers, the school district,
community organizations and local business owners to maximize the funding
available to the program. Encourage the business community to support
leagues and encourage private entertainment investment. Maximize the use
of volunteers to develop, build and maintain new parks. Seek grants.
Responsible Agency/Department: Parks and Recreation
Funding Source: General Fund
Time Frame: Ongoing
Related Policies: 1.6
                                     A-11

                     Public Facilities Implementation Program
  PF-5:     Undertake Regular Updates to the Parks and Recreation Facilities
  Master Plan:      Review the effectiveness of programs and safety and
  appropriateness of existing parks by undertaking regular review of the Parks
  and Recreation Facilities Master Plan. Evaluate the quality of the parks and
  confirm that community needs are being met.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Parks and Recreation
  Funding Source: General Fund
  Time Frame: Every five years
  Related Policies: 1.1, 1.3, 1.6
  PF-6: Keep Program Estimates and Development Impact Fees Current:
  Assure adequate funding for the program by updating cost estimates at
  each phase of the project design and by updating the Development Impact
  Fees to reflect current cost estimates.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Parks and Recreation, Public Works,
  Finance
  Funding Source: General Fund, Development Impact Fees
  Time Frame: Ongoing
  Related Policies: 1.2, 1.3
Educational Facilities
  PF-7: Schools to Serve the Community: Review development proposals for
  consistency with school facility requirements, work with the district to collect
  student impact fees and require the dedication of necessary school sites
  when appropriate.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Public Works, El Centro Elementary School
  District, Central Union High School District, McCabe Union Elementary School
  District
  Funding Source: Project proponent
  Time Frame: Ongoing
  Related Policies: 2.1
  PF-8: School Districts’ Master Plans: Work with the school districts serving El
  Centro in future updates of their Master Plans. Provide information about
  existing and planned land use to the districts. Coordinate with the districts in
  establishing new school facility sites, student generation formulas and facility
  improvement plans.
                                      A-12

                     Public Facilities Implementation Program
   Responsible Agency/Department: Planning and Zoning, El Centro Elementary
   School District, Central Union High School District, McCabe Union Elementary
   School District
   Funding Source: General Fund, state and federal funds
   Time Frame: Ongoing
   Related Policies: 2.1
   PF-9: Joint Use Agreements with Schools: Work with School Districts to
   improve joint-use agreements in order to resolve specific issues including:
               Security;
               Availability of Facilities;
               Shared parking and restrooms that can be accessed from
                outside of the buildings;
               Clear definition of responsibilities in terms of maintenance,
                repairs, scheduling and insurance liability.
   Responsible Agency/Department: Parks and Recreation, Public Works,
   Finance, El Centro Elementary School District, Central Union High School
   District, McCabe Union Elementary School District
   Funding Source: General Fund, State and Federal Funds
   Time Frame: Ongoing
   Related Policies: 3.1
Library Facilities
   PF-10: Library Administrative Board: Continue to work with the El Centro
   Public Library Administrative Board to ensure that community needs for library
   services are being met.
   Responsible Agency/Department: Library, Public Library Administrative Board
   Funding Source: General Fund, development fees, state and federal funds
   Time Frame: Ongoing
   Related Policies: 3.1, 3.2
Police Facilities
   PF-11: Law Enforcement: Review the level of services and funding levels at
   budget time, adjusting when necessary to ensure that adequate levels of
   service are provided and facilities are maintained.
   Responsible Agency/Department: Police Department
   Funding Source: General Fund
   Time Frame: Annual basis at budget time
   Related Policies: 4.1
                                          A-13

                     Public Facilities Implementation Program
Fire Stations
   PF-12: Fire Protection: Review the level of services and funding levels at
   budget time, adjusting when necessary to ensure that adequate levels of
   service are provided and facilities are maintained.
   Responsible Agency/Department: Fire Department
   Funding Source: General Fund
   Time Frame: Annual basis at budget time
   Related Policies: 5.2
Civic Center
   PF-13: Civic Center Precise Plan: Create and implement a Precise Plan for
   the City’s Civic Center that maximizes the efficiency of public agencies.
   Responsible Agency/Department: Planning and Zoning
   Funding Source: General Fund
   Time Frame: 2003-2004
   Related Policies: 6.1
Cultural Facilities
   PF-14: Community Based Organizations: Continue to coordinate with
   community organizations to provide facilities that serve the diverse cultural
   groups and activities in El Centro.
   Responsible Agency/Department: Parks and Recreation
   Funding Source: General Fund
   Time Frame: Ongoing
   Related Policies: 7.1
Sewer System
   PF-15: Sewer Master Plan: Update, as necessary, and implement the Sewer
   Master Plan. As part of the Master Plan update, the City will evaluate the
   need for additional pump station and piping capacity.
   Responsible Agency/Department: Public Works
   Funding Source: General Fund
   Time Frame: Ongoing
   Related Policies: 8.1, 8.3, 8.4
                                       A-14

                    Public Facilities Implementation Program
Water System
  PF-16: Water Master Plan: Update, as necessary, and implement the Water
  Master Plan. As part of the Master Plan update, the City will evaluate the
  need for additional piping capacity.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Public Works
  Funding Source: General Fund
  Time Frame: Ongoing
  Related Policies: 9.1
  PF-17: Water and Sewer Service: Review development proposals and
  require necessary studies, as appropriate, and water conservation and
  mitigation measures to ensure adequate water and sewer service is provided
  and maintained.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Planning and Zoning, Public Works
  Funding Source: General Fund, project proponent, development fees
  Time Frame: Ongoing
  Related Policies: 9.1
  PF-18: Improve Surface Water Quality: Reduce pollutants in urban runoff, by
  requiring new development projects and substantial rehabilitation projects to
  incorporate Best Management Practices pursuant to the National Pollutant
  System Discharge Elimination System Permit (NPDES) to ensure that the City
  complies with applicable State and Federal regulations.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Planning and Zoning, Public Works
  Funding Source: General Fund, state and federal funds, project proponent
  Time Frame: Ongoing
  Related Policies: 2.1
  PF-19: Watershed Management Initiative: Cooperate with regional agencies
  to implement the Watershed Management Initiative.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Planning and Zoning, Public Works,
  Imperial Irrigation District, County of Imperial
  Funding Source: General Fund, state and federal funds
  Time Frame: Ongoing
  Related Policies: 9.1, 9.2
                                        A-15
                  Public Facilities Implementation Program
PF-20: Water Quality Education: Coordinate in the development and
implementation of a public education program to inform the public of the
harm caused by pollutants and litter that can be carried on the surface of
land to the drainage systems, creeks, rivers, groundwater, and Salton Sea.
Responsible Agency/Department: Planning and Zoning, Public Works,
Imperial Irrigation District, County of Imperial
Funding Source: General Fund, state and federal funds
Time Frame: Ongoing
Related Policies: 9.1, 9.2
PF-21: Imperial Irrigation District Rules and Regulations: Continue to
implement the Imperial Irrigation District Rules and Regulations governing the
distribution and use of water.
Responsible Agency/Department: Planning and Zoning, Public Works,
Imperial Irrigation District
Funding Source: General fund, state and federal funds
Time Frame: Ongoing
Related Policies: 9.1, 9.2
                                      A-16
                                                                      Safety Element
                          TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION                                                                                                                  PAGE
Introduction....................................................................................................S-1
          Purpose of the Safety Element..........................................................................S-1
          Scope and Content of the Safety Element .........................................................S-1
          Related Plans and Programs ............................................................................S-2
          Relationship to Other General Plan Elements....................................................S-3
Issues, Goals and Policies ................................................................................. S-5
          Seismicity.......................................................................................................S-5
          Flooding .......................................................................................................S-6
          Fire ...............................................................................................................S-6
          Criminal Activities...........................................................................................S-7
          Transportation Hazards...................................................................................S-7
          Disaster Preparedness.....................................................................................S-8
          Related Goals and Policies..............................................................................S-8
Safety Plan .................................................................................................... S-10
          Seismicity.....................................................................................................S-10
          Flooding .....................................................................................................S-12
          Fire .............................................................................................................S-12
          Criminal Activities.........................................................................................S-13
          Transportation Hazards.................................................................................S-13
          Disaster Preparedness...................................................................................S-17
                                                           S-i
                                                            Safety Element
                                   LIST OF TABLES
TABLE                                                                                                          PAGE
S-1    Related Goals and Policies by Element .............................................................S-9
                                  LIST OF FIGURES
FIGURE                                                                                                         PAGE
S-1    Regional Faults Map ....................................................................................S-12
S-2    Flood Hazards .............................................................................................S-15
                                                 S-ii
                                                 Safety Element
                      SAFETY
                      ELEMENT
                      E l      C e n t r o           G e n e r a l           P l a n
INTRODUCTION
  Natural events such as flooding, landslides and earthquakes can endanger human life
  and property, while the use, storage and transport of hazardous materials and other
  human activities can impact community safety. Community safety regulations and
  programs can reduce the potential for loss of life, injuries and property damage
  associated with natural and man-made hazards. The Safety Element establishes
  goals, policies and a plan to assure that there is an adequate coordinated and
  expedient response to public safety concerns.
Purpose of the Safety Element
  The purpose of the Safety Element is to identify and address those features or
  characteristics existing in or near El Centro that represent a potential hazard to the
  citizens, structures, and infrastructure in the community.          The Safety Element
  establishes policies to minimize the danger to residents, workers and visitors while
  identifying actions needed to manage crises such as earthquakes, fires and floods.
  Additionally, the Safety Element contains specific policies and programs to regulate
  existing and proposed development in hazard-prone areas. Emergency preparedness
  and evacuation routes are also addressed.
Scope and Content of the Safety Element
   The Safety Element satisfies the requirements of State planning law and is a
   mandated component of the General Plan. Government Code section 65302(g) sets
   forth a list of hazards that the Element must cover if they pertain to conditions in the
   City. These hazards are:
       ¾ Seismically induced conditions including ground shaking, surface rupture,
           ground failure, tsunami and seiche;
       ¾ Slope instability leading to mudslides and landslides;
       ¾ Subsidence and other geologic hazards;
       ¾ Flooding;
       ¾ Wildland and urban fires; and
       ¾ Evacuation routes, water supply requirements and design standards for new
           development as they relate to identified fire seismic and geologic hazards.
                                         S-1

                                                  Safety Element
    State law also permits communities to add safety issues to this list. Due to potential
    safety concerns with the use, storage and transport of hazardous materials in the City,
    hazardous materials are also discussed in this Element.
    The Safety Element contains three sections: 1) this Introduction; 2) Issues, Goals and
    Policies; and 3) the Safety Plan. In the Issues, Goals and Policies section, major
    issues pertaining to hazardous conditions and safety are identified and related goals
    and policies are established.
    The goals are statements of the City’s desires and consist of broad statements of
    purpose and direction. The policies serve as guidelines for reducing risk associated
    with natural and human activity hazards. The policies also serve to direct and
    maximize community emergency preparedness. The Plan explains how the goals and
    policies will be achieved and implemented. Specific action programs for the Public
    Safety Element are contained in the General Plan Implementation Program contained
    in Appendix A of this General Plan.
Related Plans and Programs
    There are a number of existing plans and programs that directly relate to the goals of
    the Safety Element. These plans and programs have been enacted through state and
    local legislation and are administered by agencies with powers to enforce state and
    local laws.
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and Guidelines
    The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) was adopted by the State
    legislature in response to a public mandate for a thorough environmental analysis of
    projects that might adversely affect the environment. Public safety hazards are
    recognized as environmental impacts under CEQA. The provisions of the law and
    environmental review procedures are described in the CEQA Statutes and the CEQA
    Guidelines. Implementation of CEQA ensures that during the decision making stage
    of development, City officials and the general public will be able to assess the safety
    impacts associated with public and private development projects.
Seismic Hazards Mapping Act
   Pursuant to the Seismic Hazards Mapping Act, the State Geologist compiles maps
   identifying seismic hazard zones. Development in seismic hazard areas is subject to
   policies and criteria established by the State Mining and Geology Board. Additionally,
   approval of development on a site within a seismic hazard area requires the
   preparation of a geotechnical report and local agency consideration of the policies
   and criteria set forth by the State Mining and Geology Board (Public Resources Code
   Section 2690 et. seq.).
                                           S-2

                                                 Safety Element
Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act
    The Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act requires the State Geologist to
    identify earthquake fault zones along traces of both recently active and potentially
    active major faults. Cities and counties that contain such zones must inform the
    public regarding the location of these zones, which are usually one-quarter mile or
    less in width. Proposed development plans within these earthquake fault zones must
    be accompanied by a geotechnical report prepared by a qualified geologist
    describing the likelihood of surface rupture. No known fault zones or seismic zones
    intersect the Planning Area.
Landslide Hazard Identification Program
   The Landslide Hazard Identification Program requires the State Geologist to prepare
   maps of landslide hazards within urbanizing areas. According to Public Resources
   Code Section 2687 (a), public agencies are encouraged to use these maps for land
   use planning and for decisions regarding building, grading and development permits.
City of El Centro Codes
    The City has adopted the most recent Uniform Building Code, Uniform Mechanical
    Code, Uniform Fire Code and the National Electric Code, which contain structural
    requirements for existing and new buildings. The codes are designed to ensure
    structural integrity during seismic and other hazardous events, and prevent injury, loss
    of life and substantial property damage. To protect public safety, planned
    development in El Centro is subject to these structural codes.
Relationship to Other General Plan Elements
    The Safety Element must be consistent with the other General Plan elements. All
    elements of the General Plan are interrelated to a degree, and certain goals and
    policies of each element may also address issues that are the primary subjects of
    other elements. The integration of overlapping issues throughout the General Plan
    elements provides a strong basis for implementation plans and programs, and
    achievement of community goals. As identified in Table S-1 provided in the following
    section, the Safety Element most closely relates to the Land Use and Circulation
    Elements.
    Policies and plans in the Safety Element are designed to protect existing and planned
    land uses identified in the Land Use Element from public safety hazards. Potential
    hazards are identified in the Safety Element, and action programs are established to
    avoid or mitigate public safety impacts from planned development. Concurrently, the
    Land Use Element contains policies to ensure that environmental conditions,
    including hazards, are considered in all land use decisions.
    The distribution of residential and other sensitive land uses on the Land Use Policy
    Map is designed to avoid areas where hazardous conditions have been identified.
                                           S-3
                                                  Safety Element
                     ISSUES, GOALS, AND POLICIES
                     Certain natural conditions and human activities in El Centro create
                     risks to individuals and properties within the community. Excessive
                     risk from such hazards can be reduced or avoided through
  implementation of the Safety Element.
  Six major issues are addressed within the Safety Element. These issues include: public
  safety hazards related to (1) seismicity; (2) flooding; (3) fire; (4) criminal activities; (5)
  transportation; as well as (6) disaster preparedness. Each issue and the related goals
  and policies are included in this section of the Element.
Seismicity
  Due to its geographic location in a seismically active region, El Centro is subject to
  geotechnical hazards such as seismic activity and liquefaction. This risk can be
  reduced through appropriate land use planning, development engineering, and
  building construction practices. Existing structures, especially older buildings and any
  remaining unreinforced buildings in the town center may require retrofitting to be able
  to withstand seismic hazards.
  Safety Goal 1: Educate the public about earthquake hazards and reduce loss of
  life, injuries, damage to property, and economic and social dislocations resulting from
  future earthquakes.
  Policy 1.1: Reduce the risk of impacts from seismic hazards by applying proper
  development engineering, building construction, and retrofitting requirements.
  Policy 1.2: Restrict land uses in areas determined to be subject to seismic hazards
  and require adequate environmental review and mitigation measures for development
  proposed within a geological hazard area.
  Policy 1.3: Locate significant public facilities, such as dams, reservoirs, hospitals,
  emergency facilities, schools, utilities, transportation facilities, multi-story buildings,
  and correctional facilities in the seismically safest locations.
  Policy 1.4: Identify all earthquake-prone (without steel) public buildings and
  buildings housing critical public functions, and require these buildings to be upgraded
  and structurally retrofitted.
  Policy 1.5: Educate the public on the hazards related to seismic activity and
  methods to reduce the associated risks.
                                           S-4
                                                 Safety Element
Flooding
   Floodplains located in and around El Centro present a potential natural hazard to the
   City. Proper land use planning can limit the risk of exposure.
   Safety Goal 2: Promote programs and actions that educate the public about flood
   hazards and reduce the risk of flood losses.
   Policy 2.1: Identify and evaluate potentially hazardous flood risks in the community
   and educate the public about how best to minimize the safety hazards associated with
   these risks.
   Policy 2.2: Maintain all drainage and flood control facilities so that they function
   correctly.
   Policy 2.3: Improve drainage ways and flood control facilities to lessen recurrent
   flood problems and include necessary improvements in the City’s Capital
   Improvement Program.
   Policy 2.4: Review all new proposed development to ensure that it will not
   aggravate poor drainage conditions and will, to the extent possible, improve poor
   drainage conditions.
   Policy 2.5: Require all proposed development projects to submit a hydrological
   analysis of a project’s expected runoff that will enter the City’s drainage system, as well
   as the cumulative impact of the project and surrounding development (existing and
   planned) on the drainage system and flood prone areas.
   Policy 2.6: Avoid new development that would create runoff volumes or velocities
   that may cause the City’s existing drainage system to exceed its design capacity until
   appropriate site design and mitigation steps are taken.
   Policy 2.7: Continue to fund needed infrastructure improvements, identifying new
   funding sources as necessary.
Fire
   Loss of life and damage to structures and open space due to fire constitutes a hazard
   to public safety. The purpose of addressing fire hazards in the Safety Element is to
   reduce exposure to fire risks. Risks can be reduced through proper land use planning,
   enforcement of the building standards, and through public education.
   Safety Goal 3: Ensure that the Fire Department continues to protect the health,
   safety, and general welfare of the citizens of El Centro by educating the public about
   fire hazards and reducing the risk associated with fire hazards.
                                           S-5

                                                   Safety Element
   Policy 3.1: Identify and evaluate potentially hazardous fire risks in the community
   and educate the public about the safety hazard associated with these risks.
   Policy 3.2: Maintain fire prone areas to lessen recurrent fire problems and include
   necessary improvements in the City’s Capital Improvement Program.
   Policy 3.3: Avoid new development that would create major increases in fire risk
   that may cause the City’s existing fire fighting capacity to be exceeded.
   Policy 3.4: Maintain efficient, 24-hour fire protection by providing the Fire
   Department with adequate funding, facilities, equipment, and training, and identify
   new funding sources as necessary.
Criminal Activities
   Residents, businesses, and visitors to El Centro are at times exposed to criminal
   activity. The risk of exposure to criminal activity can be reduced through proper
   planning, education methods and regulation of human activity.
   Safety Goal 4: Ensure that the Police Department continues to protect the health,
   safety, and general welfare of the citizens of El Centro by educating the public about
   criminal activities and reducing the incidence of crime.
   Policy 4.1: Identify and evaluate potentially hazardous criminal activities in the
   community and educate the public about how to best minimize the safety hazard
   associated with these activities.
   Policy 4.2: Continue to provide efficient, 24-hour police protection by providing the
   Police Department with adequate levels of funding, facilities, equipment, and training,
   and identify new funding sources as necessary.
Transportation Hazards
   Public safety hazards related to transportation are universal to every community.
   However, the risk of exposure to these hazards can be reduced to acceptable levels
   through proper planning and regulation of human activity.
   Safety Goal 5: Educate the public about transportation related hazards, including
   automobile, aircraft, and train hazards, and reduce the risk of these hazards.
   Policy 5.1: Identify and evaluate potentially hazardous transportation risks in the
   community, and educate the public about how best to minimize the safety hazard
   associated with these risks.
   Policy 5.2: Continue to use traffic control devices and other street design measures
   along arterials and collector streets to regulate, warn, and guide vehicular, bicycle,
   and pedestrian traffic.
                                            S-6

                                                 Safety Element
  Policy 5.3: Ensure public safety by providing alternative pedestrian walkways and
  bicycle paths (where appropriate) that connect residential, industrial, commercial, and
  recreational centers.
  Policy 5.4: Work with the United State Navy, Imperial County Airport, and private
  airstrip operators to review and identify improvements to airport facilities and
  takeoff/landing patterns and procedures to reduce the risk associated with aircraft
  operations.
  Policy 5.5: Continue to participate in the airport land use plan revisions for existing
  airport facilities and operations, future airports, and airport expansions.
  Policy 5.6: Coordinate with Caltrans, Union Pacific, airport commission, and other
  regional planning agencies for improvements to major roadway, railroad, and airport
  facilities.
Disaster Preparedness
  The potential for a major disaster exists in all communities. Proper preparation for
  disasters is an essential action to minimize the disruption, person injury, and property
  damage associated with such events. Preventative measures and preparatory
  responses before an emergency occurs will hasten recovery from these emergencies.
  Safety Goal 6: Improve the ability of the City to respond effectively to natural and
  human-caused emergencies.
  Policy 6.1: Support the development of local preparedness plans and multi-
  jurisdictional cooperation and communication for emergency situations, consistent
  with the Multihazard Functional Planning Guidance.
  Policy 6.2: Educate residents and businesses about appropriate actions to take in
  order to safeguard life and property during and immediately after emergencies.
  Policy 6.3: Support the construction and upgrading of medical facilities and the
  maintenance of staffing at appropriate levels to meet or exceed medical standards for
  cities of the size of El Centro.
Related Goals and Policies
  The goals and policies found in the Safety Element are related to and support subjects
  included in other General Plan elements. Likewise, many goals and policies from
  other elements are supportive of the subjects included in the Safety Element. These
  supporting goals and policies are identified in Table S-1.
                                           S-7
                                                 Safety Element
                                        Table S-1
                      Related Goals and Policies by Element
                                                  Safety Issue Area
General Plan Elements                                    Criminal     Trans.      Disaster
                        Seismicity  Flooding    Fire
                                                         Activities  Hazards   Preparedness
                       1.1, 1.2,   1.1, 1.2    1.1,     1.1, 1.12   1.1, 1.2, 1.1, 1.12
Land Use                                       1.12,                1.3
                                               2.2
Economic Development
Housing
                       1.7         1.7                              1.7, 3.4,
Circulation
                                                                    4.2
                                   1.4         5.1,     4.1, 4.2
Public Facilities                              5.2,
                                               5.3
Conservation/Open      6.1         6.1
Space
Safety
                                                                    2.1, 2.2,
                                                                    2.3, 2.4,
Noise
                                                                    2.5, 2.6,
                                                                    2.7, 2.8
                                           S-8
                                                 Safety Element
                        SAFETY PLAN
                        Like all communities, natural conditions and human activities
                        occur in El Centro that effect the quality of life and safety of its
   residents. Reducing the risks associated with natural hazards and human activities, as
   well as being prepared for emergency situations, is essential for creating an attractive
   and healthy environment. Public health and private property is protected through
   proper prevention and emergency preparedness planning.
   The goals and policies of the previous section establish a broad agenda to safeguard
   community health from natural and human activity hazards and prepare for
   emergency situations. This section of the Safety Element identifies the City’s approach
   for reducing potential hazards from natural conditions and human activities.
   Geologic conditions and seismic activity as well as flooding and fires are natural
   hazards in El Centro. Human activity hazards include: a) criminal activities; b)
   transportation hazards; and c) disaster preparedness.
Seismicity
   The Imperial Valley is one of the most tectonically active regions in the United States.
   Branches of the San Andreas Fault form the eastern boundary of the basin (Salton
   Trough) and the western edge is defined by the San Jacinto-Coyote Creek and the
   Elsinore-Laguna Salada Faults. More small to moderate earthquakes have occurred
   in the area than along any other section of the San Andreas Fault System. During the
   current century, the area has experienced eleven earthquakes of magnitude 6.0 or
   greater on the Richter Scale with the strongest being a magnitude 7.1 temblor on the
   Imperial Fault in 1940. The deep, sediment-filled geologic structure of the Trough
   makes the area particularly susceptible to severe earthquake damage.
   Since the Imperial Valley area is subject to frequent seismic events, there are concerns
   related to ground shaking, liquefaction, and landslides. The composition of geologic
   strata (bedrock and soil) determines what can be expected from an area as a result of
   ground shaking. It is therefore important to know the soil makeup in order to
   determine the appropriate design of structures proposed for an area. Since the City is
   generally flat, landslides are not considered a major hazard. However, bluff failure
   and mudslides may occur along slopes and embankments of the rivers and canals.
Existing Faults
   Although there are no known faults or seismic zones intersecting the El Centro
   Planning Area, existing and future development may be impacted by seismic activity
   from the surrounding regional faults. Figure S-1 displays regional fault and seismic
   zones nearby the City.
                                          S-9

                                                     Safety Element
   The geologic strain pattern in the Imperial Valley region is clearly defined. The
   primary strain features are the northwest-trending high-angle faults developed along
   the San Andreas, San Jacinto, and Elsinore Zones. Movements along these faults are
   predominantly right lateral, with relative south-eastward displacements of the northeast
   blocks, and vertical movements are local or only apparent. The cities of Brawley,
   Imperial, El Centro, and Calexico have, within the last 35 years, received damage
   from the movements of major faults in the San Jacinto Fault Zone. These are the
   Imperial and Superstition Hills Faults.
   In relation to the City of El Centro, the Imperial Fault is located approximately five
   miles to the east. It is a historically active fault associated with an earthquake of major
   proportions in 1940 and again in 1966, both of which have well documented reports
   indicating surface faulting. The May 18, 1940 Imperial Valley Earthquake exposed
   the exact line of the Imperial Fault, which is the only known section of the San Andreas
   system near the U.S./Mexico border.
   Within a few miles to the north of El Centro, there are several faults which have been
   active historically; some of these are associated with the recorded 1951 earthquake
   involving the Superstition Hills fault, a well documented quake, showing surface
   faulting.
Epicenters
   There are two historically active earthquake epicenters located within a 4-mile radius
   of the City of El Centro. One had an estimated magnitude of 6.3 on the Richter Scale
   in 1915. The other epicenter just southeast of the City has had 26 earthquakes
   recorded with a magnitude equal to or less than 7.1 on the Richter Scale since 1915.
   Within a 20-mile radius of the City, there are approximately 45 epicenters all with
   recorded earthquake magnitudes ranging between 4.0 and 5.9 on the Richter Scale.
   Several of these epicenters have had many recorded earthquakes.
   The City of El Centro will continue to educate the residents about earthquake hazards,
   and thereby reduce the loss of life, injuries, damage to property, and economic and
   social dislocations resulting from future earthquakes. The City will locate significant
   public facilities, such as dams, reservoirs, hospitals, emergency facilities, schools,
   utilities, transportation facilities, multi-story buildings, and correctional facilities in the
   seismically safest locations. The City restricts land uses in areas determined to be
   subject to seismic hazards and adequate environmental review and mitigation
   measures for development proposed within a geological hazard area are required in
   the City. Additionally, the City will identify all earthquake-prone public buildings and
   buildings housing critical public functions, and require these buildings to be upgraded
   and structurally retrofitted. In order to reduce the risk of impacts from seismic hazards,
   proper development engineering, building construction, and retrofitting is required of
   proposed development and redevelopment.
                                              S-10
                          Safety Element
Figure S-1
Existing Fault Lines
                     S-11
                                                Safety Element
Flooding
   El Centro’s water supply comes from the Colorado River via the canals and facilities of
   the Imperial Irrigation District (IID). A majority of the water received is used for
   irrigating the vast acreage of farmland in Imperial Valley and local drainage patterns
   within the valley have been altered through these agricultural activities. The IID
   maintains about 1,600 miles of irrigation drainage structures, which collect surface
   water runoff and subsurface drainage from some 32,200 miles of agricultural drains
   (tile) and channel the flow into the New and Alamo Rivers, which ultimately drain to
   the Salton Sea. The canals and laterals are often open and unprotected. The City will
   require developers to underground the canals and laterals as new development occurs
   adjacent to existing open drainage facilities, as allowed by the Imperial Irrigation
   District.
   El Centro has limited flooding hazards, which are mainly associated with poor
   drainage design. As shown in Figure S-2, a small portion of land in the eastern part
   of the City has been identified as a 100-Year Flood Area and is subject to flooding.
   The City’s goal is to continue to maintain all drainage and flood control facilities so
   that they function correctly. The City will avoid new development that would create
   runoff volumes or velocities that may cause the City’s existing drainage system to
   exceed its design capacity until appropriate site design and mitigation steps are taken.
   Additionally, the City will continue to fund needed infrastructure improvements,
   identifying new funding sources as necessary. The City will also promote programs
   and actions that educate the public about flood hazards and reduce the risk of flood
   losses.
Fire
   The City currently operates two fire stations: Fire Station No.1, located at 775 State
   Street and Fire Station No.2, located at 900 Dogwood. The department consists of
   33 safety members and three administrative assistants. The department is led by a
   Chief and four Battalion Chiefs.
   The department currently responds to over 38,000 emergency calls per year. During
   the year 2000, the department responded to approximately 325 fires in the City. The
   same year, the department responded to an average of 10.5 emergency calls per 24-
   hour shift. The standard response time is approximately 7 to 10 minutes for
   emergencies and 10 to 15 minutes for non emergencies. The volume of calls has
   made it difficult to respond to simultaneous calls and complete non-emergency duties
   including training, fire prevention inspections, public education, and fire station
   apparatus and equipment maintenance. The Fire Department has identified the need
   for a third station with a manned engine to deal with these issues.
                                          S-12

                                                   Safety Element
   The City of El Centro ensures that the Fire Department continues to protect the health,
   safety, and general welfare of the citizens of El Centro by educating the public about
   fire hazards and reducing the risk associated with fire hazards. The City will also
   continue to review funding levels for the Fire Department to ensure an adequate level
   of service and facilities are provided.
Criminal Activities
   Burglary, auto theft, and assault are the most frequent crimes in El Centro. The
   frequency of violent crimes such as homicide, rape and robbery is low. Protecting
   citizens and businesses from criminal activity is a priority in El Centro. Crime
   prevention techniques include substantive levels of police protection and educating the
   public about methods to reduce criminal activity.
   The El Centro Police Department is located at 150 North 11th Street and comprises
   47 officers, including: Chief of Police, one Captain, three Lieutenants, six Sergeants,
   and 36 Police Officers. The department also has an active Reserve Officer program,
   a Police Auxiliary (PAX) Team program, and an Explorer program. Currently there are
   23 civilian employees assigned to Records, Communication, Evidence, Animal
   Control, Crime Prevention, Community Service Officer, Crime Analysis Unit,
   Computer Information Services, and Parking Enforcement. In August 1996, the
   Department expanded and now has a Community Oriented Police Office, Crime
   Prevention Specialist, Training Office, and Volunteer Services office located at the
   Community Center sub station. In addition, the department has two School Resource
   Officers. One officer is permanently assigned to High Schools (Central and
   Southwest) and the second officer is assigned to the Junior High Schools.
   The Police Department’s goal is to have 1.75 police officers per 1,000 population.
   Response to calls for service is prioritized based on urgency and need. Average
   response time for routine calls is currently 5 to 10 minutes, while for emergency calls
   the response time is about three to five minutes. An average of 4,068 calls is made
   per month to the City of El Centro Police Department, as of July 2001.
   The City will ensure that the Police Department continues to protect the health, safety,
   and general welfare of the citizens of El Centro by educating the public about criminal
   activities and reducing the incidence of crime.
Transportation Hazards
   The City is linked to other cities in Imperial Valley and to other parts of California by a
   freeway and a number of highways. Interstate 8 provides for east-west travel along
   the southern portion of the City with off/on ramps at Imperial Avenue, 4th Street, and
   Dogwood Avenue. Local highways include: State Highway 111, a north-south route
   from the Mexican border in Calexico to Brawley, Calipatria and Niland; State
   Highway 86, a north-south route connecting service from Interstate 8 in El Centro to
   Interstate 10 in Indio, via the western shore of the Salton Sea; and, State Highway 80,
   an east-west route paralleling Interstate 8, known as the Evan Hewes Highway west of
                                           S-13

                                                   Safety Element
   the City, which enters El Centro on Adams, turns south on 4th Street and then east on
   East Main.
   The preponderance of ground transportation systems is an asset to local economic
   development but poses several potential hazards including automobile accidents, rail
   accidents and pedestrian and bicycling accidents. The risk of accidents can be
   reduced by properly maintaining the transportation system infrastructure and
   correcting deficiencies. The City will continue to use traffic control devices and other
   street design measures along arterials and collector streets to regulate, warn, and
   guide vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian traffic. The City will also coordinate with
   Caltrans, rail operators, the airport commission, and other regional planning agencies
   for improvements to major roadway, railroad, and airport facilities. Additionally, the
   City will educate the public about transportation related hazards, including
   automobile, aircraft, and train hazards, and reduce the risk of these hazards.
Airports
   Imperial County Airport - The Imperial County Airport (Boley Field) is located
   within the City of Imperial’s to the north of El Centro. The airport includes aviation
   facilities and provides scheduled passenger service to Los Angeles, Phoenix and other
   points in Arizona and California.
   Naval Air Facility (NAF) El Centro – NAF El Centro occupies about 2,300 acres
   of land near the edge of the Imperial Valley, seven miles west of El Centro. The base
   primarily serves as a training facility for navel air squadrons.
   Douthitt Strip Airport – Douthitt Strip Airport is a private use airport, located at the
   easternmost portion of Olive Avenue.
   The Imperial County Airport Land Use Commission has established a set of land use
   compatibility criteria for lands surrounding the County’s airports. As shown in Figure
   LU-5, in the Land Use Element of this General Plan, portions of northern El Centro are
   located within the D zone, representing negligible risk from airport activity, whereas
   other areas are in the extended approach and departure zone (B2) and are subjected
   to significant risk and noise exposure. A small strip of land south of Threshill Road is
   located within the Approach/Departure Zone (B1) subjecting development in this area
   to substantial risk and noise as a result of aircraft activity. The City will work with the
   United States Navy, Imperial County Airport, and private airstrip operators to review
   and identify improvements to airport facilities and takeoff/landing patterns and
   procedures to reduce the risk associated with aircraft operations. The City will also
   continue to participate in the airport land use plan revisions for existing airport
   facilities and operations, future airports, and airport expansions.
                                            S-14

                   Safety Element
Figure S-2
Flood Hazards
              S-15
           Safety Element
Blank                     Page
      S-16
                                                 Safety Element
Railroads
  Two rail lines serve the City of El Centro. The Union Pacific Railroad main line enters
  the eastern border near Winterhaven and then bears northwest and leaves Imperial
  County just east of the Salton Sea. This is the main Union Pacific Line, which primarily
  serves the Los Angeles area. There is a major branch line from this main line at
  Niland that provides rail service to Calipatria, Brawley, Imperial, El Centro, Calexico,
  and Mexico. This line is used extensively for agricultural shipments. Minor spurs
  provide service to Westmoreland and the area north of Holtville. The Holten
  Interurban Railroad provides service from Holtville to El Centro. A San Diego and
  Arizona route links El Centro to San Diego.
Disaster Preparedness
  Local emergency preparedness plans serve as extensions of the California Emergency
  Plan and the Emergency Resource Management Plan. The purpose of the City’s
  Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS) Multihazard Functional Plan
  (MHFP) is to respond to emergency situation with a coordinated system of emergency
  service providers and facilities.
  The City of El Centro SEMS Multihazard Functional Plan (MHFP) addresses the City of
  El Centro’s planned response to extraordinary emergency situations associated with
  natural disasters, technological incidents, and national security emergencies. The
  plan does not address normal day-to-day emergencies or the well-established and
  routine procedures used in coping with such emergencies. Instead, the operational
  concepts reflected in this plan focus on potential large-scale disasters that can
  generate unique situations requiring unusual emergency responses. The threats
  identified in the plan include: major earthquake, hazardous materials incident,
  flooding, transportation, civil unrest, and national security emergency.
  The City plans to improve the ability of the City to respond effectively to natural and
  human caused emergencies by educating residents and businesses regarding
  appropriate actions to safeguard life and property during and immediately after
  emergencies. A public educated in emergency preparedness is more likely to know
  how to prevent injury and property damage during and after emergency episodes and
  also know how to find help. In addition, the City supports the construction and
  upgrading of medical facilities and staffing at appropriate levels to meet or exceed
  medical standards for cities the size of El Centro.
                                           S-17

      Safety Element Implementation Program
                     SAFETY
                     ELEMENT
                     E l      C e n t r o          G e n e r a l          P l a n
  This Implementation Program provides actions to implement the adopted policies and
  plans identified in the Safety Element. The Safety Element Implementation Program is
  a series of actions, procedures and techniques which includes a description of the
  responsible agency/department, funding source, time frame and related policies in the
  Safety Element.
Seismicity
  S-1: Seismic and Geologic Risk Reduction: Reduce the risk to the community
  from hazards related to seismic activity and geologic hazards by requiring feasible
  mitigation of such impacts on existing, new development and redevelopment. Assess
  development proposals for potential hazards pursuant to the California Environmental
  Quality Act. Require measures to mitigate all identified significant public safety
  hazards.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Development Services, Public Works
  Funding Source: Project proponent
  Time Frame: Ongoing
  Related Policies: 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4
  S-2: Open Space Easements for Seismic Hazards: Use open space
  easements and other regulatory techniques to prohibit development and avoid public
  safety hazards where seismic hazards are identified and cannot be mitigated.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Development Services
  Funding Source: General Fund
  Time Frame: Ongoing
  Related Policies: 1.2
  S-3: Structural Codes: Prevent injury loss of life, and substantial property
  damage by complying with the most recent Uniform Building Code, Uniform
  Mechanical Code, Uniform Fire Code, and the National Electric Code, which contain
  structural requirements for existing and new buildings. To protect public safety, all
  planned development in EL Centro shall be subject to these structural codes.
  Responsible Agency/Department: Development Services
                                        A-21
        Safety Element Implementation Program
   Funding Source: Project proponent
   Time Frame: Ongoing
   Related Policies: 1.1, 1.4
   S-4: Seismic Retrofitting: Implement a program to identify and retrofit any
   unreinforced masonry buildings and other potentially hazardous buildings within the
   City. The program may include the following:
        ¾ Set a list of priorities and criteria by which strengthening of the buildings
            identified as hazardous will be established and conducted;
        ¾ Offer incentives to engender support among building owners, such as tax
            waivers, tax credits and waivers of zoning restrictions; and
        ¾ Adopt an educational program, such as informational mailings to encourage
            private owners to seismically upgrade their houses.
   Responsible Agency/Department: Development Services
   Funding Source: General Fund
   Time Frame: 2003-2004
   Related Policies: 1.4
Flooding
   S-5: Flooding Risk Reduction: Reduce the risk to the community from hazards
   related to flooding by requiring feasible mitigation of such impacts on existing, new
   development and redevelopment. Assess development proposals for potential hazards
   pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act. Require measures to mitigate
   all identified significant public safety hazards.
   Responsible Agency/Department: Development Services, Public Works
   Funding Source: Project proponent
   Time Frame: Ongoing
   Related Policies: 2.4, 2.5, 2.6
   S-6: Storm Drainage Facilities: Enforce the City’s Public Works Standards,
   which give specific requirements for design of drainage facilities to ensure that they
   are properly sized to handle storm runoff and flash floods. Require new development
   to provide adequate flood control facilities, if needed, to control runoff generated by
   the project. Identify new public and private funding sources to fund needed
   improvements.
   Responsible Agency/Department: Public Works
   Funding Source: Project proponent, General Fund
   Time Frame: Ongoing
   Related Policies: 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.6, 2.7
   S-7: Flood Hazard Education: Promote programs and actions that educate the
   public about flood hazards and how to reduce the risks and losses associated with
   flooding.
   Responsible Agency/Department: Development Services, Public Works
                                             A-22

        Safety Element Implementation Program
   Funding Source: Project proponent
   Time Frame: Ongoing
   Related Policies: 2.4, 2.5, 2.6
Fire
   S-8: Fire Risk Reduction: Reduce the risk to the community from hazards related
   to brush and structural fires by requiring feasible mitigation of such impacts on existing
   development, new development and redevelopment. Assess development proposals
   for potential hazards pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act. Require
   measures to mitigate all identified significant public safety hazards.
   Responsible Agency/Department: Development Services, Fire Department
   Funding Source: Project proponent
   Time Frame: Ongoing
   Related Policies: 3.2, 3.3
   S-9: Promote Fire Prevention: Promote Fire Prevention in El Centro in the
   following ways:
   Direct the El Centro Fire Department to implement fire hazard education and fire
   prevention programs, including weed abatement programs;
        ¾ Coordinate with the City’s Planning Department, Imperial Irrigation District
           (IID), and the El Centro Fire Department to ensure that water pressure for
           existing developed areas and sites to be developed is adequate for fire fighting
           purposes;
        ¾ Adopt and implement the most recent Uniform Fire Code provisions and
           appropriate amendments to reflect the unique El Centro topography,
           vegetation and urban form; and
        ¾ Review and revise the Fire Department budget, as necessary, to ensure
           adequate protection.
   Responsible Agency/Department: Fire Department, Community Services, IID
   Funding Source: General Fund
   Time Frame: Ongoing
   Related Policies: 3.1, 3.4
   S-10: Signal Preemption Program: Continue to implement the signal
   preemption program allowing emergency vehicles to preempt signalized traffic lights
   in order to reduce response time to emergencies.
   Responsible Agency/Department: Public Works
   Funding Source: General Fund
   Time Frame: Ongoing
   Related Policies: 3.4
                                           A-23

        Safety Element Implementation Program
Criminal Activities
   S-11: Minimize Criminal Activity: Protect residents and businesses from
   criminal activity by providing substantive levels of police protection and educating the
   public about methods to reduce criminal activity. The specific actions to implement
   these goals are identified below:
       ¾ Ensure that El Centro Police Department staffing levels correspond to the
             population and geography of El Centro, and that sufficient emphasis is placed
             on staff and programs for crime prevention;
       ¾ Ensure that mutual aid agreements between the El Centro Police Department
             and the law enforcement agencies of surrounding jurisdictions are in place for
             emergency situations;
       ¾ Use defensible space and lighting concepts in development project designs to
             enhance public safety;
       ¾ Coordinate with the El Centro Police Department to increase public awareness
             about criminal activity and crime prevention activities. Maximize the use of
             after school programs, volunteer programs and Neighborhood Watch
             programs throughout the City; and
       ¾ Coordinate with the El Centro Police Department, the El Centro Elementary
             School District, and the Central Union High School District to provide periodic
             crime prevention programs in local schools.
   Responsible Agency/Department: Police Department, El Centro Elementary School
   District, Central Union High School District
   Funding Source: General Fund
   Time Frame: Ongoing
   Related Policies: 4.1, 4.2
Transportation Hazards
   S-12: Transportation Safety: Minimize the potential for accidents involving
   railways, airplanes, automobiles, pedestrians, and cyclists by working closely with the
   El Centro Police Department, California Highway Patrol, U.S. Navy, Imperial County
   Transit, Imperial County Airport Land Use Commission, and railway operators to
   identify safety problems and implement corrective measures.
   Responsible Agency/Department: Police Department, California Highway Patrol, U.S.
   Navy, Imperial County Transit, Imperial County Airport Land Use Commission, railway
   operators
   Funding Source: General Fund
   Time Frame: Ongoing
   Related Policies: 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, 5.6
Disaster Preparedness
   S-13: SEMS Multihazard Functional Plan: Continue to implement and
   update as necessary the City’s Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS)
   Multihazard Functional Plan (MHFP) to maximize efforts of emergency service
                                           A-24

        Safety Element Implementation Program
    providers (e.g., fire, medical, and law enforcement) and minimize human suffering
    and property damage during disasters.             Support high-level multi-jurisdictional
    cooperation and communication for emergency planning and management. Solicit
    private individuals and organizations to enhance service provider communications and
    response with cellular telephones, ham radios, AM/FM radio and cable television.
    Responsible Agency/Department: Development Services
    Funding Source: General Fund
    Time Frame: Ongoing
    Related Policies: 6.1, 6.2, 6.3
S-14: Hazardous Materials: Minimize public health risks and environmental risks
from the use, transport, storage, and disposal of hazardous materials by:
        ¾ Cooperating with federal, state, and county agencies to effectively regulate the
             management of hazardous materials and hazardous waste;
        ¾ Cooperating with the County of Imperial to implement the applicable portions
             of the County Hazardous Waste Management Plan;
        ¾ Identifying roadway transportation routes for conveyance of hazardous
             materials (the City does not exercise jurisdictional over transportation of freight
             along railroad right-of-way or state highways);
        ¾ Implementing the City’s Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS)
             Multihazard Functional Plan for accidents involving hazardous materials; and
        ¾ Cooperating with the Certified Unified program Agency (CUPA) for El Centro
             and the El Centro Fire Department to administer Risk Management Plans for
             businesses within the City.
    Responsible Agency/Department: Police Department, Fire Department, CUPA, County
    of Imperial
    Funding Source: General Fund
    Time Frame: Ongoing
    Related Policies: 6.1, 6.2
                                           A-25

