                                                       AIR QUALITY
                                                                  ELEMENT
                  INTRODUCTION
                  T
                          hroughout much of Southern California, air quality does
                          not meet federal standards. Poor air quality results in
                          potential health hazards and often produces a hazy,
                          unattractive ceiling of smog above the basin. Unlike most
                  of Southern California, Temecula s air quality is very good. Air
                  quality monitoring in Temecula in the early 1990 s indicated that
                  days with air quality standard violations were rare. This is due to
                  the Lake Elsinore Convergence Zone, where coastal winds block air
                  pollutants from the rest of the South Coast Air Basin. These
                  conditions provide an environment where residents can breathe
                  clean, fresh air, improving the quality of life. The City can do its
                  part to improve regional air quality through effective land use
                  planning, automobile trip reduction strategies, energy conservation,
                  and participation in regional efforts to achieve measurable air
                  quality improvements.
  PURPOSE OF THE  The Air Quality Element establishes a policy foundation to
     AIR QUALITY  implement local air quality improvement measures and provides a
                  framework for coordination of air quality planning efforts with
         ELEMENT  surrounding jurisdictions.
      SCOPE AND   Preparation of an Air Quality Element is not required under State
 CONTENT OF THE   law, but the Government Code authorizes cities and counties to
                  adopt additional elements as deemed relevant and necessary. State
     AIR QUALITY  General Plan Guidelines include air quality as a suggested topic in
         ELEMENT  both the Circulation and Safety Elements. The South Coast Air
                  Quality Management District (SCAQMD) also recommends that
                  jurisdictions adopt an Air Quality Element to implement control
                  measures. If a jurisdiction prepares an optional Air Quality
                  Element, that element must be consistent with the other General
                  Plan elements.
C  I T Y    O F  T   E M E     C U L A         G   E N E R A L          P   L A   N
                                      AQ-1
    COMMON AIR   Temecula lies within the South Coast Air Basin, a geographic area
     POLLUTANTS  that extends from the Pacific Ocean to the San Jacinto Mountains
                 on the east, and south from the San Gabriel Mountains. The three
                 pollutants of greatest concern within the South Coast Air Basin are
                 carbon monoxide, ozone (which is formed when sunlight reacts
                 with pollutants), and particulate matter. These pollutants and
                 associated health effects are described below.
                 •     Carbon Monoxide (CO) is formed by the incomplete
                       combustion of fossil fuels, almost entirely from automobiles.
                       It is an odorless gas that can cause dizziness, fatigue, and
                       impairments to central nervous system functions. CO passes
                       through the lungs into the blood stream where it interferes
                       with the transfer of oxygen to body tissues.
                 •     Ozone (smog) is formed by photochemical reactions between
                       nitrogen oxide (NOx) and reactive organic gases, rather than
                       being directly emitted. Ozone is a pungent, colorless gas
                       typically found in Southern California smog. Elevated zone
                       concentrations result in reduced lung function, particularly
                       during vigorous physical activity. This health problem is
                       particularly acute in sensitive receptors, such as the sick, elderly
                       and young children. Ozone levels peak during the summer
                       and early fall months.
                 •     Particulate Matter (PM10) refers to small suspended
                       particulate matter with an aerodynamic diameter of ten
                       microns or less which is not readily filtered by the lungs.
                       Nitrates and sulfates, as well as dust particulates, are major
                       components of PM10. These small particles can be directly
                       emitted into the atmosphere as a by-product of fuel
                       combustion, through abrasion such as wear on tires or brake
                       linings, or through fugitive dust (wind erosion from soil and
                       dirt roads). They can also be formed in the atmosphere
                       through chemical reactions.            Particulates may carry
                       carcinogens and other toxic compounds that adhere to the
                       particle surfaces and can enter the human body through the
                       lungs.
  RELATED PLANS  A number of related plans and programs administered by federal,
  AND PROGRAMS   State, and special purpose agencies support or influence the goals of
                 the Air Quality Element.
C  I T Y  O F   T  E M E       C U L A         G    E N E R A L             P   L A    N
                                     AQ-2

             FEDERAL CLEAN AIR ACT
             The Federal Clean Air Act, enacted in 1970 and amended thereafter,
             establishes the framework for air pollution control. The Act directs
             the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to establish national
             ambient air quality standards (NAAQS) for six pollutants: ozone,
             carbon monoxide, lead, nitrogen dioxide, particulate matter, and
             sulphur dioxide. These standards are set at a level that protects
             public health and welfare. Areas exceeding the federal standards
             more than two times per year are designated "nonattainment" areas.
             Such areas are subject to more stringent planning and pollution
             control requirements.
             States are required to submit a State Implementation Plan (SIP) for
             areas that exceed the NAAQS. The SIP must demonstrate how the
             NAAQS will be achieved. Failure to submit a plan or secure
             approval could lead to denial of federal funding or permits for
             infrastructure requiring federal approval.
             CALIFORNIA CLEAN AIR ACT
             The California Clean Air Act (CCAA, 1988) establishes standards
             for the six federal criteria pollutants, as well as for hydrogen
             sulphide, sulphate and vinyl chloride. State standards for these nine
             pollutants are more stringent than federal standards. The CCAA
             requires regional emissions to be reduced by five percent per year,
             averaged over a three-year period, until attainment can be
             demonstrated. Each region that does not meet a national or State
             air quality standard is required to prepare a plan that demonstrates
             how the 5-percent reduction is to be achieved. The California Air
             Resources Board (CARB) and local air pollution control districts are
             responsible for ensuring that State standards will be achieved within
             designated timeframes.
             SOUTH COAST AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN
             In response to regional planning requirements of the California
             Clean Air Act, the South Coast Air Quality Management Plan
             (AQMP) is the primary planning tool for achieving State and
             federal air quality standards. The AQMP carries out federal and
             State mandates with respect to air quality standards through a series
             of control measures which are aimed at reducing pollutants from a
             specific source. The plan for the South Coast Air Basin, which
             includes Western Riverside County, was prepared by the South
             Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) and the
             Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG).
C I T Y O F T   E M E     C U L A         G    E N E R A L           P  L A   N
                                AQ-3
             WESTERN RIVERSIDE SUB-REGIONAL AIR QUALITY
             IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
             The Western Riverside Sub-Regional Air Quality Implementation
             Program serves as a framework for local government
             implementation of the control measures contained in the AQMP.
             The planning effort was initiated in response to a desire among
             local governments to retain autonomy in implementing the AQMP
             control measures. The Plan includes a Model Air Quality Element
             that is intended to be incorporated by participating jurisdictions
             into their General Plan. The Implementation Program also includes
             four model ordinances: Development Review and Mitigation;
             Employment Related Trip Reduction; Particulate Emission
             Reduction; and Energy Conservation. Procedures necessary for
             local jurisdictions to implement air quality measures are also
             contained in the Implementation Program.
             Temecula is a member of the Western Riverside Council of
             Governments (WRCOG) and participated in this coordinated air
             quality planning effort.        The City s Air Quality Element
             incorporates the goals, policies and programs from the WRCOG
             that are applicable within the Planning Area. The policies and
             implementation programs, however, have been tailored to reflect
             local circumstances.
             TEMECULA TRIP REDUCTION ORDINANCE
             Temecula has adopted a Trip Reduction Ordinance, pursuant to
             requirements of the State Health and Safety Code. The Ordinance
             enables the City to receive revenues from vehicle registration fees to
             administer air pollution reduction programs. The Municipal Code
             also mandates the provision of carpool, bicycle, rideshare, vanpool,
             transit, child care, transportation system management, and/or
             telecommuting facilities for both new and current development
             projects within the City where 100 or more persons are employed.
             Strategies to provide these facilities are detailed in Trip Reduction
             Plans (TRPs) prepared by employers, either as a condition of
             development review, or upon issuance of a business license.
             Businesses with fewer than 100 employees are also encouraged to
             participate on a voluntary basis.
C I T Y O F T   E M E     C U L A         G    E N E R A L            P  L A   N
                                AQ-4
                               COUNTY OF RIVERSIDE AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
                               The Air Quality Element of the Riverside County General Plan
                               identifies issues, goals, and programs to improve countywide air
                               quality. The County s Air Quality Element includes policies and
                               programs addressing each of the following topics: multi-
                               jurisdictional cooperation, sensitive receptors, mobile pollution
                               sources, stationary pollution sources, energy efficiency and
                               conservation, jobs and housing, transportation demand
                               management, transportation systems management, transportation
                               facility development, and particulate matter.
                               The Riverside County Air Quality Element has no authority over
                               the actions taken by the City of Temecula. However, the policies
                               and programs related to the coordination of air quality planning
                               efforts on the local and regional level have been considered and are
                               incorporated in Temecula's Air Quality Element.
                               AIR QUALITY PLAN
                               Good air quality is vital for the health of Temecula residents. To
                               date, most efforts at improving air quality have relied on emissions
                               control devices and development of cleaner manufacturing and
                               transportation technologies.      While these efforts have been
                               successful in reducing emissions, population growth experienced by
                               the region threatens these gains. In addition, despite these
                               improvements, federal air quality standards have not been met.
       REGIONAL AIR            Air quality efforts are increasingly directed at the relationship
               QUALITY         between growth, land use activities, and air quality. Land use
                               patterns directly influence transportation demand which, in turn,
       IMPROVEMENT             impacts air quality. Local government has the unique authority to
                               regulate land use, and the South Coast Air Quality Management
                               District (SCAQMD) calls upon local governments to implement
                               measures to achieve emissions reductions to reduce the high ozone
                               levels the Temecula area sometimes experiences.
PLANS IN ACTION                The City has important roles and commitments to the
The City is an active          implementation of the AQMP and Sub-Regional Air Quality
participant in regional air    Implementation Program. Continued efforts to provide regional
quality planning efforts,      public transit and high speed rail systems in the area will also lead
and      promotes      public  to reductions in vehicle trips and improved air quality. Temecula
education         regarding    will be an active participant in regional planning efforts with the
regional air quality issues.   County, WRCOG, SCAQMD and SCAG to support
                               accomplishment of these objectives.
 C    I T Y         O F       T   E M E      C U L A        G   E N E R A L           P  L A    N
                                                   AQ-5
  AIR QUALITY AND              Temecula is the lead agency for local land use decisions. As such,
             LAND USE          the City has the authority and responsibility to ensure that such
                               decisions consider potential air quality impacts and are contingent
                               on reliable mitigation strategies. The integral relationships between
                               land use intensity, circulation patterns, and the reliance of residents
                               on automobile travel make land use decisions a very important
                               determinant of future air quality.
PLANS IN ACTION                The primary tools available to the City to encourage air quality
Temecula          encourages   mitigation strategies are the development review process and the
development that provides      California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). The City will
both jobs and housing,         continue to encourage development that provides both employment
applies mitigation measures    and housing opportunities so that residents do not have to drive
to new development to          long distances between home and work. Promoting infill housing,
reduce air pollution, and      encouraging development of Mixed Use Overlay Areas, and
locates sensitive receptors
                               minimizing potential land use conflicts between pollution emitters
away      from      potential
pollution emitters.
                               and sensitive receptors (identified in Figure AQ-2) are additional
                               strategies the City will use to contribute to regional reductions in air
                               pollutants.
     AIR POLLUTANT             Riverside County generates the lowest volume
    EMISSIONS FROM             of annual emissions of any county in the South
                               Coast Air Basin.                   However, because of
        AUTOMOBILES            topographical and climatological factors,
                               County residents are exposed to greater health
                               risks from air pollution than other residents in
                               the Basin. Automobile travel in Los Angeles
                               and Orange Counties is the primary cause of
                               air pollution in the region. Emissions are
                               transported to western Riverside County by prevailing wind patterns
                               (see Figure AQ-1).
            Figure AQ-1
       Predominant                             SAN LUIS
                                                                        KERN
                                                                                                                        SOUTHEAST
                                                                                                                          SOUTHEAST
                                                                                                                           DESERT
                                                                                                                            DESERT
                                                 SAN LUIS
                                                OBISPO
      Surface Wind             SOUTH CENTRAL
                                SOUTH CENTRAL
                                                  OBISPO                 KERN
                                  COAST
     Flow Patterns                  COAST               SANTA
                                                          SANTA
                                                       BARBARA                                SAN BERNARDINO
                                                                                                SAN BERNARDINO
                                                        BARBARA                LOS
                                                                VENTURA         LOS
                                                                 VENTURA     ANGELES
                                                                              ANGELES
                                                                SOUTH COAST        ORANGE          RIVERSIDE
                                                                  SOUTH COAST        ORANGE          RIVERSIDE
                                                                                               SAN
                                                                                                 SAN
                                                                                              DIEGO
                                                                                               DIEGO           IMPERIAL
                                                                                                                 IMPERIAL
                                                                                   SAN DIEGO
                                                                                    SAN DIEGO
                                                                                                      Temecula
                                                                                                        Temecula
 C    I T Y         O F       T   E M E       C U L A                   G     E N E R A L                      P     L A          N
                                                          AQ-6
      Figure AQ-2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Keller Rd
      Sensitive Receptors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mc Colery Rd
      CITY OF TEMECULA GENERAL PLAN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Pat Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Specili Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Briggs Rd                                                                    Elliot Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                 Judith St
      Legend
                                                                                                               E
       ®
       u                        !
                               Hospital                                                                                      Elementary   School
                                                                                                                                     Baxter Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  City of Murrieta                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           County of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Jean Nicholas Rd
                                                                                                              M
       "
       H
       )      Library           !                                                                                            Middle School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          es
                                                                                                                                                                      Lee Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sphere of Influence                                                                          terR                                                                                                                                                                            Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ch
              Child Care Center !                                                                              H
                                                                                                                                                    Menifee Rd
       Y                                                                                                                     High School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      in
       "
       )                                                                                                                                                                                                        Liberty Rd                               Briggs Rd                Leon Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pourroy Rd
                                                                                                               P
            ü Adult
            ³
            ±       Assisted    !                                                                                            Private School                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Thompson Rd
              Care Facilities                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !           E
                                                  Temecula City Boundary                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Benton Rd
                                                  Sphere of Influence Boundary                                                                                                                                                                     }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ÿ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Skinner
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Auld Rd
                                                  Planning Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Maddalena Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Pourroy Rd
                                                                                                                                                     Calle D e Amor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Leon Rd
      Source: Temecula and Riverside County, GIS 2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Allen Rd
                                                                                                          Wh
                                                                                                               it
                                                                                                                  oo
                                                                                                                ew
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             y
                                                                                                                      d Rd
                                                                                                                                                                      Hunter Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Borel Rd
                                           Rd
                                                                                                               Dr                                                                                                                                                                            Pr omo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                      Po
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ro
       Ø
       "
       #                  Lo
                             s   Ala
                                       m   os
                                                                       Ø
                                                                       "
                                                                       #    A lt
                                                                                   aM
                                                                                           u rri
                                                                                                 e        ta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     yon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              to    ry
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P ky
                                                        ®
                                                        u                    M u r r ie t a
                                                                                                      Ho t
                                                                                                                    Springs R
                                                                                                                             d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ca n
                                                                                                                                                                                                             S ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Murrieta Hot Springs Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Buck Rd
                          City of
                         Murrieta                                                                                                                                                               y                                                                             ü
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ³
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ±
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     E
                                                                             Ja                                                                                                             W                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             d
                                                                                so                                                                                                    ire                                                               ve                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                R
                                                                              ck
                                                                                                                                                                            na                                                        l ow
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   sA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                              o la
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                sR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   d                                                                                                                                                                                                               a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Butterfield Stage Rd
                                                                                     n
                                                                                          Av
                                                                                            e                                                                             Bo                                                   W il                                                                               N ic                                                                                                                                        Vin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 re nd
                                                          M                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       o   Wy                                                                        Be
                                                                                                                                                          E
                                                              ad
                                                                   is o
                                                                                                                                                  ! Y
                                                                                                                                                    )ü                                                   ³
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ±                                              as R d
                                                                                                                                                   !J
                                                                       n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         C
                St                                                                                                                                                                                                                         N icol
                                                                         e
                                                                       Av
                                                                                                                                                                                H
        v   a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             a ll e
     ua
 G                               W                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Vista D el        Rd
                                  as                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mo nte                                                                                   Co n
                                     hing                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       te n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Via N orte
                                           to n
                     D
                                                Ave
                                                                                                                                    Y
                                                                                                                                    J
                                                                                                                                    ) M                                 M                                             No
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              rt e                                                                                                                                        La Ser en a W y
                                                                                                                                  ) !                                                                                                                                                                         E
                     ou
                         gl
                         as
                          sA
                              ve
                                                                                                                                "
                                                                                                                                )
                                                                                                                                HJY                                       arg
                                                                                                                                                                              a rit a Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Via
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ü
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ³
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ±     Rey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Rd        !                                                                                                                                                                  ho
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   lifo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          rn i a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    nc
                                                                                                                    Y
                                                                                                                    J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         l                           y
                                                                                                                                       Yn
                                                                                                                    )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         De
                                                                                                                                           e z                                                                                                                                                  W                                                                                                                                                              Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 a                 M
                                                                                                                                              Rd                                                                                                                                            en
                                                                       St                                                                                                                                                                                                        Se r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Dr
                                                               er
                                                                 ry                                                             ffe
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ü
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ³
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ±                                             M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              La                                            do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ra De
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Pla ya
                                                                                                                                                                                   Y
                                                                                                                                                                                   J
                                                                                                                             Je                                                                                                                                                                                                 w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ma d e
                                                          Ch                                                                    r so
                                                                                                                                                                                   )                                                        !                                                                                     sP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !J        P
                                                                                                                        !üJ
                                                                                                                          Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ky
                                                                                                                          )J  P
                                                                                                                                  n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   )
                                                                                                                           )Y
                                                                                                                            )         Av
                                                                                                                                       e                                                                                              d                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ta R
                                                                                                                          Y
                                                                                                                          J
                                                                                                          d
                                                                                                     rR                                                                                                               ar i                                                                                                             d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pau
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             aR
                                                                                         he
                                                                                            s   te
                                                                                                                               ³
                                                                                                                               ±
                                                                                                                                                                                     Y
                                                                                                                                                                                     J
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                            M
                                                                                                                                                                                                              g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       fo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         rn i
                                                                                                                                       Y
                                                                                                                                       J                                             )                                                                                                                            a li
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ü
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ³
                                                                                     c
                                                                              W
                                                                                  in
                                                                                                                                       )                                           !J               E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ho
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ±
                                             Ra
                                                                                                                              Di
                                                                                                                                az
                                                                                                                                  Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                    ) J
                                                                                                                                                                                    Y  Y
                                                                                                                                                                                       )                         E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !                                             Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    nc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         L in da R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  o
                                                                                                                                                                                  ) !!J                                                    !!                                                                          P
                                                  ho
                                                nc                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        se   a Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                  Y
                                                                                                                                                                                  J    Y                P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                       )                                                                                                                                                                                  M
                                                     Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         )! ! !                                             H
                                                                                                                                                                                    Yn                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       l le
                                                       lif
                                                                                                                                                                                           ez                                ho V is ta R                                                                                                    Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                            R an c                                                                                                                     ba
                                                                                                               P                                                                                                                         Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         J                                                                                                                                                                                     B u tt e r
                                                          ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                P au
                                                                                                          !
                                                        or                                                                                                                                      Rd                                        d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         C o n te n to
                               en ida
                                      D el O ro
                                                                                                                                                                                        ü                                       ³
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ±                                                                                                      E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  M e a do w s P k y
                                                              a                                                                                              d
                          Av                                    Rd                                                                                      aR
                                                                                                                                           l ifo rn i
                                                                                                                         R a nc ho C a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               f ie l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     )")
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       H                                                                 ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           g ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S ta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         De Portola Rd
                                                                                                                                                                  )Y
                                                                                                                                                                   J
                                                                                                                                                                   )                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     d
                                                                                                                                                                  Y
                                                                                                                                                                  J    Y
                                                                                                                                                                       J
                                                                                                                                                                       )                                                     Sa n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     tia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           go
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              R     d                                                         it a R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                               Rd
                                                                                                                                                                       P
                                                                                                                                                                     P !
                                                                                                                                                                     !                      !!       P                                                                                                                                 !    E                                                                                                                                                                                                        A nz
                                                                                     Via Sant
                                                                                              a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Yn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ez
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         a R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            d     }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ÿ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  79
                                                                                          Ro sa
                                                                                                                                                                                             Y
                                                                                                                                                                                             J
                                                                                                                                                                                             )
                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Va
                                                                                                                                                                                                            P
                                                                                                                                                                                                            lle
                                                                                                                                                                                                             jo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         D e Po rt o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            la
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          )                                                                   ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pky    !   M
                                           a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Y
                                       an c                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   il R
                                     B arr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  )                                                                                             Va
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !E
                                   V ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         da
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E
                                                               o Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Lin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ! ! M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            m                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Rd
                                                             a q uer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           k P ky                                                                             za
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         aw                                                                              An
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             dh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           yR
                                                          V ia V                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       le                                                                                  Re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Va l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !         E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                o lf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Pechanga                                                                                    w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Entertainment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ø
                                                                                                                                                                                                                "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             wC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      nR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     yo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           d                                                          Sp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  rH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         bo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Û
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        c ha n g a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Pe
µ
                                                  0                                      5,000                                         10,000
                                                                                                                                           Feet                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pa rk wa y
                                                                                                                                            Miles
                                                  0                                                       1                                                    2
C I T Y                                                                   O F                                                     T E M E C U L A                                                                                                                                                                                          G E N E R A L                                                                                                                                                                                             P L A N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AQ-7

PLANS IN ACTION                The main City strategies to reduce automobile emissions are
The City Trip Reduction        continued enforcement of the Trip Reduction Ordinance and
Ordinance obligates major      development of additional local employment opportunities. The
employers to implement         City will also continue to pursue development of a local public
trip reduction strategies,     transit system. The network of bicycle and pedestrian trails within
including ridesharing, use     the City will be enhanced, as specified in the Multi-Use Trails and
of       public      transit,  Bikeways Master Plan. Coordination with Caltrans and RTA to
telecommuting,
                               identify sites for potential park and ride facilities can encourage
transportation        systems
management, child care,        ridesharing and potentially alleviate traffic congestion at major
public education, and other    intersections near the Winchester Road/I-15 interchange. These
measures.                      combined actions are expected to achieve a 12 percent reduction in
                               vehicle miles traveled, as specified in the Trip Reduction Ordinance.
                ENERGY         Energy requirements and pollutants associated with the production
     CONSERVATION              of energy can be reduced through innovative architectural design,
                               building construction, structural orientation and landscaping. The
                               City will require use of the following methods to help create
                               sustainable buildings that consume less fossil fuel.
                               •     Optimize building sites and orientation to take advantage of
                                     shading and windbreak trees and reduce fuel consumption for
                                     heating and cooling.
PLANS IN ACTION                •     Design buildings to optimize natural lighting, provide for task
Temecula also promotes               lighting, and specific high-efficiency electric lighting.
energy conservation by
enforcing building codes,      •     Encourage both public and private projects to exceed Title 24
encouraging provision of             requirements.
electric vehicle charging
areas, and conserving
energy in public buildings.
                               The relationship between project design and future energy
                               requirements should be considered when reviewing proposals for
                               new development.
                               GOALS AND POLICIES
                               These goals and policies address four major issues: 1) achieving
                               improvements to regional air quality, 2) integration of air quality
                               issues into land use planning decisions, 3) reducing air pollutant
                               emissions from automobiles, and 4) conserving energy.
 C     I T Y        O F       T   E M E     C U L A          G    E N E R A L              P   L A N
                                                   AQ-8

   REGIONAL AIR  Air pollutants do not recognize political boundaries. Often the
        QUALITY  policies of one community may adversely impact another
                 community. This is particularly true with respect to air pollution,
   IMPROVEMENT   and underscores the need for regional and sub-regional
                 implementation of effective air quality strategies. Coordination
                 among regional agencies, the business community, special interest
                 groups, and individuals will ensure that measures with the greatest
                 emission reduction potential are addressed.
                 Goal 1          Continue      coordination       of     air   quality
                                 improvement efforts in the Western Riverside
                                 area.
                 Policy 1.1      Coordinate planning efforts with other local,
                                 regional and State agencies, including the County of
                                 Riverside, WRCOG, SCAQMD and SCAG.
                 Policy 1.2      Encourage participation of local citizens, the
                                 business community and interested groups and
                                 individuals in air quality planning and
                                 implementation efforts.
                 Policy 1.3      Promote programs that educate the public about
                                 regional air quality issues, opportunities and
                                 solutions.
AIR QUALITY AND  The number, location, and type of land uses in the Temecula
      LAND USE   Planning Area have long-term air quality implications. A pattern of
                 land uses that facilitates an efficient urban form is essential to
                 improving and maintaining air quality. Placing complementary
                 land uses in proximity to one another can reduce the length and
                 number of vehicle trips. For example, neighborhood parks and
                 schools can encourage residents to walk or bike from their home to
                 these often-used facilities.
                 Goal 2          Improve air quality through effective land use
                                 planning in Temecula.
                 Policy 2.1      Encourage new development that provides
                                 employment opportunities for Temecula residents to
                                 improve the balance of jobs relative to housing.
                 Policy 2.2      Encourage infill development near activity centers,
                                 within Mixed Use Overlay Areas, and along
                                 transportation corridors.
C I T Y    O F  T  E M E      C U L A         G   E N E R A L             P  L A  N
                                     AQ-9
                  Policy 2.3     Minimize land use conflicts between emission
                                 sources and sensitive receptors.
                  Policy 2.4     Mitigate air quality impacts associated with
                                 development projects to the greatest extent feasible.
  AIR POLLUTANT   Automobile use is the single greatest contributor to air pollution in
  EMISSIONS FROM  California. Most of our air quality problems stem from our
                  dependence on automobiles. According to SCAG, vehicle miles
    AUTOMOBILES   traveled have increased dramatically over past decades, with mobile
                  pollution sources comprising about 60 percent of air pollution in
                  the region. The most effective strategy for improving air quality is
                  making fewer automobile trips and when such trips are necessary,
                  making them shorter. Provision and availability of alternative
                  modes of transportation are essential to the success of this strategy.
                  Alternative transportation demand strategies can increase the
                  efficiency of the transportation system, reduce congestion, and
                  improve regional air quality.
                  Goal 3         Enhance mobility to minimize air pollutant
                                 emissions.
                  Policy 3.1     Use transportation demand reduction techniques to
                                 reduce motor vehicle trips.
                  Policy 3.2     Use transportation systems management techniques
                                 to maintain an orderly flow of traffic and improve
                                 mobility.
                  Policy 3.3     Pursue development of a public transit system
                                 consisting of local shuttle and bus routes, as well as
                                 bicycle and pedestrian trails that are linked to the
                                 regional transit network.
                  Policy 3.4     Establish a convenient and efficient system of bicycle
                                 routes and pedestrian walkways.
                  Policy 3.5     Promote the use of alternative clean-fueled vehicles,
                                 new transportation technologies, and combustion
                                 engine alternatives for personal and business use.
                  Policy 3.6     Develop and implement programs that reduce local
                                 traffic congestion at peak hours and during special
                                 events.
C  I T Y    O F  T   E M E    C U L A          G   E N E R A L           P   L A    N
                                     AQ-10
         ENERGY   Energy production to meet our daily cooking, heating/cooling, and
  CONSERVATION    electric power demands results in the emission of air pollutants.
                  Conservation reduces demand for energy production, leading to a
                  reduction of emission pollutants. Recycling efforts also reduce the
                  amount of energy required for production of goods and materials.
                  Goal 4          Adopt effective energy conservation and recycling
                                  practices to reduce emissions.
                  Policy 4.1      Encourage community-wide reductions in energy
                                  consumption through conservation.
                  Policy 4.2      Promote local recycling of wastes and the use of
                                  recycled materials.
                  Policy 4.3      Encourage      energy-efficient design    in   new
                                  development projects.
                  IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
                  The following Implementation Programs provide actions to
                  implement Air Quality Element policies.
            AQ-1  Support regional transit initiatives and promote development of
          MULTI-  high-speed rail service connecting Temecula to San Diego and Los
                  Angeles. Actively participate in efforts to protect and improve air
  JURISDICTIONAL  quality in the region. Attend meetings with the County of
  COORDINATION    Riverside, WRCOG, SCAQMD, SCAG, and other agencies as
                  required to support these objectives and fulfill Temecula s
                  requirements and obligations under the AQMP and Sub-Regional
                  Air Quality Implementation Program.
                  Agency/Department:          Planning
                  Related Policy:             1.1
                  Required by General Plan EIR
            AQ-2  Continue to involve the general public, environmental groups, the
          PUBLIC  business community, and special interest groups in the formulation
                  and implementation of air quality programs. Conduct periodic
   PARTICIPATION  public outreach efforts, and continue to promote public education
                  as a method of employer compliance with the Trip Reduction
                  Ordinance.
C  I T Y    O F  T   E M E    C U L A           G  E N E R A L          P  L A   N
                                      AQ-11
                  Agency/Department:           Planning
                  Related Policies:            1.2, 1.3
                  Required by General Plan EIR
           AQ-3   Adhere to the policies and programs of the Land Use Element,
       LAND USE   including development of mixed-use projects where designated and
                  feasible, to ensure that future land use patterns and traffic increases
   COMPATIBILITY  are accompanied by measures to improve air quality.
                  Agency/Department:           Planning
                  Related Policy:              2.3
                  Required by General Plan EIR
           AQ-4   Improve the jobs/housing balance in Temecula by encouraging
   JOBS/HOUSING   development and expansion of businesses, while also promoting
                  development of housing affordable to all segments of the
        BALANCE   community near job opportunity sites, and within Mixed Use
                  Overlay Areas.
                  Agency/Department:           City Manager s Office, Planning
                  Related Policies:            2.1, 2.2
                  Required by General Plan EIR
           AQ-5   Assess the potential air quality impacts of individual development
     MITIGATION   projects by requiring preparation of air quality analysis for
                  individual projects. The City shall require individual development
      MEASURES    projects to comply with the following measures to minimize short-
                  term, construction-related PM10 and NOx emissions, and to
                  minimize off-site impacts:
                  •     Water all active construction areas at least twice daily.
                  •     Cover all haul trucks or maintain at least two feet of freeboard.
                  •     Pave or apply water four times daily to all unpaved parking or
                        staging areas.
                  •     Sweep or wash any site access points within 30 minutes of any
                        visible dirt deposition on any public roadway.
                  •     Cover or water twice daily any on-site stockpiles of debris, dirt
                        or other dusty material.
                  •     Suspend all operations on any unpaved surface if winds exceed
                        25 mph.
C I T Y    O F   T  E M E       C U L A          G   E N E R A L            P   L A N
                                       AQ-12

                   •     Hydroseed or otherwise stabilize any cleared area which is to
                         remain in active for more than 96 hours after clearing is
                         completed.
                   •     Ensure that all cut and fill slopes are permanently protected
                         from erosion.
                   •     Require the construction contractor to ensure that all
                         construction equipment is maintained in peak working order.
                   •     Limit allowable idling to 10 minutes for trucks and heavy
                         equipment.
                   •     Encourage car pooling for construction workers.
                   •     Limit lane closures to off-peak travel periods.
                   •     Park construction vehicles off traveled roadways.
                   •     Wet down or cover dirt hauled off-site.
                   •     Wash or sweep away access points daily.
                   •     Encourage receipt of materials during non-peak traffic hours.
                   •     Sandbag construction sites for erosion control.
                   Approve development that could significantly impact air quality,
                   either individually or cumulatively, only if it is conditioned with all
                   reasonable mitigation measures to avoid, minimize, or offset the
                   impact.
                   Agency/Department:          Planning
                   Related Policy:             2.4
                   Required by General Plan EIR
           AQ-6    Locate new sensitive receptors away from major air pollution
        SENSITIVE  sources. Require buffering of sensitive receptors from air pollution
                   sources through the use of landscaping, open space and other
     RECEPTORS     separation techniques.
                   Agency/Department:          Planning
                   Related Policies:           2.3, 2.4
                   Required by General Plan EIR
           AQ-7    Incorporate strategies into City-wide design guidelines and
          DESIGN   development standards that promote a pedestrian-scale
                   environment, encourage use of mass transit, and reduce dependence
     GUIDELINES    on the automobile.
C I T Y    O F    T  E M E      C U L A          G   E N E R A L            P  L A N
                                      AQ-13

                   Agency/Department:         Planning
                   Related Policies:          3.1, 3.4
                   Required by General Plan EIR
           AQ-8    Promote the use of alternative work weeks, flextime, telecommuting,
     ALTERNATIVE   and work-at-home programs among employers in Temecula and
                   continue to enforce provisions of the City s Trip Reduction
          WORK     Ordinance, including requirements for preparation of Trip
       SCHEDULES   Reduction Plans (TRPs) for qualifying development projects and
                   employers.
                   Agency/Department:         Planning, Public Works
                   Related Policies:          3.1, 3.6
                   Required by General Plan EIR
           AQ-9    Require employee rideshare and transit incentives for large
  RIDESHARE AND    employers, consistent with the requirements of the City s Trip
                   Reduction Ordinance.          Continue to encourage voluntary
         TRANSIT   compliance with the Ordinance for smaller employers.
       INCENTIVES
                   Agency/Department:         Planning
                   Related Policies:          3.1, 3.6
                   Required by General Plan EIR
           AQ-10   Require operators of large scale outdoor events to submit a Trip
  SPECIAL EVENTS   Reduction Plan (TRP) that shall apply to both patrons and
                   employees during the course of the event. Encourage special event
                   operators to advertise and offer discount parking incentives to
                   carpooling patrons, with two or more persons per vehicle, for on-
                   site parking facilities.
                   Agency/Department:         Planning
                   Related Policies:          3.2, 3.6
                   Required by General Plan EIR
C  I T Y   O F    T   E M E    C U L A          G   E N E R A L           P  L A N
                                        AQ-14
           AQ-11    Work to achieve local performance goals for vehicle miles traveled
TRANSPORTATION      (VMT) reduction, consistent with SCAG s Growth Management
                    Plan recommended standards for the Western Riverside County sub-
    ALTERNATIVES    region.     Enforce requirements and options within the Trip
                    Reduction Ordinance to achieve a 12 percent citywide reduction in
                    vehicle miles traveled.
                    Agency/Department:          Planning
                    Related Policies:           3.1, 3.3, 3.4
                    Required by General Plan EIR
           AQ-12    Promote and encourage the use of alternative fuel vehicles.
     ALTERNATIVE    Consider adoption of an ordinance requiring provision of
                    alternative fueling stations at or near major employment locations,
 FUELED VEHICLES    shopping centers, public facilities, and mixed-use developments.
                    Agency/Department:          Planning
                    Related Policy:             3.5
                    Required by General Plan EIR
           AQ-13    Encourage pedestrian and bicycle trips as an option to single-
MULTI-USE TRAILS    occupancy vehicle trips by constructing and maintaining trails and
                    bikeways specified in the Multi-Use Trails and Bikeways Master
   AND BIKEWAYS     Plan. Periodically update the Master Plan as needed to meet
     MASTER PLAN    resident needs and City objectives.
                    Agency/Department:          Community      Services,  Public   Works;
                                                Planning
                    Related Policy:             3.3
                    Required by General Plan EIR
           AQ-14    Work with Caltrans and RTA to identify potential sites for Park and
  PARK AND RIDE     Ride facilities adjacent to key commuting routes within the City.
                    Prioritize development of such facilities in corridors served by more
        FACILITIES  than one mode of planned transportation (automobile, transit,
                    and/or high-speed rail).
                    Agency/Department:          Public Works, Planning, Caltrans, RTA
                    Related Policy:             3.6
                    Required by General Plan EIR
C  I T Y   O F     T  E M E      C U L A          G   E N E R A L           P   L A N
                                       AQ-15
          AQ-15   Incorporate energy efficient design elements in residential,
ENERGY EFFICIENT  commercial and light industrial and mixed-use development
                  projects. Examples may include (but are not limited to) the
         DESIGN   following.
                  •    Site orientation strategies that use shade and windbreak trees
                       to reduce fuel consumption for heating and cooling.
                  •    Building designs that maximize use of natural lighting,
                       provide for task lighting, and specify high-efficiency electric
                       lighting.
                  Agency/Department:         Planning, Building & Safety
                  Related Policies:          4.1, 4.2, 4.3
                  Required by General Plan EIR
C I T Y    O F   T  E M E     C U L A          G   E N E R A L           P L A N
                                     AQ-16

                                                     CIRCULATION
                                                                   ELEMENT
                  INTRODUCTION
                  T
                           he Circulation Element describes how Temecula residents
                           and local employees get around using automobiles, public
                           transit and bicycles on sidewalks, trails, and current and
                           future railways. A well-developed system of local roadways
                  provides access to and circulation within many residential areas of
                  the City. The City has made substantial efforts in recent years to
                  improve traffic conditions on local roadways, and to encourage
                  alternative means of travel. However, Temecula needs better
                  roadway       circulation    between      residential     areas      and
                  commercial/employment centers, and more efficient connections to
                  regional transportation routes. Pass-through traffic accessing these
                  regional routes from unincorporated areas is also a significant
                  concern. Effective solutions are needed to manage the growth of
                  surrounding areas, provide circulation alternatives for current and
                  future residents, and improve this critical aspect of quality of life.
  PURPOSE OF THE  The City strives to reduce traffic congestion and improve safety on
    CIRCULATION   roadways, to provide useful travel alternatives to the automobile,
                  and to provide better access to regional travel routes.
         ELEMENT  Accomplishing these objectives requires effective land use planning,
                  roadway monitoring and improvement, transportation system and
                  demand management, and regional coordination. The policies and
                  programs in this Element emphasize maintenance of a balanced,
                  multi-modal transportation system that responds to the demands of
                  current and planned land uses, as set forth in the Land Use
                  Element. The Element also addresses the high levels of pass-through
                  traffic associated with development in surrounding areas that
                  accesses Interstate 15 through the City.
                  The Circulation Element is firmly linked to the Land Use Element
                  as the uses identified on the Land Use Policy Map provide the basis
                  for determining future roadway improvements. Moreover, planned
                  roadway alignments can influence or even determine future land
                  uses along arterials within the City. The Circulation policies and
                  plans attempt to ensure that current transportation facilities will be
                  improved and new facilities will be constructed to adequately serve
                  traffic generated by planned development. An efficient and well
C  I T Y    O F  T   E M E      C U L A        G   E N E R A L             P   L A     N
                                       C-1
                 planned circulation system is also a critical factor for diversifying
                 and expanding local economic activities, as described in the
                 Economic Development Element.
                 The Circulation Element provides the foundation for the Citywide
                 Multi-Use Trail and Bikeway system, offering both recreational and
                 commuting opportunities to City residents. Provision of a Multi-
                 Use Trail system also relates to the Air Quality Element because the
                 trail system supports walking and bicycling, both of which reduce
                 demands placed on the automobile transportation system and
                 improve air quality.
     SCOPE AND   State General Plan guidelines suggest that Circulation Element
 CONTENT OF THE  policies and plans:
   CIRCULATION
                 •    Coordinate transportation and circulation systems with planned
        ELEMENT       land uses
                 •    Promote the safe and efficient transport of goods and the safe
                      and effective movement of all populations
                 •    Make efficient use of existing transportation facilities
                 •    Protect environmental quality and promote the wise and
                      equitable use of economic and natural resources
                 The Circulation Element addresses the City s anticipated future
                 transportation and circulation needs in the context of the following
                 topics:
                         •   Roadway Circulation
                         •   Traffic Safety
                         •   Regional Mobility
                         •   Transportation System and Demand Management
                         •   Parking
                         •   Non-Motorized and Alternative Circulation
                         •   Truck Circulation
                 Along with the circulation system, State law requires infrastructure
                 to be addressed in the General Plan. Rather than treat public
                 utilities within the Circulation Element, utilities and public services
                 are addressed in the Growth Management and Public Facilities
                 Element.
C I T Y    O F  T   E M E      C U L A         G   E N E R A L             P   L A  N
                                      C-2

     MEASURING   Within the Circulation Element, two measures are used to describe
   TRAFFIC FLOW  traffic flow on Temecula s roadways and freeway access points:
                 Volume to Capacity Ratios (V/C) and Intersection Capacity
                 Utilization (ICU). These measures are used to establish Level of
                 Service (LOS) categories describing the performance of roadways
                 and access points throughout the community. Each of these
                 measures is described briefly below.
                 VOLUME TO CAPACITY RATIO (V/C)
                 This measure, consisting of a ratio between volume and theoretic
                 capacity, is used to measure the performance of roadway facilities.
                 Volume is established either by a traffic count (in the case of
                 current volumes) or by a forecast for a future point in time.
                 Capacity refers to the vehicle carrying ability of a roadway at free
                 flow speed, and is a critical component of roadway design. For
                 example, a roadway that carries 16,000 vehicles per day, with the
                 capacity to accommodate 20,000 vehicles per day at free flow speed,
                 has a V/C of 0.80.
                 INTERSECTION CAPACITY UTILIZATION (ICU)
                 This measure is applied using peak hour volumes and considers the
                 geometric configuration of intersections when measuring capacity.
                 Intersection Capacity Utilization sums the V/C ratios for the
                 critical movements of an intersection, and thus accounts for the
                 overall performance of intersections, which are the most critical
                 limitations within the City roadway system.
                 LEVEL OF SERVICE
                 Level of Service (LOS) describes the efficiency and quality of traffic
                 operations. Six categories of LOS the letter designations A to F
                 are used to identify traffic conditions, with LOS A representing
                 excellent conditions and LOS F representing extreme congestion.
                 The LOS designations are based upon V/C ratios calculated for
                 freeway access ramps and roadway segments, as well as ICU values
                 calculated for intersections. Table C-1 shows V/C and ICU ranges
                 and the corresponding LOS, with a description of corresponding
                 traffic conditions.
C I T Y    O F  T   E M E     C U L A         G   E N E R A L           P   L A    N
                                     C-3
                                                    TABLE C-1
                                      LEVEL OF SERVICE DESCRIPTIONS
                   Level
                                                                                    V/C or
                    of               Description of Traffic Conditions
                                                                                       ICU
                  Service
                            Very short delays at intersections and free flow         0.00
                    A       operation. Vehicles are completely unimpeded and           0.60
                            can maneuver freely within traffic.
                            Short delays of 10 to 20 seconds at intersections.       0.61 -
                     B      Vehicles are completely unimpeded and can                  0.70
                            maneuver through traffic.
                            Stable flow, with delays of 20 to 35 seconds at          0.71
                            intersections. Some waiting vehicles may fail to go        0.80
                    C       through the intersection before the green light
                            turns red. Ability to maneuver and change lanes at
                            mid-block is somewhat restricted.
                            Congestion becomes more noticeable, with delays          0.81
                            of 35 to 55 seconds at intersections. Many vehicles        0.90
                    D
                            are required to stop at signals, and travel speeds
                            along these roadways become slower.
                            Unstable traffic flow, with delays of 55 to 80           0.91
                     E      seconds at intersections. Most vehicles are required       1.00
                            to wait at least one traffic signal cycle.
                            Traffic volumes exceed capacity, resulting in            Above
                            jammed intersections. This can result in delays            1.00
                     F
                            greater than 80 seconds, and/or two-cycle signal
                            waits.
                  Source: Highway Capacity Manual 2000, Transportation Research Board,
                  National Research Council
  RELATED PLANS  Transportation planning and management require cooperation and
  AND PROGRAMS   coordination among many State, County and regional agencies.
                 Relevant agencies include Caltrans, the Riverside County
                 Transportation Commission (RCTC), the Southern California
                 Association of Governments (SCAG), and the South Coast Air
                 Quality Management District (SCAQMD), which addresses air
                 quality issues associated with vehicle traffic. These agencies have
                 federal and State mandates to adopt transportation-related programs
                 that affect Temecula (and other jurisdictions throughout the area).
C  I T Y  O F   T  E M E       C U L A            G    E N E R A L            P  L A      N
                                       C-4
             SCAG REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION PLAN (RTP)
             The Regional Transportation Plan (RTP) is a multi-modal, long-
             range planning document prepared by the Southern California
             Association of Governments (SCAG). The RTP includes programs
             and policies for congestion management, transit, bicycles and
             pedestrians, roadways, freight, and financing. The RTP is prepared
             every three years to address a 20-year projection of needs.
             Each agency responsible for building and managing transportation
             facilities, including the City of Temecula, has implementation
             responsibilities under the RTP. The RTP relies on local plans and
             policies governing circulation and transportation to identify the
             region s future multi-modal transportation system.
             SOUTH COAST AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN
             The South Coast Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP) mandates
             a variety of measures to reduce traffic congestion and improve air
             quality. The Circulation Element identifies Circulation Programs
             to be implemented in Temecula that may help improve regional air
             quality. The plan for the South Coast Air Basin, which includes
             Temecula and western Riverside County, was prepared by the South
             Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) and SCAG.
             RIVERSIDE COUNTY INTEGRATED PROJECT (RCIP) / COMMUNITY
             AND ENVIRONMENTAL TRANSPORTATION ACCEPTABILITY PROCESS
             (CETAP)
             Western Riverside County is projected to grow from a current
             population of about 1.2 million to 2 million in 2020. In an effort
             to improve the quality of life for current and future residents, the
             County of Riverside, the Riverside County Transportation
             Commission (RCTC) and Southern California Association of
             Governments (SCAG) embarked on a planning process to determine
             future placement of buildings, roads and open spaces within the
             County. This process was named the Riverside County Integrated
             Project (RCIP) and resulted in three interrelated plans: a General
             Plan for land use and housing, a Multiple Species Habitat
             Conservation Plan (MSHCP) to determine open spaces and
             conservation areas, and the Community and Environmental
             Transportation Acceptability Process (CETAP), which identifies
             improvements for highways and transit systems. The integration of
             these distinct planning efforts will improve their ultimate
             effectiveness.
C I T Y O F T   E M E      C U L A         G   E N E R A L            P  L A N
                                  C-5
             The main goals of CETAP are to: 1) identify and set aside areas for
             major transportation facilities; 2) ensure that transportation
             infrastructure will be in place to foster the economic development
             of Riverside County; and 3) provide access to schools, jobs,
             shopping and other daily activities. One major component of the
             CETAP is to identify a location for the Winchester to Temecula
             Corridor, which will involve widening of both I-15 and I-215, as
             well as construction of French Valley Parkway, connecting the
             French Valley Future Growth Area to I-215 and providing an
             alternate freeway access point to Winchester Road. Other goals
             include providing expanded rail service and express bus service
             throughout Riverside County. Decisions reached through the
             CETAP will affect transportation facilities and opportunities within
             Temecula.
             RIVERSIDE COUNTY CIRCULATION ELEMENT
             The Riverside County Circulation Element forms part of the
             County General Plan and is supposed to identify the system of
             regional arterials and bikeways in unincorporated portions of the
             Planning Area.
             The bikeways system is guided through the application of the
             General Plan s policies, programs and standards in conjunction with
             adopted bicycle routes. County designated Class I Bike Paths follow
             the courses of Murrieta and Temecula Creeks.            The City s
             Circulation Plan calls for establishment and implementation of a
             bikeway plan that links to County routes.
             RIVERSIDE COUNTY CONGESTION MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
             Urbanized areas such as Riverside County are required to adopt a
             Congestion Management Program (CMP). The Riverside County
             Congestion Management Program (CMP) is updated every two
             years, pursuant to Proposition 111. The goals of the CMP are to
             reduce traffic congestion, to improve air quality, and to provide a
             coordination mechanism between land development and
             transportation improvement decisions.             The Congestion
             Management Program is administered by the Riverside County
             Transportation Commission (RCTC).
             In 1997, RCTC significantly modified the original CMP to meet
             federal Congestion Management System (CMS) guidelines. This
             effort included development of an Enhanced Traffic Monitoring
             System, in which real-time traffic count data can be accessed by
C I T Y O F T   E M E     C U L A         G   E N E R A L          P  L A    N
                                 C-6
             RCTC to evaluate the condition of the CMS, as well as meet other
             monitoring requirements at the State and federal levels.
             As a result, the submittal of Traffic Impact Assessments (TIAs) for
             development proposals to RCTC is no longer required. However,
             the City is required to maintain minimum LOS thresholds
             identified in the General Plan and continues to require TIAs on
             development projects.
             MEASURE A, TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM
             In 1988, Riverside County voters approved Measure A, a half-cent
             sales tax program that creates funding for a wide variety of
             transportation projects and services throughout Riverside County.
             RCTC is responsible for administering the program. Measure A
             dollars are spent in accordance with a voter-approved expenditure
             plan that was adopted as part of the 1988 election. None of the
             originally programmed improvement projects are located within
             the Planning Area.
             Riverside County voters approved an extension of the current
             Measure A program for an additional 30 years in November, 2003.
             Improvement projects within the Planning Area include adding one
             lane in each direction to I-15 within the Planning Area, and
             constructing arterial connections between SR-79 and I-215 at French
             Valley Parkway and Clinton Keith Road.
             TEMECULA FIVE YEAR CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM
             The City s Capital Improvement Program (CIP) is a planning tool
             used to coordinate the financing and scheduling of major projects,
             including transportation improvements, to be undertaken by the
             City. Not all projects included in the CIP have budget approval.
             The City s CIP is revised on an annual basis to meet changing
             needs, priorities, and financial conditions.
             The following CIP designated projects have particular relevance to
             the Circulation Element:
             •   French Valley Parkway interchange and overcrossing of I-15
             •   The extension of Overland Drive bridge over Murrieta Creek to
                 Diaz Road
             •   Pechanga Parkway widening and improvements from SR-79
                 South to Via Eduardo
C I T Y O F T   E M E     C U L A          G   E N E R A L          P L A    N
                                  C-7

             •   Rancho California Road widening from Old Town Front Street
                 to east of Ynez Road
             •   Rancho Way extension from Diaz Road to Margarita Road
             •   Eastern Bypass project improvements to Butterfield Stage Road,
                 Nicolas Road and Murrieta Hot Springs Road.
             •   Diaz Road extension to Cherry Street
             •   Diaz Road widening from Winchester Road to Rancho
                 California Road
             •   Main Street bridge over Murrieta Creek (replacement)
             •   Pauba Road Improvements from Margarita Road to west of
                 Showalter Road
             •   Rainbow Canyon Road widening from Pechanga Parkway to the
                 City limits
             •   I-15/SR-79 South ultimate interchange
             •   La Paz Street widening from Ynez Road to SR-79 South
             •   Temecula Creek crossing to provide supplemental access to SR-
                 79 South
             •   Ynez Road widening from Tierra Vista Road to La Paz Street
             •   Western Bypass Corridor from SR-79 South to French Valley
                 Parkway
             TEMECULA TRIP REDUCTION ORDINANCE
             Temecula has adopted a Trip Reduction Ordinance, pursuant to the
             requirements of the State Health and Safety Code. The Ordinance
             enables the City to receive revenues from State vehicle registration
             fees to administer air pollution reduction programs. The Municipal
             Code also mandates the provision of carpool, bicycle, rideshare,
             vanpool, transit, child care, transportation system management,
             and/or telecommuting facilities for both new and current
             development projects within the City where 100 or more persons
             are employed. Strategies to provide these facilities are detailed in
             Trip Reduction Plans (TRPs) prepared by employers, either as a
             condition of development review, or upon issuance of a business
             license. Businesses with fewer than 100 employees are also
             encouraged to participate on a voluntary basis.
             TEMECULA MULTI-USE TRAILS AND BIKEWAYS MASTER PLAN
             The Temecula Multi-Use Trails and Bikeways Master Plan is a
             separate document from the General Plan that provides a number of
             options to implement the general policy direction established by the
             General Plan. Key aspects of the adopted Master Plan are
             incorporated within the Circulation and Open Space/Conservation
             Elements of the General Plan. However, due to changes to the
C I T Y O F T   E M E     C U L A          G  E N E R A L          P   L A    N
                                 C-8

                standard roadway cross-sections, the location and feasibility of
                providing future bike lanes may need to be re-evaluated.
                CIRCULATION PLAN
                Temecula s circulation network consists of roadways, transit
                services, multi-use trails and bikeways, and air traffic at French
                Valley Airport. Other facilities, such as park-and-ride lots, transit
                shelters, and public and private parking lots support these methods
                of travel. The Circulation Plan is carried out by goals, policies, and
                implementation programs presented at the conclusion of the
                Circulation Element.
                Roadway and alternative mode mobility plans have been designed
                that provide adequate capacity to accommodate travel needs
                resulting from development pursuant to the Land Use Element
                within the Temecula Planning Area, as well as attempting to
                anticipate future development in the County of Riverside, and the
                City of Murrieta.
      ROADWAY   Roadways in Temecula are defined using a hierarchical classification
   CIRCULATION  system. Each type of roadway is described by size, function, and
                capacity. The Circulation Plan establishes eight types of roadways,
                ranging from eight-lane high capacity divided roadways to two-lane
                undivided roadways. Some roadway types will have a standard rural
                cross-section for use in selected areas. The standard roadway
                classifications are listed in Table C-2, and described in the
                paragraphs that follow. The typical non-intersection cross sections
                are illustrated in Figure C-1. Additional rights-of-way (beyond the
                standard width) may be required at higher volume intersections and
                to provide for safe turning movements.
                FREEWAY
                Interstate 15 freeway design standards are dictated by Caltrans
                District 8. Interchange improvements identified in the Circulation
                Plan will need to be coordinated and approved by Caltrans.
                Most interchange on-ramps along Interstate 15 within Temecula will
                be subject to peak period ramp metering. The City supports the
                concurrent implementation of HOV bypass lanes at the ramps
                (where possible) to promote ride sharing and express transit use by
                area commuters.
C I T Y  O F   T   E M E      C U L A        G   E N E R A L            P  L A     N
                                    C-9
                                             TABLE C-2
                                   ROADWAY CLASSIFICATIONS
                                                                                        Maximum
                                                      Minimum                           Two-Way
  Standard                                              Width            Typical          Daily
  Roadway                                              (ROW/           Number of         Traffic
    Class                  Definition                 Pavement)           Lanes          Volume
                Highways carrying high
                volumes of regional and                             8-10 lanes with
                local traffic.      Priority is                     raised median
Urban Arterial  given to through traffic              134 /110      and additional        72,000
                flow, and access is generally                       turn lanes at
                limited      to      signalized                     intersections
                intersections.
                Highways acting as main
                thoroughfares and providing
                                                                    6 lanes with
                access to major activity
                                                                    raised median
  Principal     centers and to the regional
                                                      110 / 86      and additional        54,000
   Arterial     freeway system.           Direct
                                                                    turn lanes at
                access to adjacent properties
                                                                    intersections
                is discouraged, except at
                signalized intersections.
                Highways that complement
                the principal system by
                                                                    4 lanes with
                providing        a     medium
                                                                    raised median
    Major       capacity backbone system.
                                                      100 / 78      and additional        36,000
   Arterial     Only limited access is
                                                                    turn lanes at
                provided,       typically     to
                                                                    inter-sections
                commercial properties (i.e.
                not to residential properties)
                Roadways intended to carry
                traffic between local streets
                                                                    4 lanes
                and principal or major
  Secondary                                                         undivided, with
                arterials. They are similar to         88 / 68                            29,000
   Arterial                                                         turn lanes as
                major arterials, with only
                                                                    needed
                limited access to adjacent
                properties.
  Modified      Secondary arterials designed                        4 lanes
  Secondary     to preserve rural character of         88 / 70      separated,     no     20,000
   Arterial     surrounding areas.                                  curb and gutter
   Limited      Secondary arterials that have                       2 lanes divided
  Secondary     lower volumes such that                88 / 46      with turn lanes       16,000
   Arterial     four lanes are not needed.                          where needed
                Roadways             providing         66 / 44
                property access, and linking          Residential
                                                                    2 lanes
  Collector     properties to secondary,                                                  14,000
                                                                    undivided
                major,      and       principal        78 / 56
                arterials.                            Industrial
                Roadway providing property
    Rural                                                           2 lanes
                access and local circulation         88 150 / 50                          10,000
   Highway                                                          undivided
                in rural areas.
C  I T Y       O F        T  E M E        C U L A          G    E N E R A L           P  L A     N
                                                 C-10
   Figure C-1
   Roadway Cross Sections
   CITY OF TEMECULA GENERAL PLAN
   Source: Austin-Foust Associates, Inc.
R/W                                                                *134' Minimum                                               R/W
                                                                         110'
      12'            12'              12'        12'         12'         14'         12'       12'        12'      12'     12'
                                                                          RAISED MEDIAN
                                              URBAN ARTERIAL (8-10 LANES DIVIDED)
             R/W                                                   *110' Minimum                                       R/W
                                                                         86'
                      12'              12'       12'         12'         14'         12'       12'         12'     12'
                                                                           RAISED MEDIAN
                                               PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL (6 LANES DIVIDED)
                    R/W                                            *100' Minimum                                   R/W
                                                                         76'
                             12'           7'      12'         12'       14'        12'       12'       7'     12'
                                                                            RAISED MEDIAN
                                                MAJOR ARTERIAL (4 LANES DIVIDED)
                                           * Additional right-of-way should be provided for bicycle lanes
                                                   on urban and principal arterials when feasible
C I T Y                   O F              T E M E C U L A                          G E N E R A L                     P L A N
                                                                         C-11
 Figure C-1
 Roadway Cross Sections
 CITY OF TEMECULA GENERAL PLAN
  Source: Austin-Foust Associates, Inc.
                          R/W                                    88' Minimum                        R/W
                                                                      68'
                                   10'      10'     12'         12'        12'      12'   10'   10'
                                        SECONDARY ARTERIAL (4 LANES UNDIVIDED)
                            R/W                                       88'                         R/W
                                                                      70'
                                     9'     14'         14'           14'       14'     14'    9'
                              MODIFIED SECONDARY ARTERIAL (4 LANES SEPARATED)
                          R/W                                         88'                           R/W
                                                            46'
                                   10'     5'   12'         12'        12'     5'   12'   9'  10'
                                                             Turning Lane
                                  LIMITED SECONDARY ARTERIAL (2 LANES DIVIDED)
C I T Y                  O F              T E M E C U L A                        G E N E R A L          P L A N
                                                                     C-12

             URBAN ARTERIALS
             Urban Arterials are eight-lane roadways with raised landscaped
             medians. In some circumstances, ten lanes may be required. Access
             to Urban Arterials may vary depending on where the facility is
             located within the City, but is typically limited to adjacent
             commercial properties at signal-controlled intersections. Generally,
             one-quarter mile intersection spacing should be considered as a
             minimum. Where overriding circumstances will not allow the
             desired intersection spacing policy to be met, left turn restrictions
             should be considered at all unsignalized intersections and "high-
             speed" design features should be incorporated into the intersection
             design (e.g. curb radii and acceleration/deceleration lanes where
             appropriate.) In most situations, bicycle lanes will not be provided
             along Urban Arterials when alternate routes are available.
             Curbside parking is prohibited. Traffic carrying capacities of
             70,000+ vehicles per day can be achieved depending on the degree of
             access control, peak period traffic loadings, and lane configurations
             at the major intersections.
             PRINCIPAL ARTERIALS
             Principal Arterials are six lane roadways with raised landscaped
             medians. Desirable minimum spacing for street intersections along
             a Principal Arterial is approximately one quarter mile. Unsignalized
             minor street and driveway access may be allowed, but signalized
             access is preferred and left-turn restrictions are typically placed at
             unsignalized access locations. An exception to the standard cross
             section is found in the French Valley area. According to an
             agreement between Caltrans and the County of Riverside, the right-
             of-way for Winchester Road, between Hunter and Keller Roads,
             needs to be 184 feet wide.
             Curbside parking is prohibited. Traffic carrying capacities of
             54,000± vehicles per day can be achieved depending on the degree of
             access control, peak period loadings, and lane configurations at the
             major intersections.
             MAJOR ARTERIALS
             Major Arterials are four lane roadways with painted or raised
             landscaped medians. Minimum spacing for intersections along
             Major Arterial streets should be one-eighth mile. Left turn
             restrictions will generally be placed at minor unsignalized driveways.
C I T Y O F T   E M E     C U L A           G   E N E R A L           P  L A   N
                                  C-14

             As a primary traffic carrier, curbside parking may not be
             appropriate along some of the more heavily traveled Major Arterial
             street segments within the City. Traffic carrying capacities of
             36,000± vehicles per day can be achieved depending on the degree
             of access control and peak period loadings.
             SECONDARY ARTERIALS
             Secondary Arterials are four-lane roadways without medians
             (undivided). Minimum intersection spacing along Secondary
             Roadways should be approximately one-sixteenth mile (330 feet).
             Direct access from private residential properties should be avoided
             where possible unless medians can be provided at such access
             points.
             While the Secondary Arterial provides for curbside parking, such
             parking should be prohibited near intersections where left-turn lane
             striping is provided. In some locations, secondary arterials may
             include a limited median, or be re-striped to provide a left-turn
             pocket. While the Secondary Arterial provides for curbside
             parking, there may be localized circumstances which would warrant
             parking restrictions. Traffic carrying capacities of 30,000± vehicles
             per day can be achieved depending on the degree of access allowed
             and peak period traffic loadings.
             MODIFIED SECONDARY ARTERIALS
             Along DePortola Road between Santiago and Margarita Roads, a
             Modified Secondary Arterial cross-section is anticipated. This cross-
             section is intended to help preserve the rural character of the area,
             while accommodating local circulation needs.
             The cross-section envisions a multi-use trail adjacent to one side of
             the roadway beyond the current 88-foot right-of-way. Prior to
             improving Ynez/DePortola Road to four lanes, the City will acquire
             sufficient right-of-way or easements necessary to extend the multi-
             use trail along all improved sections of the road.
             LIMITED SECONDARY ARTERIALS
             A Limited Secondary Arterial features two lanes with a median
             within a similar right-of-way to the four-lane Secondary Arterial.
             The reduced cross-section anticipates one lane in each direction,
             with the potential to add a left turn pocket, and separated trail.
             This designation is used on Secondary Arterial roadways that feature
C I T Y O F T   E M E     C U L A         G    E N E R A L           P  L A   N
                                  C-15

             a more rural appearance and have lower traffic volumes. Traffic
             carrying capacity is around 20,000± vehicles per day.
             COLLECTORS
             Collector streets often provide access to local streets from the
             arterial roadway network. Collectors are two-lane roadways that
             sometimes have painted medians for left turn movements.
             The right-of-way width for collectors varies from 66 feet to 78 feet,
             depending on location within the City. Direct access from
             individual private residential properties should be avoided where
             possible. The 78 foot cross sections are typically applied to
             Collectors located within light industrial and commercial areas,
             whereas a smaller dimension may be appropriate for residential
             areas.     The desirable intersection spacing for Collectors is
             approximately 330 feet. Minimum intersection/access spacing on
             all Collector facilities should be 200 feet.
             Collectors provide for curbside parking. Parking should be
             restricted near intersection approaches where a separate right-turn
             lane is provided. Traffic carrying capacities of 16,000± vehicles per
             day can be achieved depending on the degree of access control and
             peak period traffic loadings. Not all collector streets are shown on
             the Circulation Plan.
             RURAL HIGHWAYS
             The Rural Highway standard may be applied to roads within Rural
             Preservation Areas (RPAs) identified in the Land Use Element, as
             well as semi-rural neighborhoods within the City. Surrounding
             areas are primarily designated as Vineyards/Agriculture, Hillside,
             Rural, Very Low, or Low Density Residential in the General Plan.
             Rural Highways feature a two lane 50-foot curb-to-curb cross section
             within a right of way of 88 to 150 feet or more. For safety reasons,
             left turn lanes may be required at major access points (such as
             intersections) and the 50-foot curb-to-curb width allows this to
             occur without the need for additional pavement width. Bike lanes
             can be located along only one side of the roadway to form a
             continuous system along each street, when needed. Minimum
             intersection/access spacing along Rural Highways should be
             approximately one-sixteenth of a mile (330 feet). Direct access from
             private residential properties should be avoided where possible. The
             carrying capacity of Rural Highways is approximately 20,000
C I T Y O F T   E M E     C U L A           G   E N E R A L          P   L A  N
                                  C-16

             vehicles per day. This relatively high capacity can be achieved due
             to few signalized intersections and minimum side friction.
             The intent of the Rural Highway classification is to preserve
             sufficient right-of-way for construction of future Secondary, Major
             or Principal Arterials, while enabling use of these facilities to
             support rural development in the short term. Should future traffic
             volumes on streets constructed to a Rural Highway standard reach
             the threshold noted above, the roadway should be improved to full
             arterial standards.
             LOCAL STREETS
             Local Streets are two-lane roadways without medians. Centerline
             striping is typically not provided, and curbside parking is allowed.
             Minimum intersection spacing on Local Streets should be
             approximately 200 feet and curbside parking should be provided.
             Traffic carrying capacity is physically similar to a Collector
             roadway, however the qualitative limit of acceptable traffic volumes
             in a residential environment is substantially lower (less than 5,000
             vehicles per day). Local streets are not shown on the Circulation
             Plan.
             ROADWAY DIMENSIONS
             Figure C-1 shows schematic cross-sections of each category of
             roadway. These sections represent the desirable standards, but
             variations in right-of-way width and specific roadway improvements
             will occur in certain cases due to physical constraints and/or right-
             of-way limitations. In some situations, additional right-of-way may
             be required for bikeways and trails.
             The roadway classifications may deviate from the standards where
             physical constraints exist, where preservation of community
             character dictates special treatment, or on approaches to Principal
             Intersections (discussed later in this Element). Bikeways and
             sidewalks also affect the specific standards applied to various
             roadways. However, the overriding circulation goal is that all
             roadways carry the designed volumes of traffic at desired
             performance levels. In addition, the median width of Major and
             Secondary roadways will vary according to the area being served,
             right-of-way constraints and turn-lane requirements.
C I T Y O F T   E M E     C U L A          G   E N E R A L          P   L A   N
                                  C-17
             INTERSECTION DIMENSIONS
             The cross-sections presented in Figure C-1 identify mid-block
             roadway dimensions. Right-of-way needs at intersections are
             typically greater than those at mid-block. Table C-3 provides
             guidelines for determining the number of required lanes at
             intersection approaches for each roadway class.
                                                TABLE C-3
                                   INTERSECTION LANE GUIDELINES
                                        Number of Entering
                                       Lanes (each direction)
                 Roadway                          Left Right
               Classification        Through Turn Turn                       Comments
             Urban Arterial               4        2(1)      1(2)
                                                                    At specific locations,   two
                                                    (1)       (2)   right turn lanes or a    free
             Principal Arterial           3        2         1
                                                                    right turn may             be
                                                                    required.
                                                                    At specific locations,   two
                                                    (1)       (2)   right turn lanes or a    free
             Major Arterial               2        2         1
                                                                    right turn may             be
                                                                    required.
             Secondary
                                          2        2(1)      1(2)
             Arterial
             Modified
             Secondary                    2        2(1)      1(2)
             Arterial
                                                                    Two through lanes may
                                                                    be required if the
             Limited
                                                                    roadway changes to a
             Secondary                   1-2        1         1
                                                                    higher classification on
             Arterial
                                                                    the far side of the
                                                                    intersection.
                                                                    A right turn lane may be
                                                                    required for turns onto
             Collector                    1         1        0-1
                                                                    an Urban, Principal, or
                                                                    Major Arterial
             Rural Highway               1-2        1         1
                          (1)
             Notes:            Only one left turn lane is required if left turn is onto a Limited
                               Secondary, Collector, or two-lane Rural Highway.
                           (2)
                               If a roadway changes from a lower classification on the far side
                          of the intersection (e.g. Urban to a Principal or Principal to a
                          Major), then a right turn lane drop (trap lane) can act as a separate
                          right turn lane, and an additional right turn lane would not be
                          required.
C I T Y O F T  E M E        C U L A            G    E N E R A L                   P  L A     N
                                     C-18
                             In most cases, the right-of-way shown on the mid-block cross-
                             sections in Figure C-1 will be adequate to accommodate the
                             through and left turn lanes shown in Table C-3. Right turn lanes
                             will typically require some additional right-of-way on one side (the
                             entering side of the intersection). The additional right-of-way shall
                             be a minimum of six feet (10 feet is preferable), and shall extend
                             for at least 250 feet back from the intersection curb face.
                             PERFORMANCE CRITERIA
                             Evaluating the ability of the circulation system to serve Temecula s
                             residents and businesses requires establishing suitable performance
                             criteria. Performance criteria have a policy component that
                             establishes a desired level of service (LOS) and a technical
                             component that specifies how traffic forecast data can be used to
                             measure criteria achievement.
                             The performance criteria used for evaluating volumes and capacities
                             on the City street system are based on peak hour intersection data,
                             since intersections are the primary limiting factor affecting traffic
                             flow on City roadways. Performance criteria for freeway ramps
                             accessing I-15 are based on V/C ratios for each ramp. The
                             performance standards are summarized in Table C-4.
                                                               TABLE C-4
                                        CIRCULATION SYSTEM PERFORMANCE CRITERIA
                             Peak Hour Intersection Criteria
                               Intersection capacity utilization (ICU) not to exceed 0.90 (LOS D)
                                    Saturation flow rate             1,750 vehicles per hour per lane
                                    Clearance interval               0.10 ICU
                             Peak Hour Freeway Ramp Criteria
                               Volume-to-capacity (V/C) ratio not to exceed 1.00 (LOS E)
                             Source: Austin-Foust Associates, Inc., September 2003.
PLANS IN ACTION              The City of Temecula has an intersection capacity performance
The City strives to achieve  standard of 0.90 ICU for peak hour intersection operation impacts.
LOS          for peak hour   This standard means that an intersection is operating at 90 percent
intersection operations and  of its capacity, corresponding to LOS D. In addition to this ICU
LOS           for non-peak   analysis, freeway ramps require a special traffic operations analysis.
hour operations.             For freeway ramps, the maximum peak hour V/C is 1.00.
 C    I T Y         O F     T   E M E      C U L A             G    E N E R A L              P   L A  N
                                                   C-19
                              These performance standards establish a basis from which to
                              evaluate the need to improve or replace roadway facilities within the
                              City in response to increased traffic or congestion. Beyond these
                              area-wide standards, specific trip caps have been defined and applied
                              to Mixed Use Overlay Areas established within the Land Use
                              Element. These trip cap standards are tied to the capacity of
                              surrounding roadways, and apply in addition to the standards
                              described in this Element.
                              GENERAL PLAN ROADWAY SYSTEM
 PLANS IN ACTION              Circulation Element goals and policies emphasize the need for a
 Roadway improvements         better circulation system, capable of serving both current and future
 are programmed using the     local and regional traffic. The Roadway Plan for the Temecula
 City s Capital Improve-      Planning Area is illustrated in Figure C-2. Alignments shown for
 ment Program process.        future planned roadways are preliminary and are subject to
                              refinement based on future engineering studies. The Roadway Plan
                              accommodates anticipated traffic levels and the hierarchical roadway
                              classification system is used to avoid community impacts. Roadway
                              improvements needed to achieve performance criteria and avoid
                              roadway and intersection impacts within the Planning Area are
                              prioritized, funded, and completed using the City s 5-year Capital
                              Improvement Plan process.
                              PRINCIPAL INTERSECTIONS
PLANS IN ACTION               The orientation of Temecula s street system funnels many trips
The       City      monitors  through a few key intersections. Failure of these intersections to
performance of Principal      perform at adopted performance standards significantly impairs the
Intersections, and elevates   overall effectiveness of the transportation network. Principal
priority within the CIP for   Intersections identified by the City as critical to the function of the
improvements to Principal
                              entire local and regional transportation network are regularly
Intersections exceeding LOS
D.
                              monitored and priority is given to them in implementing roadway
                              improvements.
                              Right-of-way and roadway widths specified in Table C-2 shall vary
                              on all approaches to Principal Intersections identified by the City to
                              accommodate intersection improvements, such as full width
                              auxiliary turn lanes and/or dual-left turn lanes, as needed. Parking
                              shall also be restricted on all approaches to Principal Intersections,
                              to ensure adequate space to develop such improvements.
 C    I T Y          O F     T   E M E      C U L A         G   E N E R A L             P  L A   N
                                                  C-20
Figure C-2
Roadway Plan
 C  I T Y    O F T E M E C U L A  G E N E R A L P L A N
                             C-21
BACK SIDE OF 11X17”
PAGE
C  I T Y      O F   T E M E C U L A  G E N E R A L P L A N
                                C-22

               REGIONAL           Western Riverside County has grown at a tremendous rate over the
                 MOBILITY         past two decades, and a high rate of continued growth is expected.
                                  Effective regional transportation strategies are needed to successfully
                                  implement City and County plans accommodating future growth.
                                  Such strategies must link Temecula with other regional employment
                                  and commercial centers, as well as airports and other transportation
                                  hubs, and should include alternative modes of travel. Temecula is
                                  well connected to the regional vehicle circulation system, but lacks
                                  effective alternatives to the automobile.
                                  Interstate 15 bisects the western portion of the Planning Area and
                                  provides connections to other regional freeways in Riverside County,
                                  San Diego County, San Bernardino County and beyond. Interstate
                                  215, located north of the Planning Area, provides direct access to the
                                  communities of Moreno Valley and Riverside. SR-79 North
                                  provides access to Hemet and San Jacinto, while SR-79 South
                                  provides access to eastern Riverside and San Diego Counties. No
                                  regional or national passenger rail service is provided in Temecula.
PLANS IN ACTION                   The Winchester to Temecula Corridor, which is currently being
Temecula supports efforts by      planned in the CETAP process, is expected to provide additional
RCTC,         including      the  freeway access and capacity. This corridor involves widening both
CETAP, to provide effective       I-15 and I-215, as well as construction of French Valley Parkway,
solutions       to      regional  connecting the French Valley Future Growth Area to I-215 and
transportation needs, and         providing an alternate freeway access point to Winchester Road. In
monitors progress of proposed     addition, proposed regional improvements included in the Measure A
improvements outside the
                                  Extension would provide additional access to I-215 at Clinton Keith
City to ensure potential
benefits are realized.
                                  Road. As a result, some local transportation patterns may change as
                                  traffic using I-15 and I-215 is redirected from Winchester Road to
                                  these alternate routes.
                                  Ensuring adequate regional circulation for residents and businesses
                                  will require coordination with regional and State transportation
                                  planning efforts. To achieve this, the City will work with partners
                                  such as Caltrans, Riverside Transit Agency, the Western Riverside
                                  Council of Governments, the City of Murrieta, the Pechanga Band,
                                  and the County of Riverside to pursue opportunities for light rail or
                                  high speed rail service, and to improve access to regional freeways.
 C     I  T Y          O    F    T   E   M  E   C  U   L   A     G  E   N   E   R  A   L     P L  A  N
                                                       C-23
TRANSPORTATION             Efficiency of the circulation system will be maximized with
          SYSTEM AND       transportation system management (TSM) and transportation
                           demand management (TDM) strategies. TSM involves physical
              DEMAND       improvements to the circulation infrastructure to expand capacity
       MANAGEMENT          and increase traffic flow, while TDM involves reducing the demand
                           for vehicular transportation.        In addition to enhancing the
                           operation of the circulation system, TSM and TDM strategies
PLANS IN ACTION            provide relief from increasing demands for more improvements to
The City Trip Reduction    transportation facilities.
Ordinance is enforced to
achieve several TDM        TSM and TDM solutions for Temecula include traffic signal
objectives, and new mixed
                           coordination and spacing, discouraging on-street parking along
use development projects
must emphasize pedestrian  Principal roadways, providing and maintaining bikeways and bike
and alternative modes.     lanes, and encouraging additional regional public transportation
                           services and support facilities, such as park and ride lots.
                           CLOSED STREETS
                           When Temecula incorporated in 1989, the citywide road network
                           was incomplete. The gaps in the road network forced through
                           traffic onto local streets. Higher traffic volumes and excessive
                           speeds generated numerous complaints and requests for City action.
                           In response, the City began approving street closures to minimize
                           potential conflicts. An unintended consequence of this was the
                           further concentration of vehicle trips onto a limited number of
                           arterial routes.
                           Since that time, the City s road network has undergone significant
                           improvement.        The completion of Margarita Road, and
                           improvements to Rancho California, Winchester, and Ynez Roads
                           have all resulted in a more functional road network and better
                           traffic flow. However, to continue to improve local circulation, new
                           internal connecting routes are required in some areas to maximize
                           the capacity of the overall road network. These enhancements to
                           the local road network should be balanced with the need to
                           minimize outside through traffic onto local streets that provide
                           driveway access to single-family residences.
                TRUCK      An efficient and effective goods movement system is essential to the
       CIRCULATION         economic livelihood of the Temecula area. Trucking dominates
                           goods movement within and through the southern California
                           region. Temecula experiences moderate amounts of truck traffic
                           generated by commercial and light industrial uses on the west side
                           and agricultural and vineyard uses in the eastern portion of the
                           Planning Area.
C     I T Y       O F     T   E M E     C U L A          G    E N E R A L            P  L A N
                                               C-24
PLANS IN ACTION               Truck traffic is expected to continue to increase as new businesses
The City requires trucks to   open in the community. Noise impacts and congestion can be
travel on identified routes   caused by truck traffic in urban areas. Such impacts are expected
and enforces truck loading    on Temecula streets heavily used by trucks: including Diaz Road,
and access requirements of    Jefferson Avenue, Winchester Road, Rancho California Road, I-15,
the Development Code.         SR-79 South and several Principal Collectors located west of I-15.
 NON-MOTORIZED                A key component of Temecula s Circulation Plan is to promote the
 AND ALTERNATIVE              use of alternative modes such as transit, bicycling and walking.
                              Increasing use of alternative modes produces a number of
         CIRCULATION          community benefits, including reduced traffic, less need for costly
                              roadway improvement projects and improved air quality. Facilities
                              constructed for biking or walking provide important recreational
                              opportunities as well. Crossings of Interstate 15 that do not
                              include on- or off-ramps should incorporate additional bikeway
                              and pedestrian facilities.
                              PUBLIC TRANSIT
PLANS IN ACTION               Public bus service in Temecula is currently provided by Riverside
The City coordinates with     Transit Agency (RTA), and will become an increasingly important
RTA to develop future         component of the transportation system. A well-balanced public
transit schedules and routes  transportation system offers many benefits, including increased
in Temecula, and provides     mobility, energy savings, decreased pollution, and decreased
important transit support     congestion through more efficient use of roadway capacity.
facilities, including park-
and-ride lots and bus
                              Public transportation first became available in Temecula in 1991
shelters.
                              when RTA established a local transit route within Temecula and
                              initiated a pilot program providing commuter service between
                              Temecula and Corona with stops in Murrieta and Lake Elsinore.
                              To meet the needs of a growing population, public transit services
                              have since been expanded. Current routes serving Temecula are
                              shown on Figure C-3, and Table C-5 summarizes the approximate
                              origin and destination for each route.
                                                             TABLE C-5
                                             RTA BUS ROUTES SERVING TEMECULA
                                          Line              Origin/Destination
                                           23     Temecula / Murrieta
                                           24     Temecula / Pechanga Resort / Vail Ranch
                                           79     Hemet / Temecula
                                           202    Murrieta / Oceanside
                                           206    Temecula / Corona
                                           208    Temecula / Riverside
                                          Source: RTA, 2004
 C     I T Y        O F      T   E M E     C U L A          G   E N E R A L            P  L A   N
                                                  C-25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ¿
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         To Hemet
         Figure C-3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Keller Rd
         RTA Transit Routes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Mc Colery Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Pat Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Specili Rd
         CITY OF TEMECULA GENERAL PLAN
         Legend                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Briggs Rd                                                              Elliot Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                Judith St
                                                                                                                                                                        Baxter Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jean Nicholas Rd
                         23                           Temecula/Murrieta                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   79
                                                                                                                                                                                                                City of Murrieta                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     County of
                         24                           Temecula/Pechanga ResortLee Ln                                                                                                                          Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          te
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            rR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ch
                                                                                                                                                       Menifee Rd
                                                      Hemet/Temecula
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Liberty Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Briggs Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pourroy Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Leon Rd
                         79                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    W
                     202                               Murrieta/Oceanside                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Thompson Rd
                     206                               Temecula/Corona
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Benton Rd
                     208                              Temecula/Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ÿ                                           Auld Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Skinner
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               79
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Maddalena Rd
                                                                      208              ¿
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pourroy Rd
                                                                                                                                                        Calle De Amor
                                                                                                To Riverside                                                                                                                                                                    Leon Rd        Allen Rd
¿        To Corona                                    23                                                                                                                Hunter Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   rr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        oy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Borel Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               u
                                             Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Po
                                            os                                                                 a    Dr                                                                                                                                                                        Pr om o
         Ø
         "
         #                 Lo
                              s   Ala
                                        m
                                                                         Ø
                                                                         "
                                                                         #     Al
                                                                                   t   aM
                                                                                                 ur      rie t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  yo n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         to   ry            Pky
                                                                                                                                                                                                             C an
                                                                                                                                                Rd                                                        S ky
                                                                                    M u rr ie ta                                            s
                                                                                                                    Ho
                                                                                                                         t    Sp r
                                                                                                                                     in g                       23                                                                                                                            Murrieta Hot Springs Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Buck Rd
                          City of                                                                                                                                                             W
                                                                                                                                                                                                   y
                                                                                                                                                                                       ire
                                                                                   Ja                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                d
                         Murrieta                                                  ck
                                                                                          n                                                                                    na                                                              sA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            sR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     R
                                                                                       so                                                                                    Bo                                                       l ow                                                                            ola                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Butterfield Stage Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           W il                                                                              N ic                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          r e nd
                                                                               202
                                                                                                Av    e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               V in
                                                            M                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                oW                                                                                  a
                                                                     n                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            y
                                                                 i so
                                                               ad                206                                                                                                                                                                                d
            a
                St                                                            Av                                                                                                          23                                           N ic ol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       as R                                                                                                                                                                                                                    C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Co n
                                                                              e
         av
                                                                                                         208
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  alle
     u
 G                                W
                                   as                                                                                                                                                     79                                                                                                                                                                           Vista D el
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mo nte
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Rd
                                              t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          te n
                                        hi ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                to
                                               on
                                                  Av                                                                                                                                                                  rte                                                                                                                                              L a Se r en a W y
                     D                                                                                                                                                                                             No
                                                    e                                                                                                                       M
                     ou
                                                                                                                                                                                 a r ita Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Via
                         gla
                                                                                                                                                                             a rg
                          ss                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Rd
                                 e                                                                              Je
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                      rn i a
                               Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          lifo
                                                                                                                    f fe                                                                                                                                                      Rey                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ca
                                                                                                                        on                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ho
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             nc
                                                                                                                      rs
                                                                                                                                                               &                                                                                                                              W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        De
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ra
                                                                                                                              ve                                                                                                                                                          e   na
                                                                                                                             A                                               Promenade                                                                                          S er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             M
                                                                         St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             La                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a          Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                Mall                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e Pla y
                                                                 ry                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   do
                                                               er                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e ra D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         M ad
                                                          Ch                                                                                          Yn ez
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            s
                                                                                                                    79                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pk  y
                                                                                                                                                        Rd                                                                        d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ta R
                                                                                                               Rd                                                                                                 ar i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Rd
                                                                                                         er
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ar                                                                                                                   d                                                                                                                                                   Pau
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            aR
                                                                                                                                                 23
                                                                                                                                                                                                           g
                                                                                                    st                                                                                                  M                                                                                                             rni
                                                                                       in
                                                                                            ch
                                                                                               e
                                                                                                                                                                        79                    24                                                                                                       Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             li f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  o
                                                                                   W                                                   az                                                                                                                                                           ho
                                                                                                                                     Di                                                                                                                                                        nc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ra
                                                 Ra
                                                                                                                                            Rd
                                                                                                                                                                         202                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      L in da R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   o
                                                  nc
                                                    ho                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        24                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   se   a Rd
                                                       Ca                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rd                                                                                                                                                                               l le
                                                                                                                                                                                        Yn                                                                                                                                     u ba
                                                          li f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                h o V is t a R
                                                                                                                                                                                                         R a nc                                                                                                           Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Bu t t e r
                                                           or                                                                                                                                 ez                               d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 C o n te n t o
                                                                                                                             79
                                                               nia
                                   ida De l O ro                                                                                                                                                   Rd
                               ve n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              M ea d o ws P k y
                           A                                        Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   M                                                                                                                                         fi e l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ga                                                                                                                                               St a                                                                      De Portola Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         rit a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      24                                    ge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   d                                                                                                                                                                                                             Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          R                                                                  Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ti   ago
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sa n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                A nz
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Yn
                                                                                                     a Ro sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ez
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         d   }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ÿ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             79
                                                                                            Via Sant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     a R
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Va                Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                        lle
                                                                                                                                                                                                            jo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e                                                                             Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Av                                                                         la                                                                                                                                                            P ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         D e Po r to                                                                                                                                                              ch
                                            a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              il R
                                         an c
                                        Barr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  24                                                                                                                                       24                                          Va
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   a
                                     V ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               in       da
                                                                 er o R                                                                                                                                                                                                                     aL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          om
                                                                       d                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                         202
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pk y                                                                           za
                                                           V ia V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                k                                                                                 An
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    d                                                                                        aw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             yR
                                                                  aq u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          dh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Va
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        le                                                                              Re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          o lf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pechanga                                                                        ol lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Entertainment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       &                        rH
                                                      Temecula City Boundary                                                                                                                                 Ø
                                                                                                                                                                                                             "
                                                                                                                                                                                                             #                         Rd                                                                                                                                    ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Center                                                         D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 yon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               n
                                                      Sphere of Influence Boundary                                                                                                                                    bo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          w
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 in
                                                      Planning Area                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Û                      Pe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 To Oceanside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Pa r kw a y
 µ
                                                      0                                            5,000                                             10,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ch an g a
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ¿
                                                                                                                                                         Feet
                                                                                                                                                          Miles
                                                      0                                                             1                                                   2
C I T Y                                                                       O F                                                           T E M E C U L A                                                                                                                                                                        G E N E R A L                                                                                                                                                                                                              P L A N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        C-26

PLANS IN ACTION                  In addition to local routes, RTA provides limited stop service to
Development           projects   Riverside, Corona, and Oceanside on CommuterLink. The City is
within Mixed Use Overlay         committed to ensuring that public transportation becomes and
Areas and village centers        remains a viable travel alternative to the automobile, and is taking
must be designed to              steps to ensure that transit accessibility is a foremost consideration
encourage          long-range    within new mixed use development proposals. To facilitate use of
transit          accessibility,  these public transportation resources, the City will encourage the
including access to future
                                 development of park-and-ride lots along the I-15 corridor and at
light rail or high speed rail
service.                         other locations within Temecula, and will seek to maximize
                                 opportunities presented by joint-use of existing parking facilities.
                                 MULTI-USE TRAILS AND BIKEWAYS
                                 The City has an extensive network of multi-use trails providing
                                 connections for pedestrians, equestrians and bicyclists. In addition
                                 to the multi-use trails, many of Temecula s roadways are designed
                                 to support bikeways of various types. The current and planned
                                 system of multi-use trails and bikeways is shown on Figure C-4.
                                 Table C-6 provides descriptions of the multi-use trails and bikeways
                                 present within the City. Cross sections for each type of facility are
                                 contained in Temecula s Multi-Use Trails and Bikeways Master Plan.
                                 The trail and bikeway system is composed of a network of Class I
                                 off-road trails located parallel to roadways and within residential
                                 subdivisions, and Class II and III bike lanes and routes located on
                                 arterial roadways. In addition, the Riverside County bikeways plan
                                 identifies a future Class I Regional Trail crossing the City from
                                 north to south along the power transmission easement.
PLANS IN ACTION
Temecula s          Multi-Use    The City will continue to improve the bikeway system as new
Trails and Bikeways              roadways are constructed, and to build Class I facilities identified in
Master Plan provides a           the Multi-Use Trails and Bikeways Master Plan. Many enhanced
blueprint for future trail       local bicycle and pedestrian links are planned, and the City will
construction. The City uses      work to improve bicycle and pedestrian safety through application
the Master Plan to               of uniform trail standards and signs. Restrictions apply to
prioritize, finance and          motorized vehicles accessing the trails network, and potential
build new trail segments,
                                 conflicts between off-street bicycles and pedestrians will be
and        requires       new
development projects to          minimized through the construction of overhead trail crossings,
provide local connections to     where feasible.
master plan trails where
feasible.
 C    I T Y          O F        T   E M E     C U L A          G  E N E R A L             P  L A     N
                                                     C-27
      Figure C-4
      Multi-Use Trails and Bikeways                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Keller Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mc Colery Rd
      CITY OF TEMECULA GENERAL PLAN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Pat Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                              Specili Rd
      Legend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Briggs Rd                                                                   Elliot Rd                                                                                                                                                                              Judith St
                                                     Multi-Use Trails                                                                                                    Baxter Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jean Nicholas Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           City of Murrieta                                                                       s te                                                                                                                                                         County of
                                                     Class 2 Bike Lanes                                                                                                  Lee Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sphere of Influence                                                                   he
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      rR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         d                                                                                                                                                     Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             in c
                                                                                                                                                        Menifee Rd                                                      Liberty Rd                                                                                                                           Pourroy Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        W
                                                     City Boundary                                                                                                                                                                                             Briggs Rd                Leon Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Thompson Rd
                                                     Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Benton Rd
                                                     Planning Area
       Source: Temecula GIS and Cotton/Bridges/Associates
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ÿ                                              Auld Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Skinner
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Maddalena Rd
                                                                                                                                                         Calle De Amor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Leon Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Allen Rd
                                                                                                                   Wh
                                                                                                                        it
                                                                                                                              d Rd
                                                                                                                           oo                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rd                                                                                                                                                                       Borel Rd
                                                                                                                         ew                                                                                                                                                                                                                        oy
                                                                                                                                                                         Hunter Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          u   rr
                                            Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Po
                                                                                                                  r                                                                                                                                                                               Promon
                                           os                                                                  aD
       Ø
       "
       #                Lo
                             s
                                 Ala
                                       m
                                                                           Ø
                                                                           "
                                                                           #   Alt
                                                                                       aM
                                                                                                 ur ri
                                                                                                       et
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ca n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           yon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    or  y             P ky
                                                                                               Mu r ri                                         Sp rin gs                                                              S ky
                                                                                                               e ta                                                           Rd
                                                                                                                                          t
                                                                                                                                     Ho                                                                                                                                                               Murrieta Hot Springs Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                    Buck Rd
                       City of
                      Murrieta                                                                                                                                                                   W
                                                                                                                                                                                                     y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   d
                                                                                                                                                                                           ire                                                                ve                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         R
                                                                                  Ja
                                                                                                                                                                                      na                                                                 sA                                                                                  d
                                                                                       s
                                                                                    ck                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 sR
                                                                                         on                                                                                      Bo                                                          l ow                                                                               ola                                                                                                                                                                                          Be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      W il                                                                              N ic                                                                                                                                                                                                   r e nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Stage Rd
                                                                                                 Av
                                                                                                   e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                V in
                                                           M                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               oW                                              An                        a
                                                                ad                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              y                                           za
                                                                      is o
                                                                           n                                                                                                                                                                                  as Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Rd
             St                                                            Av
                                                                             e                                                                                                                                                                N ic ol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                C all
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Butterfield
        va
     ua
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e Co
 G                               W                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Vista D el        Rd
                                  as                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mon te                                                                           nt
                                             n
                                          to                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               e nt
                                       ng                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Via N orte                                                                                                                                                                                             o
                                     hi
                                                Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        L a S er en a W y
                  D                               e
                  ou
                      gla                                                  Ad
                       ss                                                      am                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        n   ia R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    for
                              e                                                   s                            Je
                            Av                                                                                     ff e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Rd                                                                                                                                                                          al i
                                                                                                                          on                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            oC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           y
                                                                                                                        rs                      Yn ez                                                                                                                                                  W                                                                                                                                              ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ra n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       el R                       e   na
                                                                                                                               Av                    Rd                                                                                                            D                Se r                       M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 La
                                                                                                                                     e
                                                                      St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ea                                                                                                                                                        a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        do                                                                                                                                            e Pla y
                                                               rr y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             e ra D
                                                           e                                                                                                                                             So lan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Mad
                                                                             dy                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             w
                                                        Ch            Den                                                                                                                                         a                                                                                                             sP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          d                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ta R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ba
                                                                                                               d                                                                                                             a ri                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Pau
                                                                                                          rR                                                                                                          ar                                                                                                              Rd
                                                                                                s   te
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           r   n ia
                                                                                         c   he                                                                                                                                                                                                                       lifo
                                                                                      in                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ca
                                                                                  W                                           Di
                                                                                                                                az                                                                                                                                                                      ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           o                                            Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                n                                             sta
                                                                                                                                     Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                 Vi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ho                                                                                                                                                                           Linda
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 nc
                                                Ra
                                                 nc
                                                   ho                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ra                                                                                                                                                                                              Ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             s e a Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         B utte r fi
                                                     Ca
                                                        li f                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Rd                                                                                                                                         l le
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ba
                                                          orni                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pa u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            C on t en to
                                ida D e l O ro
                                                                 a
                            ve n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    M e a d o ws
                        A                                             Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e ld
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Yn
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ez
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                           St a
                                                                                                                                                  O
                                                                                                                                                    ld                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ge                                                             D e Portola Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               M
                                                                                                                                                        To                                                                                                                                                          a rg
                                                                                                                                                          wn                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ago Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ar ita
                                                                                                                                                                         Fr                                                                              nt i                                                                                                                      Pk y
                                                                                                                                                                          on                                                                     Sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Rd
                                                                                                                                                                           t
                                                                                                                                                                              1s
                                                                                                                                                                                 t   St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ÿ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      79
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    An
                                                                                                      a
                                                                                             Via Sant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Yn                                                                                                                                                                                                 la                                                                                             za
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ecu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 T em
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ez                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Rd                                                           Rd                                                                                                      Rio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        la                                                                                             Via
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  rto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 De P o
                                                                                                 Ro sa                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ch    P ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      R
                                       an c
                                     B arr
                                           a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ÿ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |79
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Va
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              il
                                  V ia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    aR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             in d
                                                                 o Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  aL                                                                                                                                             y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  om                                                                                                                                             Pk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              dha w k                                                                                  Rd
                                                               a q uer                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Rd                                                                                                                                                        za
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Va                                                                                                                                                     An
                                                          V ia V                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         lle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               o lf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Pechanga a P k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Entertainment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 y                                              D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ø
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                W er H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   y o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       l lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ny
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     bo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 in                                                                                                                                                 Û
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Pe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ar kw ay
 µ
                                                     0                                              5,000                                       10,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           an g a P
                                                                                                                                                    Feet
                                                                                                                                                     Miles
                                                     0                                                              1                                                    2
C I T Y                                                                      O F                                                              T E M E C U L A                                                                                                                                                                                 G E N E R A L                                                                                                                                                                         P L A N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           C-28

                                                     TABLE C-6
                                  BIKEWAY CLASSIFICATION DESCRIPTIONS
                            Type                              Description
                                          Bicycle paths with exclusive rights-of-way
                                          intended to serve cyclists with the safest means of
                     Class I
                                          travel. Pedestrians and equestrians also use these
                                          routes.
                                          Bicycle lanes along the curb lane of a street or
                                          highway. The path provides for one-way travel
                     Class II
                                          and is generally delineated with special striping
                                          and signs.
                                          Bike routes for shared use with pedestrian or
                                          motor vehicle traffic. Signs are posted which
                     Class III            indicate that the road also serves as a bike route,
                                          although no special striping is provided for
                                          bicyclists.
                     Sources: Caltrans and City of Temecula, 2003.
TRAFFIC SAFETY                   Traffic accidents can have tragic impacts and can negatively affect
                                 the lifestyle of Temecula residents if they occur on a routine or
PLANS IN ACTION                  repeated basis. Accidents typically occur as a result of driver
Speed limits are enforced        distractions, such as cell phones; excessive automobile speed; traffic
throughout the Planning          congestion; poorly-designed driveway/roadway interface areas;
Area, and the City improves      and/or poor placement of pedestrian or bicycle facilities relative to
roadway access, separates        high-speed vehicle travel lanes.
vehicles from pedestrian and
bicycle traffic, educates the    Traffic safety problems are most acute at major intersections along
public regarding safe driving,   the SR-79 North and South corridors, freeway interchanges along
and coordinates with schools     I-15, and locations where vehicle traffic both occurs within short
to improve pick-up / drop-off    peak periods, such as schools, churches, or community centers. The
circulation.
                                 City is committed to reducing potential traffic safety hazards through
                                 a variety of improvement and education strategies.
                 PARKING         Parking typically is considered a separate issue from vehicle
                                 circulation. However, the presence of on-street parking has a direct
PLANS IN ACTION                  effect on roadway capacity.               In addition, off-street parking
The City enforces parking        deficiencies can cause vehicles to re-circulate on public streets, which
provisions contained in the      also increases traffic volumes and congestion by reducing capacity for
Development Code, and            through traffic.
encourages new parking
solutions, including struc-      The City’s Development Code includes parking requirements to
tures, underground parking       ensure that an adequate number of spaces are provided on-site for
and shared or joint parking      most uses. The Code also establishes minimum stall dimensions
in mixed use areas and           consistent with current standards for other jurisdictions. These
village centers.
 C     I   T Y       O    F    T    E   M    E  C     U  L  A      G    E  N    E  R    A   L P  L A  N
                                                        C-29

                regulations apply to all new developments and may be applied to
                current uses that are modified or expanded. There is currently
                adequate on-street parking in the Old Town area. However, there is
                a need for additional off-street parking to handle peak-period
                demand.
                GOALS AND POLICIES
      ROADWAY   Roadway congestion is a major concern to local residents and
   CIRCULATION  businesses. The City responds to local concerns regarding roadway
                congestion through the identification of acceptable performance
                standards for City roadways and intersections, as well as access
                points to regional highways, such as I-15. The stated performance
                standard serves as the foundation for providing a street network
                that moves people and goods safely and efficiently throughout the
                City while ensuring that traffic delays are kept to a minimum.
                Goal 1         Strive to maintain a Level of Service         or better
                               at intersections within the City during peak hours
                               and Level of Service           or better during non-
                               peak hours.
                Policy 1.1     Use the Circulation Element Roadway Plan to guide
                               detailed planning and implementation of the City's
                               roadway system, including appropriate road width
                               and median transitions when a roadway classification
                               changes.
                Policy 1.2     Pursue trip reduction and transportation systems
                               management measures to reduce and limit
                               congestion at intersections and along streets within
                               the City.
                Policy 1.3     Actively monitor the capacity             of  principal
                               intersections throughout the City.
                Policy 1.4     When Principal Intersections exceed LOS         during
                               peak hours, or LOS             during off-peak hours,
                               consider elevating the priority of CIP projects that
                               reduce traffic congestion in these areas.
C I T Y  O F   T   E M E    C U L A          G    E N E R A L            P  L A   N
                                   C-30
                  Policy 1.5    Require additional right-of-way and impose
                                additional parking restrictions for approaches to all
                                Principal Intersections to allow for future
                                intersection improvements and turning movement.
      REGIONAL    Future development within the Planning Area and in surrounding
        MOBILITY  unincorporated areas will create additional travel demand between
                  Temecula and other population and employment centers within the
                  region. Special efforts are needed to adequately and efficiently
                  accommodate regional travel demand.
                  Goal 2        A      regional     transportation      system      that
                                accommodates the safe and efficient movement of
                                people and goods to and from the community.
                  Policy 2.1    Actively pursue the construction of system
                                improvements outside the City s jurisdiction in
                                cooperation with Caltrans, the City of Murrieta,
                                Riverside County, the Pechanga Band, and local
                                developers. Measures should be taken to preserve
                                anticipated right-of-way needs and to identify
                                funding mechanisms for needed interchange and
                                regional arterial improvements.
                  Policy 2.2    Develop a bypass system of roadways on the east,
                                west and south sides of the City to accommodate
                                traffic flow from development outside the City and
                                improve center-of-town traffic conditions.
                  Policy 2.3    Actively pursue improvements to current freeway
                                interchanges within the City and construction of
                                new overpasses as required to achieve performance
                                standards.
                  Policy 2.4    Coordinate with public and private transit providers
                                to provide fixed route transit service (bus or shuttle)
                                along major transportation corridors connecting
                                regional employment and commercial areas, airports,
                                health care facilities, and major recreation areas.
                  Policy 2.5    Coordinate with Western Riverside Council of
                                Governments to identify, protect, and pursue
                                opportunities for light rail or high speed regional
                                rail transit along major transportation corridors
                                which connect Temecula to other population centers.
C I T Y   O F    T  E M E     C U L A         G    E N E R A L            P  L A     N
                                    C-31
                 Policy 2.6      Identify, at the appropriate time, and reserve the
                                 necessary rights-of-way for future regional transit
                                 lines and facilities to address the valley s long-term
                                 transportation needs.
TRANSPORTATION   Circulation system improvement options in Temecula are limited
     SYSTEM AND  by various constraints. As the City continues to develop, it will
                 become increasingly important to maximize the efficiency of the
        DEMAND   roadway network and minimize vehicular travel on City streets. The
   MANAGEMENT    intent of the following policies is to allow for a proactive approach
                 in achieving these goals.
                 Goal 3          An efficient City circulation system through the
                                 use of transportation system management and
                                 travel demand management strategies.
                 Policy 3.1      Require proper spacing and interconnect traffic
                                 signals where feasible to maximize the smooth
                                 progression of traffic flows and to minimize delay
                                 and stop-and-go conditions.
                 Policy 3.2      Discourage the provision of on-street (curbside)
                                 parking along principal arterial roadways to
                                 minimize traffic conflicts and increase carrying
                                 capacity.
                 Policy 3.3      Provide a comprehensive system of Class I and/or
                                 Class II bicycle lanes to meet the needs of cyclists
                                 traveling to and from work and other destinations
                                 within the City.
                 Policy 3.4      Encourage a mix of uses within projects designed to
                                 internalize trips, maximize use of parking facilities,
                                 and promote a shift from auto use to pedestrian,
                                 bicycle, and other alternative modes of travel.
                 Policy 3.5      Encourage the provision of additional regional
                                 public transportation services and support facilities,
                                 including park-and-ride lots near the I-15 freeway
                                 and within mixed use overlay area and village
                                 centers.
C I T Y    O F  T  E M E     C U L A           G   E N E R A L           P   L A    N
                                     C-32
                 Policy 3.6      Discourage closing local streets to maintain the
                                 functionality of the arterial road network, achieve
                                 public safety goals, and improve the response time
                                 for police, fire, and ambulance services, unless it
                                 significantly impacts rural preservation areas.
         TRUCK   Truck circulation is required to support commercial and light
   CIRCULATION   industrial activities in the western portion of the Planning Area, as
                 well as distribution of produce and wine from the agriculture and
                 vineyard areas located in the eastern portion of the Planning Area.
                 Goal 4          A truck circulation system that provides for safe
                                 and efficient transport of commodities and also
                                 minimizes noise, air pollution and traffic impacts
                                 to the City.
                 Policy 4.1      Designate primary truck routes on selected arterial
                                 streets to minimize the impacts of truck traffic on
                                 residential areas.
                 Policy 4.2      Require loading areas and access ways for trucks that
                                 minimize or eliminate conflicts with automotive and
                                 pedestrian areas to maintain safe and efficient traffic
                                 circulation.
NON-MOTORIZED    Promotion of alternative travel modes such as bicycle, pedestrian,
AND ALTERNATIVE  new technology, and equestrian modes requires a transportation
                 network supporting these modes, providing convenient access and
  TRAVEL MODES
                 designed to promote safety.
                 Goal 5          Safe and efficient alternatives to motorized travel
                                 throughout the City.
                 Policy 5.1      Promote pedestrian and bicycle safety by adhering to
                                 uniform trail standards and practices and
                                 communicating safety practices to the public.
                 Policy 5.2      Minimize potential conflicts between off-street
                                 bicycle and equestrian trails and automobile cross
                                 traffic.
                 Policy 5.3      Ensure the accessibility of pedestrian facilities to the
                                 elderly and disabled.
C I T Y   O F   T  E M E      C U L A          G    E N E R A L           P   L A    N
                                      C-33
                  Policy 5.4       Provide a comprehensive network of multi-use trails
                                   and bikeways between residential areas and
                                   commercial/employment activity centers, public
                                   institutions, and recreation areas.
                  Policy 5.5       Apply appropriate restrictions (including prohibiting)
                                   to motorized vehicles and cycles using the City’s
                                   multi-use trail system.
                  Policy 5.6       Encourage the provision of facilities that support
                                   carpooling and public transportation within the City.
TRAFFIC SAFETY    Safe operation of vehicular traffic on City streets is a concern of both
                  City officials and residents of the community. The following policies
                  are directed towards minimizing safety hazards and encouraging safer
                  operating conditions on City streets.
                  Goal 6           Enhanced traffic safety on City streets.
                  Policy 6.1       Enforce speed restrictions throughout the City.
                  Policy 6.2       Require that future roads and improvements to
                                   current roads be designed to minimize traffic conflicts
                                   which result from curb parking maneuvers,
                                   uncontrolled access along heavily traveled roadways,
                                   and development of private driveways onto primary
                                   residential collector streets.
                  Policy 6.3       Require that vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle traffic
                                   be separated to the maximum extent feasible,
                                   especially in areas with high traffic volumes.
                  Policy 6.4       Establish public education and enforcement programs
                                   to promote safe driving in the community.
                  Policy 6.5       Work with schools and developers to improve
                                   circulation at pick-up/drop off areas and encourage
                                   that these facilities be provided on-site.
                  Policy 6.6       Consider installing traffic calming measures on
                                   residential streets when other forms of traffic control
                                   have not been successful at reducing traffic speeds.
C I T Y     O  F T  E   M   E   C   U   L   A     G    E  N   E   R A   L     P  L A   N
                                       C-34

        PARKING  The need for adequate public and private parking is fundamental. A
                 shortage of parking can cause circulation problems and loss of
                 business activity. The City’s Development Code, which specifies the
                 minimum parking requirements for various types of land uses, will
                 be periodically updated to respond to the dynamics of trip
                 generation and parking characteristics throughout the City. As the
                 City develops, it becomes increasingly important to provide adequate
                 off-street parking in non-residential areas to minimize the disruption
                 to traffic flows caused by curbside parking along heavily traveled
                 streets.
                 Goal 7          An adequate supply of private and public
                                 parking to meet the needs of residents and
                                 visitors to the City.
                 Policy 7.1      Enforce applicable City parking ordinances and
                                 standard design requirements.
                 Policy 7.2      Provide additional public parking in the Old Town
                                 area where feasible through common parking areas or
                                 establishment of a parking district.
                 Policy 7.3      Encourage underground parking or parking structures
                                 where economically feasible in commercial areas.
                 Policy 7.4      Consider the joint development and use of parking
                                 facilities where feasible, and require such parking in
                                 mixed use areas and village centers to maximize
                                 efficient use of available parking and increase
                                 developable site area.
                 Policy 7.5      Require parking for bicycles and other forms of
                                 alternative transportation.
C I T Y    O F  T   E  M   E   C  U   L   A     G  E   N   E  R  A    L   P  L   A  N
                                     C-35

                   IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
                   This Implementation Program provides actions to implement the
                   adopted policies and plans of the Circulation Element.
              C-1  Prioritize, secure funding, design and build new roadways and
  ROADWAY PLAN     complete roadway improvements using the established Capital
                   Improvement Program process to implement the circulation system
                   shown on the Roadway Plan (Figure C-2). Future roadways must
                   meet roadway classification design specifications and performance
                   criteria.
                   Agency/Department:         Public Works, Planning
                   Related Policies:          1.1, 2.1, 2.2
                   Required by General Plan EIR
             C-2   Maintain and repair City streets on an ongoing basis to ensure
                   roadways and intersections continue to function safely and
       ROADWAY     efficiently.
    MAINTENANCE
                   Agency/Department:         Public Works, Planning
                   Related Policy:            1.3
             C-3   As traffic approaches the LOS standards established in the
    INTERSECTION   Circulation Element, roadway capacity will be improved by
                   restricting on-street parking, improving signal timing, widening
     MONITORING    intersections, adding through and turn lanes, and other
                   transportation systems management measures.           Monitor the
                   performance of Principal Intersections on an ongoing basis. Ensure
                   that Principal Intersections approaching Level of Service D are
                   prioritized for improvement within the City s Capital Improvement
                   Program.
                   Agency/Department:         Public Works, Planning
                   Related Policies:          1.3, 1.4, 3.1
                   Required by General Plan EIR
C  I T Y   O F    T   E M E     C U L A         G    E N E R A L         P L A   N
                                       C-36
            C-4   Require additional dedication of right-of-way on all approaches to
  RIGHT-OF-WAY    Principal Intersections. Such right-of-way shall be preserved for
                  future intersection improvements that may be required at these
     FOR FUTURE
                  intersections, such as full width auxiliary turn lanes and/or dual-left
   INTERSECTION   turn lanes.
  IMPROVEMENTS
                  Agency/Department:            Public Works, Planning
                  Related Policy:               1.5
                  Required by General Plan EIR
            C-5   Continue to update the Capital Improvement Plan on an annual
         CAPITAL  basis to plan for and fund future improvements to the roadway,
                  pedestrian, and bicycle systems within the community. Identify
   IMPROVEMENT    available funding sources and establish a financing plan to guide
  PROGRAM AND     construction and funding of transportation system improvements.
TRANSPORTATION    Require new development projects to construct and/or fund in
      FINANCING   whole or in part necessary traffic improvements associated with the
                  proposed project through the assessment and collection of traffic
                  impact fees. Such improvements should address both automotive,
                  as well as alternative means of transportation.
                  Agency/Department:            Public Works, Planning
                  Related Policies:             1.1, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5
                  Required by General Plan EIR
            C-6   Implement the following procedures and requirements to minimize
       PROPOSED   impacts of proposed development projects on the City s circulation
                  system, and to encourage increased use of alternative transportation:
   DEVELOPMENT
                  •   Evaluate development proposals for potential impacts to the
                      transportation and infrastructure system.
                  •   Require mitigation in the form of physical improvements
                      and/or impact fees for significant impacts prior to or
                      concurrent with project development.
                  •   Require dedication of adequate right-of-way along new roadways
                      to permit pedestrian and bicycle facilities.
                  •   Require new development to incorporate design features which
                      facilitate transit service and encourage transit ridership, such as
                      bus pullout areas, covered bus stop facilities, efficient trail
                      systems through projects to transit stops, installation of bike
                      lanes, bikeways, and bicycle parking, and incorporation of
                      pedestrian walkways that pass through subdivision boundary
                      walls, as appropriate.
C I T Y    O F   T   E M E      C U L A           G    E N E R A L         P   L A   N
                                       C-37

                  •    Require new specific plans and other projects to provide an
                       internal system of pathways and trails. Trails should link schools,
                       shopping centers, transit, and other public facilities in residential
                       areas.
                  •    Require transportation demand management plans to be
                       submitted for preliminary review at the Specific Plan or
                       Development Plan stage of site development and submitted for
                       final approval prior to issuance of building permits.
                  Agency/Department:            Planning, Public Works
                  Related Policies:             1.3, 3.4, 6.1, 6.2
                  Required by General Plan EIR
             C-7  Assess the feasibility of opening previously closed streets or
  CLOSED STREETS  completing construction of local connecting streets that benefit
                  citywide circulation on a case-by-case basis, providing ample
                  opportunity for both neighborhood residents and the community at-
                  large to comment on such proposals. Establish a review process for
                  the future closing of any local street that requires City Council
                  determination that the closure does not have an adverse affect on
                  citywide circulation.
                  Agency/Department:            Public Works, Planning
                  Related Policies:             3.6
                  Required by General Plan EIR
             C-8  When needed to address cut-through traffic volumes, high speeds,
 NEIGHBORHOOD     truck traffic intrusion, demonstrated accident history, and school-
                  related traffic congestion, this program will look at possible
TRAFFIC CALMING   alternative methods to address these concerns. The process will
       PROGRAM    strive to ensure that every neighborhood with demonstrated
                  problems and overall community support has equal access to traffic
                  calming measures while maintaining community circulation.
                  Agency/Department:            Public Works, Planning
                  Related Policies:             6.5, 6.6
C  I T Y   O  F  T   E   M   E  C   U  L   A      G    E  N    E   R A L     P  L   A  N
                                       C-38

            C-9    Work with local schools, the school district, and developers to
 SCHOOL TRAFFIC    improve traffic safety and reduce congestion caused by picking-up
                   and dropping-off students.
          SAFETY
                   Agency/Department:         Planning,     Public    Works,     Police,
                                              Temecula Valley USD
                   Related Policy:            6.5
            C-10   To reduce expenditure, improve design, and minimize traffic
                   disruption, work with the Riverside County Transportation
     COORDINATE    Commission (RCTC), Caltrans, South Coast Air Quality
TRANSPORTATION     Management District (SCAQMD), and other regional agencies to
   IMPROVEMENTS    coordinate local street improvements with major transportation
                   system improvement projects such as additional access to I-15 and
                   construction of a bypass route around Temecula. The City will also
                   continue to monitor proposed roadway projects (including the
                   Winchester to Temecula corridor) and revise the Roadway Plan, if
                   necessary, to reflect changes caused by these projects. In addition,
                   the impacts of development projects and major transportation
                   projects will be monitored and mitigation may be required.
                   Agency/Department:         Planning, Public Works, County of
                                              Riverside, RCTC, Caltrans, SCAQMD
                   Related Policies:          2.1
             C-11  Work with the Pechanga Band, City of Murrieta, RCTC, and
 FREEWAY ACCESS    Caltrans to create additional access points to I-15 and I-215 to
                   ensure that access to the freeways is provided for future bypass
   IMPROVEMENTS
                   routes on both the west and east sides of the City, in a manner that
      AND BYPASS   has the least potential impacts on the environment.
         ROUTE
                   Agency/Department:         Public Works, Planning, City of
                                              Murrieta, Pechanga Band, RCTC,
                                              Caltrans
                   Related Policies:          2.2, 2.3
            C-12   Continue to work with WRCOG, SCAG and others to advocate
     FUTURE RAIL   future commuter or high speed rail service connecting Temecula to
                   Los Angeles, Riverside and San Diego. Ensure that any future
      CORRIDOR     commuter rail corridor serving Temecula is located on the west side
                   of I-15 to reduce noise impacts on residential areas. If a future rail
                   alignment is identified, require new commercial, industrial, or
C  I T Y   O F    T   E M E     C U L A         G    E N E R A L          P   L A   N
                                       C-39
                   mixed-use development in areas surrounding proposed stations to
                   include transit-oriented design amenities.
                   Agency/Department:           Planning, Public Works,         City   of
                                                Murrieta, WRCOG, SCAG
                   Related Policies:            2.5, 2.6
                   Required by General Plan EIR
             C-13  Promote the use of alternative work weeks, flextime, telecommuting,
 TRIP REDUCTION    and work-at-home programs among employers in Temecula, and
                   continue to enforce provisions of the City s Trip Reduction
     ORDINANCE     Program Ordinance, including requirements for preparation of Trip
                   Reduction Plans (TRPs) for qualifying development projects and
                   employers.
                   Agency/Department:           Planning, Public Works
                   Related Policies:            1.2, 3.4
                   Required by General Plan EIR
             C-14  Improve parking in neighborhoods, and at offices, shopping
         PARKING   centers, and public facilities through the following development
                   requirements and recommendations:
                   •   Require consolidation of parking, and related circulation
                       facilities, where appropriate to minimize the number in ingress
                       and egress points onto arterials.
                   •   Require project proponents to provide adequate on-site parking,
                       consistent with Development Code requirements. Alternatively,
                       developers may contribute to a program to acquire, develop, and
                       maintain off-site facilities.
                   •   Require shared parking facilities in structures or subterranean
                       parking for new projects constructed within Mixed Use Overlay
                       Areas. Require shared parking for new projects within village
                       centers. Encourage shared parking for all other commercial,
                       office, and industrial uses, consistent with Development Code
                       requirements.
                   •   Implement requirements of the Old Town Specific Plan
                       regarding parking in the Old Town area.
                   •   Require project proponents to provide parking for bicycles and
                       other forms of alternative transportation.
                   Agency/Department:           Planning, Public Works
                   Related Policies:            3.2, 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, 7.4, 7.5
C  I T Y    O F   T  E M E       C U L A          G    E N E R A L           P L A   N
                                        C-40

            C-15  Implement the adopted Multi-Use Trails and Bikeways Master Plan
MULTI-USE TRAILS  to complete design and construction of a comprehensive alternative
                  transportation network, promote safe use of the trail system, and
  AND BIKEWAYS
                  ensure accessibility of pedestrian facilities to the disabled.
   MASTER PLAN
                  Agency/Department:           Community Services
                  Related Policies:            3.3, 5.4
                  Required by General Plan EIR
            C-16  Work with public and private transit providers to improve transit
      IMPROVED    service and encourage ridership through the following actions:
 TRANSIT SERVICE
                  •   Require transit facilities in major new development and
                      rehabilitation projects.
                  •   Coordinate with providers to get more frequent service and
                      broader transit coverage serving employment, shopping,
                      educational, recreational, and residential areas.
                  •   Work with providers to identify and receive additional funding
                      sources for additional transit services.
                  Collaborate with providers to identify needs and provide special
                  transit services beyond fixed-route buses. Potential needs include:
                  •   Subscription or dial-a-ride service for lower density residential
                      areas.
                  •   Offering limited transit service between outlying residential
                      areas and the City s commercial/employment core.
                  •   Shuttle or trolley service between Old Town and other
                      destinations along the I-15 commercial corridor, and expanded
                      service to other areas, including the wineries along Rancho
                      California Road, as opportunities arise.
                  •   Providing bicycle carrying racks on buses.
                  Agency/Department:           Planning, Public Works, RTA
                  Related Policies:            2.4, 2.6, 3.5
                  Required by General Plan EIR
            C-17  Implement uniform roadway and trail standards set forth in the
  ROADWAY AND     City s Development Standards and Trails and Bikeways Master Plan.
                  Communicate safety practices to the public through the use of signs
    TRAIL SAFETY  and markings, education programs coordinated with local school
                  districts and community organizations, and City publications, such
                  as the newsletter and website.
C I T Y    O F   T   E M E      C U L A          G    E N E R A L            P   L A N
                                       C-41

                 Allow for safe movement of vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians and
                 minimize accidents throughout the City by implementing the
                 following trail safety measures:
                 •   Enforce posted speed limits throughout the City.
                 •   Properly time and periodically adjust traffic signals located
                     along bike routes and where significant pedestrian activity is
                     present.
                 •   Develop safe passage routes and alternatives to crossing busy
                     highways within the City.
                 •   Construct separated bicycle and pedestrian crossings over I-15
                     and arterial roadways with heavy traffic volumes.
                 •   Place limitations on motorized vehicle and cycle use of the
                     recreation trail system. Individual electric vehicles of limited
                     size may be allowed on the trail system to provide access for the
                     disabled and to support alternate transportation modes.
                 Agency/Department:         Community Services, Public         Works,
                                            Planning
                 Related Policies:          5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.5, 6.1, 6.4
           C-18  Encourage carpooling and use of public transportation in Temecula
CARPOOLING AND   through the following measures:
         PUBLIC
                 •   Develop and promote park and ride and Transit Oasis facilities
TRANSPORTATION       within the City.
                 •   Encourage preferred parking for ride sharing and low emission
                     vehicles.
                 Agency/Department:         Planning, Public Works
                 Related Policies:          1.2, 5.6
                 Required by General Plan EIR
C I T Y   O F   T  E M E       C U L A        G    E N E R A L           P L A    N
                                     C-42

           C-19  Continue to work with trucking industry representatives to orient
      TRUCKING   trucks to truck routes to avoid traffic and noise impacts on local
                 roadways, and to divert commercial truck traffic to off-peak periods
       INDUSTRY  to reduce congestion and diesel emissions. Designate new local
                 truck routes when necessary. Require adequate truck access,
                 parking, and loading within new commercial and industrial
                 projects, consistent with requirements of the Development Code.
                 Agency/Department:          Planning, Public Works,        Caltrans,
                                             County of Riverside
                 Related Policies:           4.1, 4.2
                 Required by General Plan EIR
C I T Y   O F   T   E M E     C U L A          G    E N E R A L         P  L A    N
                                     C-43
               This page is left intentionally blank.
C I T Y O F T E M E    C U L A            G   E N E R A L P L A N
                                C-44




























                                                            ECONOMIC
                            DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                  INTRODUCTION
                  T
                          emecula s local economy contributes greatly to the overall
                          quality of life experienced by the City s residents. A healthy
                          local economy consists of a highly trained and educated
                          workforce, diversified businesses, accessibility to major
                  highways and freeways, available housing, financial assistance to
                  businesses, and infrastructure ready to serve technologically
                  advanced businesses. Temecula's accessible location along the I-15/I-
                  215 freeway corridors, business-friendly outlook, and excellent
                  quality of life make it one of the most attractive cities in Southern
                  California for business location. Using these incentives, the City
                  has a valuable opportunity to attract, retain, and expand the local
                  business community. This will in turn ensure Temecula s fiscal and
                  financial health, allowing for a high level of public services and
                  programs. Economic development goals and policies set the tone
                  and direction for the City s business community.
  PURPOSE OF THE  The Economic Development Element provides policy to improve
      ECONOMIC    the economic viability of Temecula through provision of balanced
                  employment and housing opportunities, attraction and retention of
    DEVELOPMENT   businesses, and promotion of fiscal strength and stability in the
         ELEMENT  community.
      SCOPE AND   Preparation of an Economic Development Element is not required
 CONTENT OF THE   under State law, but the Government Code authorizes cities and
                  counties to adopt additional elements as deemed relevant and
      ECONOMIC    necessary.     State General Plan Guidelines include Economic
    DEVELOPMENT   Development as a suggested topic to promote fiscal stability and
         ELEMENT  economic growth. If a jurisdiction prepares an optional Economic
                  Development Element, that element must be consistent with the
                  other General Plan elements. The Economic Development Element
                  is most directly related to goals, policies, and implementation
                  programs within Temecula s Land Use, Circulation, Housing, and
                  Community Design Elements.
C  I T Y    O F  T   E M E     C U L A          G   E N E R A L            P   L A  N
                                      ED-1
e   RELATED PLANS  A number of other plans and programs directly relate to the goals
                   of the Economic Development Element. These plans and programs
c   AND PROGRAMS
                   are administered by private organizations, as well as public agencies.
o
n                  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT               CORPORATION      OF    SOUTHWEST
                   RIVERSIDE COUNTY
o
m                  The Economic Development Corporation (EDC) of Southwest
i                  Riverside County has a strategic partnership with the Southwest
c                  California Economic Alliance and the Chamber of Commerce, to
                   facilitate business attraction, retention and expansion of enterprises
                   in the region. These organizations primary purpose is to provide
d                  much needed resources to businesses that are currently relocating or
e                  operating within Southwest Riverside County.
v                  The EDC works to enhance the business climate in and around the
e                  communities of Lake Elsinore, Murrieta and Temecula by
l                  promoting economic growth and supporting a business
                   environment to encourage job creation and business expansion.
o                  The EDC provides such resources as area demographics, facilities
p                  and site location assistance, assistance with utility providers, job
m                  training programs, and low-cost loan sources.
e                  TEMECULA VALLEY CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
n
t                  The Temecula Valley Chamber of Commerce (TVCC) focuses on
                   improving and promoting business development opportunities for
                   all Chamber members and Temecula businesses. The TVCC
                   provides important information and assistance: 1) opportunities
                   for funding and investment; 2) business support, including up-to-
                   date information on legislation, labor laws, and business
                   administration; 3) business advocacy; 4) networking; and 5) training
                   and education.
                   In addition, the TVCC offers a business start-up kit to new and
                   relocating businesses. The kit contains City guidelines for operating
                   a business, tax information, City ordinances, and area information.
                   The TVCC also has an active Civic and Developmental Committee
                   which tracks business related legislation and local issues.
                   Committee members attend the Planning Commission, Traffic
                   Commission, Parks and Recreation Commission and City Council
                   meetings and make recommendations to the board for taking
                   positions on business related issues.
  C  I T Y  O F   T   E M E     C U L A           G   E N E R A L          P   L A   N
                                       ED-2
             SOUTHWEST CALIFORNIA ECONOMIC ALLIANCE
                                                                                    e
             The City of Temecula also partners with the Southwest California
             Economic Alliance to promote economic and job growth in the
                                                                                    c
             Temecula area. The Alliance includes the Cities of Murrieta, Lake      o
             Elsinore and the County of Riverside.                                  n
             CITY OF TEMECULA FAST TRACK PROGRAM
                                                                                    o
                                                                                    m
             Temecula promotes the business advantages of locating in the City      i
             with the Fast Track Program. The program provides a means of           c
             expediting a commercial project in an efficient and timely manner.
             Priority treatment is given to qualified applicants to accelerate land
             use approvals. The City also provides a mechanism for those            d
             projects that require expediting due to funding constraints, escrow    e
             timelines or internal business timelines.
                                                                                    v
             OLD TOWN SPECIFIC PLAN                                                 e
                                                                                    l
             The Old Town area provides an important retail environment
             within a historic setting, and is a key component of Temecula's
                                                                                    o
             tourism industry. The Old Town Specific Plan was completed in          p
             part to provide economic development incentives and guidance.          m
             The Old Town Specific Plan implements the goals and policies of
             the General Plan within the Old Town Area. Goals, policies and
                                                                                    e
             programs relating to the Old Town Area are included in the Land        n
             Use, Community Design, and Economic Development Elements of            t
             the General Plan.
             CULTURAL ARTS MASTER PLAN
             The Cultural Arts Master Plan was prepared in 1998. The Plan
             examined the cultural and civic amenities that enhance the quality
             of life for local residents. Issues considered included the need to
             provide and support a wide range of art and cultural programs, to
             encourage the provision and enhancement of public spaces, and to
             promote the local historic legacy. These represent some of the
             intangible factors that help make Temecula a desirable place to live
             and work.
C I T Y O F T  E M E      C U L A         G   E N E R A L            P  L A     N
                                 ED-3
e
                 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN
c                Temecula has experienced tremendous growth in recent decades.
o                The City has had great success in diversifying the manufacturing
                 base, significantly expanding retailing opportunities, and
n                broadening both residential and tourist opportunities. However,
o                new growth pressures within the Planning Area have created new
m                challenges and opportunities. The City s economic development
i                efforts must focus on attracting and retaining businesses that:
c                •   Complement Temecula s character and take advantage of the
                     City s supply of quality housing and locational benefits.
d
                 •   Stimulate jobs, economic growth, and fiscal stability.
e
v                •   Serve local employment, shopping, and entertainment needs.
e
l                •   Expand the selection of conveniently located goods and services.
o   CHALLENGES   The City s economic profile and the population and income
p                characteristics suggest that the following economic development
     FACING THE
m                challenges face the City:
           CITY
e                •   The revitalization of older commercial districts.
n                •   Transition to a professional office/financial district
t                    environment while maintaining the diversified manufacturing
                     base.
                 •   Improving circulation, particularly to the industrial areas and
                     along the SR-79 corridor, as well as better regional, high speed
                     transportation solutions.
                 •   Preserving and building upon tourist opportunities, such as the
                     wineries, Old Town Temecula, and the Pechanga Entertainment
                     Center.
     ACTIONS TO  Public and private efforts will be required to ensure the fiscal
                 strength and stability of the City and to meet market demand. The
           MEET  goals and policies of this Element address these challenges.
    CHALLENGES   Additionally, the following programs are proposed:
  C I T Y  O F  T   E M E     C U L A         G   E N E R A L            P  L A   N
                                     ED-4

                                TEMECULA REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
                                                                                                       e
PLANS IN ACTION                 The Temecula Redevelopment Agency was formed to provide a tool         c
                                to eliminate blighting conditions and ensure that the City s
Temecula s Redevelopment
Agency has prepared an          economic base would grow and remain healthy through new public
                                                                                                       o
implementation plan for         improvements, commercial development, and affordable housing.          n
the Redevelopment Project
Area. This Redevelopment
                                Prior to Temecula s incorporation in 1989, the County of Riverside     o
                                established a Redevelopment Project Area in accordance with            m
Plan is one of the tools the    California Community Redevelopment Law to eliminate blight
City uses to achieve
                                within designated areas. After incorporation, the City of Temecula     i
economic         development
objectives.                     assumed responsibility for administering the Project Area shown in     c
                                Figure ED-1. The Project Area encompasses sections of the
                                community with conditions that often impede the City's
                                development: such as abandoned buildings, substandard housing,         d
                                empty parcels, and vandalism.                                          e
                                                                                                       v
                                COORDINATION WITH REGIONAL ECONOMIC                                    e
                                DEVELOPMENT AGENCIES
PLANS IN ACTION                                                                                        l
The City works with
several organizations to
                                The City coordinates with the Southwest California Economic            o
obtain input from the           Development Alliance, Temecula Valley Chamber of Commerce,             p
                                and the Economic Development Corporation of Southwest
business          community
                                Riverside County to address the needs of businesses in the
                                                                                                       m
regarding the best means
for assisting local businesses  community.                                                             e
and maintaining a healthy                                                                              n
business environment.           ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ACTION PLAN                                       t
                                The City has developed an Economic Development Action Plan
                                that will be periodically updated to attract new businesses and retain
                                existing businesses. Based on ongoing research performed by the
                                City, the Economic Development Action Plan may address the
                                following concerns:
                                •   Monitoring retail and meeting demand. The City has over 3
                                    million square feet of retail centers including regional centers
                                    such as The Plaza and The Commons. Both centers have large
                                    value-oriented retailers, such as Lowes, Office Depot, Circuit
                                    City and Costco.
                                •   Maintaining a strong retail position. Taxable sales data from
                                    the California State Board of Equalization indicates that the
                                    City nearly doubled taxable retail sales in recent decades. Non-
                                    retail (business-to-business) taxable sales also increased
 C    I T Y          O F       T   E M E     C U L A          G  E N E R A L            P   L A   N
                                                    ED-5

      Figure ED-1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Keller Rd
      Redevelopment Project Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mc Colery Rd
      CITY OF TEMECULA GENERAL PLAN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pat Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Specili Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Briggs Rd                                                                       Elliot Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                Judith St
      Legend                                                                                                                                                         Baxter Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Jean Nicholas Rd
                                                Redevelopment Project Area                                                                                                                                   City of Murrieta                                                                                     d                                                                                                                                                                        County of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                rR
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sphere of Influence                                                                             s te                                                                                                                                                                            Riverside
                                                Temecula City Boundary                                                                                               Lee Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    inc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         he
                                                                                                                                                   Menifee Rd                                              Liberty Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pourroy Rd
                                                Sphere of Influence Boundary                                                                                                                                                                       Briggs Rd                     Leon Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Thompson Rd
                                                Planning Area
      Source: Temecula GIS and Cotton/Bridges/Associates                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Benton Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ÿ                                                  Auld Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Skinner
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Maddalena Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Pourroy Rd
                                                                                                                                                    Calle D e Amor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Leon Rd           Allen Rd
                                                                                                           Wh
                                                                                                                it
                                                                                                                      d Rd
                                                                                                                   oo                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rd
                                                                                                                 ew
                                                                                                                                                                     Hunter Rd                                                                                                                                                              y                                                                                                                                                                                               Borel Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ur
                                          Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Po
                                                                                                                Dr                                                                                                                                                                          Pr omo
                                         os
       Ø
       "
       #                Lo
                           s   Ala
                                     m
                                                                    Ø
                                                                    "
                                                                    #        Al
                                                                               t    a
                                                                                        Mu
                                                                                          r ri e
                                                                                                           ta
                                                                                                                                                                                                            an y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    nD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r                                                                                 n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           to    ry            P ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Sk y
                                                                                                                                                                                                           C
                                                                              Mu r ri eta
                                                                                                       Ho
                                                                                                                t Springs Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Murrieta Hot Springs Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Buck Rd
                        City of
                       Murrieta                                               Ja                                                                                                            W
                                                                                                                                                                                                y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       d
                                                                               ck
                                                                                                                                                                                   i   re                                                         ve                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    R
                                                                                   son
                                                                                                                                                                                na                                                           sA                                                                                sR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                l ow                                                                                     ola                                                                                                                                                                                                                Be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Butterfield Stage Rd
                                                                                                                                                                         Bo                                              W il                                                                                   N ic
                                                                                          Av    e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         V in                                                                                r e nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 oW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    a
                                                        M
                                                              i so                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      y
                                                            ad
                                                                    n                                                                                                                                                                                          d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  as R                                                                                                                                                                                                              C
             St                                                                                                                                                                                                                      N icol
                                                                          e
                                                                        Av
        va                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              a l le
     ua
 G                             W                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Vista D el        Rd
                                as                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Mo nte                                                                                 C on
                                   hing                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       te n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Via N ort e
                                          ton
                                              Av                                                                                                                                                                   r te                                                                                                                                                   L a Se r en a W y
                  D                                                                                                                                                                                              No
                                                e                                                                                                                       M
                  ou
                                                                                                                                                                             a rit a Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Via
                      gla
                                                                                                                                                                         arg
                       ss                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Rd
                              e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Rd                                                                                                                                                                                          r   ni a
                            Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Rey                                                                                                                                                                                            a     lif o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        oC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 nc h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       l                            y
                                                                                                                                         Yn                                                                                                                           De
                                                                                                                                             z
                                                                                                                                             e                                                                                                                                                 W                                                                                                                                                           Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                a               M
                                                                                                                                              Rd                                                                                                                                           en
                                                                        St                                                                                                                                                                                                    Se r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           La                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Dr
                                                                 rr
                                                                    y                                                          ffe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         do                                                                                                                                                       Pla y a
                                                            he                                                               Je                                                                                                                                                                                              w                                                                                                                                              ra De
                                                        C                                                                          o                                                                                                                                                                                           sP                                                                                                                            M ad e
                                                                                                                                rs                                                                                                                                                                                                 ky
                                                                                                                                     n
                                                                                                                                     Av  e                                                                                      d                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rd
                                                                                                           d                                                                                                            ta R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ba
                                                                                                      rR                                                                                                         ar i                                                                                                        R     d                                                                                                                                    Pau
                                                                                               st e                                                                                                  ar                                                                                                                 n ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     or
                                                                                                                                                                                                       g
                                                                                      c   he                                                                                                         M                                                                                                       l if
                                                                                   in                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ca
                                                                               W
                                                                                                                              Di
                                                                                                                                az                                                                                                                                                                   ho
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                nc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ra
                                                                                                                                 Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  L in da R
                                          Ra                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          o
                                                ho
                                              nc                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      se   a Rd
                                                   Ca                                                                                                                              Yn                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ll e
                                                     lif                                                                                                                             ez                      o                                                                                                                              Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                      R a nch Vi sta Rd                                                                                                           ba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Bu t t e r
                                                      or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             P au
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      C on ten t o
                                                         ni                                                                                                                                 Rd
                                ida D el O ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 M ea d o ws Pk y
                            ve n
                                                            a                                                                                              d
                        A                                     Rd                                                                                               R
                                                                                                                                       li for    nia
                                                                                                                         R an ch o C a                                                                                                                                                              M                                                                                                                           f ie l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            it                                                                                                                            Sta                                                                        De Portola Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        gar                                                                                                                                     ge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        R     d                                                                                                                                                                                                      Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     go
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               tia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sa n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A nz
                                                                                      Vi a Sant                                                                                                     Va
                                                                                                                                                                                                     le
                                                                                                                                                                                                       l
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Yn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ez
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          a R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       d      }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ÿ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              79
                                                                                          a Ro sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                       jo
                                                                                                                                                                                                               e                                                                                Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Av                                                                            la                                                                                                                                                 P ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       D e Po rt o                                                                                                                                                       ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                an
                                      n ca                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 il R
                                     arr a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Va
                                  Via
                                      B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           aR
                                                             o Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               aL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           m                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Rd
                                                            q uer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         k Pk y                                                                           za
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      aw                                                                             An
                                                        Via V                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 dh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Re
                                                              a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Va
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  lle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             olf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Pechanga                                                                        ol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Entertainment                                                                        lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ø                                                                                          Sp                                                                                H
                                                                                                                                                                                                         "
                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                nR                                                                       ar Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               yo                                                                               Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        wC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    bo
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                               in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Û
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ch an g a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pe
µ
                                                0                                          5,000                                          10,000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           r kw a y
                                                                                                                                              Feet
                                                                                                                                               Miles
                                                0                                                              1                                                 2
C I T Y                                                                  O F                                                     T E M E C U L A                                                                                                                                                                                       G E N E R A L                                                                                                                                                                                               P L A N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ED-6

PLANS IN ACTION                 markedly, reflective of the industrial development trend.
Temecula s        Economic                                                                      e
Development Action Plan      •  Recycling older commercial retail strip centers to mixed use
is updated on an ongoing        with commercial, office and possibly mixed use residential
                                                                                                c
basis to respond to current     development.                                                    o
market trends and the
needs of businesses located
                                                                                                n
                             •  Working to retain, as well as encouraging the expansion of      o
in the City and those
                                existing businesses with higher skilled employment and wages.
seeking to locate in the
City. These priorities will
                                                                                                m
be addressed in future       •  Continuing to attract industrial and high-technology            i
updates of the Action Plan.     businesses with higher skilled employment and wages.            c
                             •  Preserving the attractive appearance and design of the City s
                                industrial centers, such as the Ridge View Business Park.       d
                                                                                                e
                             •  Encouraging professional office development in key              v
                                locations, such as high traffic volume corridors along I-15 and
                                the SR-79 South corridor.                                       e
                                                                                                l
                             •  Developing solutions to address circulation issues, such as the o
                                SR-79 corridor, advocating high speed rail to facilitate better
                                regional transportation solutions, and enhanced use of French
                                                                                                p
                                Valley Airport.                                                 m
                                                                                                e
                             •  Focusing on new components of the City s tourism industry       n
                                including interaction between the wineries, Old Town, and the
                                Pechanga Entertainment Center.                                  t
                             •  Continuing investment in tourism venues, such as Old Town
                                Temecula, the Annual Temecula Valley Balloon and Wine
                                Festival and the winery tours.
                             •  Developing lodging along the freeway, such as the Extended
                                Stay America at Overland, which interacts well with the
                                professional office and tourism markets and enhances fiscal
                                viability.
                             •  Focusing on the interface between French Valley and other
                                adjacent growth areas.
                             •  Preserving agriculture and wineries/tourist opportunities
                                amidst growth pressures.
 C    I T Y         O F     T  E M E      C U L A         G   E N E R A L           P  L A  N
                                                ED-7

                 •   Building better working relationships with key players,
e                    including the City of Murrieta, the Pechanga Band, and the
                     County of Riverside.
c
o                •   Enhancing existing cultural amenities and encouraging the
n                    development of a hospital.
o
                 •   Developing improved telecommunications infra-structure
m                    and enhanced telecommuting opportunities.
i
c                •   Maintaining an efficient product and material distribution
                     system and developing supporting infrastructure such as a brine
                     line.
d
e                GOALS AND POLICIES
v
e                These goals and policies address six major issues: 1) promoting clean
l                manufacturing businesses within the City, 2) diversifying Temecula s
                 economic base, 3) maintaining the economic base, 4) establishing
o                diverse education, job training, and placement systems, 5)
p                promoting local business advantages, and 6) expanding the local
m                tourism industry.
e         CLEAN  Temecula has maintained high standards for manufacturing activity
n MANUFACTURING  which have enhanced attractiveness to both employers and residents.
t                With additional land reserved for manufacturing activities, the City
                 must continue to guide the location, design, and function of
                 industry in a manner that benefits the community.
                 Goal 1         A strong base of clean manufacturing activities
                                which employs a skilled labor force and can be
                                successfully      integrated     into      Temecula's
                                community character.
                 Policy 1.1     Attract and retain a diverse range of business and
                                industry that complements Temecula's character,
                                utilizes the local workforce, and takes advantage of
                                Temecula's location.
                 Policy 1.2     Encourage the growth and expansion of industry by
                                providing high quality municipal services, facilities,
                                and economic development assistance.
  C I T Y  O F  T  E M E     C U L A          G   E N E R A L            P  L A   N
                                    ED-8

                  Policy 1.3     Encourage an environmentally-friendly business
                                 atmosphere that maintains local regulations            e
                                 favorable to clean industry and provides technical
                                 assistance to industries affected by new regional air
                                                                                        c
                                 quality regulations and other developing regional      o
                                 regulations.                                           n
                  Policy 1.4     Encourage the establishment of federal and State
                                                                                        o
                                 agency offices, corporate headquarters facilities, and m
                                 other white-collar employers in Temecula to expand     i
                                 local employment opportunities.                        c
                  Policy 1.5     Encourage the expansion and attractive appearance
                                 and design of professional office environments and     d
                                 industrial centers while maintaining the diversified   e
                                 manufacturing base.
                                                                                        v
                  Policy 1.6     Develop and maintain strategic partnerships with the   e
                                 Chamber of Commerce, the Economic Development          l
                                 Corporation, and other organizations that encourage
                                 the establishment of high-paying jobs in the area.     o
                                                                                        p
         DIVERSE  Temecula s local economy has expanded rapidly in recent years,        m
                  diversifying in both manufacturing and services. Areas where
  ECONOMIC BASE
                  additional diversification is needed may include: prioritizing light  e
                  manufacturing and high technology operations, expanding the           n
                  financial sector, medical and health services, hotel/lodging,         t
                  conference/meeting, recreation and other tourist-commercial goods
                  and services.
                  Goal 2         A diverse economic base including a range of
                                 manufacturing, retail, service, and knowledge-
                                 based professional activities.
                  Policy 2.1     Provide for industrial land uses which facilitate a
                                 variety of user types, including biomedical and high
                                 technology operations, manufacturing, business
                                 office, and research and development.
                  Policy 2.2         Plan for land use and development patterns that
                                 allow succession of use, adapt to Temecula's
                                 economic conditions, and promote development of
                                 properly located and well designed commercial
                                 centers meeting the diverse service needs of the City.
C  I T Y   O F   T   E M E     C U L A         G   E N E R A L           P   L A    N
                                     ED-9
                   Policy 2.3     Use redevelopment powers and opportunities to
e                                 enhance development, including the revitalization of
                                  older commercial areas through the development of
c                                 mixed use projects.
o
n                  Policy 2.4     Encourage professional office development in key
                                  locations, such as high traffic volume corridors
o                                 along I-15 and the SR-79 South Corridor.
m
i                  Policy 2.5     Promote retail and other support activities that
c                                 provide a broader selection of high-quality goods
                                  and services for residents, workers and tourists,
                                  including apparel, general merchandise, home
d                                 furnishings and appliances.
e
         MAINTAIN  Prior to incorporation, the Temecula area experienced rapid growth
v                  under the jurisdiction of Riverside County.               Following
    ECONOMIC BASE
e                  incorporation, Temecula can directly influence its fiscal stability
l                  through strategic land use and economic development planning
                   programs.
o
p                  Goal 3         A sound economic base providing a fiscal
m                                 foundation for the City, quality community
                                  facilities, and high service levels.
e
n                  Policy 3.1     Encourage a pattern of development that balances
t                                 revenue generating land uses in phase with other uses
                                  that have negative fiscal impacts.
                   Policy 3.2     Encourage the growth or relocation of industries
                                  that generate local tax and employment advantages.
                   Policy 3.3     Evaluate fiscal impacts of new development on an
                                  ongoing basis and provide appropriate mitigation
                                  strategies.
                   Policy 3.4         Take advantage of Temecula's regional capture of
                                  taxable sales and continue to establish Temecula as a
                                  retail center.
                   Policy 3.5     Promote recycling and revitalization of older
                                  retail/commercial corridors within the City,
                                  including Jefferson Avenue, and potential increases
                                  in mixed use residential and commercial projects.
  C  I T Y  O F   T  E M E     C U L A           G  E N E R A L           P  L A    N
                                      ED-10
         DIVERSE   Residents and employers have identified education as a key element
      EDUCATION,   in developing the long-range economic base in Temecula. By             e
                   providing superior educational opportunities and resources, with an
  TRAINING, AND    emphasis on practical educational programs for the job mix
                                                                                          c
  JOB PLACEMENT    required to serve the community, many residents will prefer to work    o
                   within the City. A full range of adult education, retraining, special  n
                   education, vocational/technical education and college/university
                   level facilities and curriculums should be provided, aimed at
                                                                                          o
                   responding to the educational needs of the community through           m
                   each phase of development.                                             i
                                                                                          c
                   Goal 4          A diverse education, job training, and placement
                                   system which will develop and maintain a high
                                   quality work force in Temecula.                        d
                                                                                          e
                   Policy 4.1      Support economic development goals through a           v
                                   range of education and training activities.
                                                                                          e
                   Policy 4.2      Establish a proactive, continuing dialogue between     l
                                   the City and educational institutions, including       o
                                   school districts, community colleges and universities
                                   on the phasing of development, service standards,      p
                                   and the needs of the work force.                       m
                                                                                          e
                   Policy 4.3      Encourage development of a comprehensive higher
                                   education center in conjunction with interested        n
                                   private, community and state colleges or universities. t
          LOCAL    Temecula has a number of favorable employment growth
         BUSINESS  conditions, including demonstrated attractiveness to industry and
                   ideal locational advantages for company headquarters. The City
     ADVANTAGES    wishes to focus future efforts on continuing to attract high quality
                   clean industry. However, with the current regulatory environment
                   and rising land prices, the City may need to clearly define incentives
                   for businesses to locate in Temecula instead of other communities.
                   Goal 5          Promote the advantages to businesses of locating
                                   in Temecula, including cost advantages, amenities,
                                   housing, community activities, cultural amenities,
                                   and civic services.
                   Policy 5.1      Continue to develop and maintain the marketing
                                   program to publicize the advantages of relocating to
                                   Temecula.
C  I T Y   O F    T   E M E      C U L A         G    E N E R A L          P   L A   N
                                       ED-11
                   Policy 5.2      Monitor economic conditions in Temecula in
e                                  comparison to other locations in California and
                                   throughout the nation to determine relative
c                                  advantages.
o
n                  Policy 5.3      Monitor and maintain the supply of diverse housing
                                   types and price ranges in relation to the supply of
o                                  jobs to balance area-wide jobs, households, worker
m                                  earnings and housing expenses throughout the City.
i
c                  Policy 5.4      Monitor existing businesses and support small
                                   businesses and the business retention program to
                                   encourage local employment and growth of local
d                                  businesses.
e
                   Policy 5.5      Continue to attract industrial and high-technology
v                                  businesses that require higher skilled employment to
e                                  take advantage of Temecula s skilled work force.
l
                   Policy 5.6      Encourage the provision of cultural arts and
o                                  amenities with the development of cultural facilities
p                                  that enhance the City s image and the local quality
m                                  of life.
e           LOCAL  Over recent years, Temecula has become a tourist destination point
n         TOURISM  with local wineries, Old Town Temecula, and Pechanga
t                  Entertainment Center leading the way. Tourism will play an
                   effective role in the local economy by expanding beyond these
                   attractions and with the continued provision of year-round activities
                   capable of generating greater tourist interest. Community leaders
                   have expressed the desire to expand Temecula's tourism industry in
                   a manner that complements established residential areas as well as
                   businesses.
                   Goal 6          A comprehensive, recognizable tourist destination,
                                   offering a range of attractions throughout and
                                   beyond the Planning Area.
                   Policy 6.1      Encourage and enhance cooperative efforts with the
                                   wine-making      industry    and     other   tourism
                                   organizations in the Temecula Valley to promote
                                   Temecula as a destination resort.
  C I T Y    O F  T   E M E     C U L A         G    E N E R A L           P  L A   N
                                       ED-12
                   Policy 6.2      Support tourism venues, including commercial
                                   recreation, convention, resort, and wine-making           e
                                   activities, that spotlight the desirability of, and bring
                                   visitors to, the Temecula Valley.                         c
                                                                                             o
                   Policy 6.3      Continue to expand Old Town’s role in local tourism       n
                                   and improve its attractiveness, accessibility, and
                                   economic vitality, as well as it’s interaction with other o
                                   local attractions.                                        m
                   Policy 6.4      Encourage development of lodging along the freeway
                                                                                             i
                                   which interacts well with the professional office and     c
                                   tourism markets and enhances fiscal viability.
                                                                                             d
                   IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS                                                   e
                                                                                             v
                   The following actions implement the goals and policies identified in      e
                   the Economic Development Element.                                         l
                                                                                             o
             ED-1  The City, through the Redevelopment Agency, will continue to              p
 REDEVELOPMENT     implement the 5-year Implementation Plan, Agency-adopted goals,
                   and Project Area Plans. The Redevelopment Agency will continue to
                                                                                             m
                   use powers, as appropriate, to accommodate site needs of new              e
                   businesses. Participate with the Planning Department in undertaking       n
                   a study of the Jefferson Avenue Corridor, between Winchester and
                   Rancho California Roads, to develop a plan to revitalize the area and
                                                                                             t
                   comprehensively implement the mixed use concept.
                   Agency/Department:            City Manager’s Office, City Council,
                                                 Redevelopment Agency, Planning
                   Related Policies:             All Policies
            ED-2   The City will coordinate with the Temecula Valley Chamber of
  COORDINATION     Commerce, the Economic Development Corporation of Southwest
                   Riverside County, and other organizations to address the needs of
  WITH REGIONAL    businesses in the community. The City will work with these agencies
       ECONOMIC    to obtain input from the business community as to the best means
     DEVELOPMENT   for assisting local businesses and maintaining a healthy business
         AGENCIES  environment.
C  I  T Y   O F   T  E  M    E  C   U   L   A     G    E   N  E R   A   L      P  L  A  N
                                       ED-13

                   Agency/Department:         City Manager s Office, City Council,
e                                             Planning
                   Related Policies:          All policies
c
o
n            ED-3  Use the Economic Development Action Plan to help attract new
                   industry and retain existing businesses.
o       ECONOMIC
m    DEVELOPMENT   Agency/Department:         City Manager s Office, City Council,
i     ACTION PLAN                             Planning, Public Works
c                  Related Policies:          All Policies
d
e
v
e
l
o
p
m
e
n
t
  C I T Y   O F   T  E M E     C U L A          G   E N E R A L       P  L A N
                                      ED-14
                                                            APPENDIX                 e
                                                                                     c
                       2001 ECONOMIC PROFILE                                         o
                                                                                     n
              This Appendix describes Temecula s overall economic profile in         o
              terms of standard economic indices: population growth,                 m
              employment and salary trends, future employment growth,                i
              employment and wage growth trends, taxable retail sales, and non-
              retail sales.                                                          c
  POPULATION   As mentioned above, Temecula experienced tremendous population        d
               growth from 1990 to 2002, increasing from 27,099 to 72,715 people,
     GROWTH    or by 168.3 percent. During the same time period, the City s          e
      TRENDS   employment rose from 13,590 to 33,105 (up 19,515 jobs or 143.6        v
               percent). Riverside County was California s fastest growing major     e
               County during this period, with population increasing by more
               than 30 percent. The City s focus is on developing a vision that will l
               address the quality of life while maintaining control in areas where  o
               it has achieved economic strength, such as the industrial base and    p
               retail centers.
                                                                                     m
               Growth has resulted in circulation issues, with high traffic volumes  e
               at major intersections and ramps along I-15. Although the             n
               Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) expects
               the City to experience slower growth in the future, the
                                                                                     t
               unincorporated areas are expected to develop at a rapid pace.
               SCAG also indicates that the local employment will grow faster
               than population. According to SCAG, the City s population is
               projected to grow at an average annual rate of 0.7 percent from
               2005 to 2020 while employment is projected to grow at an average
               annual rate of 2.9 percent.
               Development in the County has also impacted the City at its
               boundaries and adjacent areas. Unplanned development of nearby
               areas such as Red Hawk and Vail Ranch, and in the French Valley
               continues to pose issues for the City. Growth pressure on the
               wineries at the City s edge is also a major concern. Coordination
               with the County will be critical to ensuring that growth patterns are
               compatible with the City s vision.
C I T Y  O F T   E M E      C U L A         G   E N E R A L           P  L A N
                               ED-Appdx-1
    EMPLOYMENT             Temecula s emergence as a center of job growth is primarily the
e     AND WAGE
                           result of the migration of firms and people to the Inland Empire
                           from the Southland s coastal counties. This migration is occurring
c       GROWTH             as the density of land development in San Diego, Orange and Los
o        TRENDS            Angeles counties has created a shortage of manufacturing and
n                          housing space, and increased space costs. Temecula is unique in
                           that the major impetus for the growth is coming north out of San
o                          Diego County and secondarily from Orange or Los Angeles
m                          counties. Also, the jobs coming to the City are better paying than
i                          the Inland Empire average.
c                          As shown in Table ED-1, employment in Temecula rose from about
                           13,570 jobs in 1991 to about 25,140 in 1999. This represents a total
d                          increase of almost 11,570 jobs or an 85.3 percent increase in total
e                          employment. Retail and Manufacturing showed the largest increase
                           in jobs from 1991 to 1999, adding 2,551 and 2,449 positions,
v                          respectively.
e
l                                                       TABLE ED-1
                      CITY OF TEMECULA EMPLOYMENT BY SECTOR: 1991 AND 1999
o                                                        Job Growth                           Share of Total
p              Employment
                   Sector
                                           Year             Numerical          Percent             Jobs
m                                     1991        1999        Change           Change         1991      1999
           Manufacturing                3,414 5,863                 2,449           71.7%      25.2%     23.3%
e          Retail Trade                 2,828 5,379                 2,551           90.2%      20.8%     21.4%
n          Education                    1,032 2,057                 1,025           99.3%       7.6%      8.2%
t          Distribution-                  812 1,954                 1,142         140.6%        6.0%      7.8%
           Transport
           Construction                 1,489       1,769             280           18.8%      11.0%      7.0%
           Hotel & Amusement              231       1,700           1,469         635.9%        1.7%      6.8%
           Employment Agency              182       1,378           1,196         657.1%        1.3%      5.5%
           Other Services                 430       1,141             711         165.3%        3.2%      4.5%
           Agriculture                  1,054       1,050               -4           -0.4%      7.8%      4.2%
           FIRE                           544         777             233           42.8%       4.0%      3.1%
           Business Services              379         759             380         100.3%        2.8%      3.0%
           Health Services                358         731             373         104.2%        2.6%      2.9%
           Engineer. & Mgmt.              780         414            -366          -46.9%       5.7%      1.6%
           Government                      37         168             131         354.1%        0.3%      0.7%
              Total Employment         13,570     25,140          11,570            85.3%     100.0%    100.0%
           Source: Stanley R. Hoffman Associates, Inc., Economics & Politics, Inc. July 2000.
  C  I T Y    O F        T   E M E       C U L A              G    E N E R A L                   P  L A N
                                             ED-APPDX-2
                      The large increase in Employment Agencies is due to the increasing
                      reliability of firms on outside agencies to recruit, train and supply                              e
                      new workers.       The Hotel and Amusement sector also grew
                      dramatically, in large part due to the Pechanga Entertainment
                                                                                                                         c
                      Center. Only the Agriculture and Engineering and Management                                        o
                      sectors lost jobs, declining by 0.4 percent and 46.9 percent,                                      n
                      respectively. While Manufacturing employment grew strongly and
                      remained the largest sector in 1999, its share of total jobs declined
                                                                                                                         o
                      from 25.2 percent to 23.3 percent from 1991 to 1999 as the                                         m
                      economic base became more diversified. Retail employment                                           i
                      increased its share of the total jobs in this period from 20.8 percent                             c
                      to 21.4 percent and has expanded further with the opening of the
                      Promenade Mall.
                                                                                                                         d
                      Average pay per worker in Temecula increased from $28,695 in 1991                                  e
                      to $33,349 in 1999 in constant 2001 dollars. This represents an
                      increase of 16.2 percent. As shown in Figure ED-2, the highest                                     v
                      salary per worker in 1999 was in the Manufacturing and Utilities                                   e
                      sectors. This is the result of the concentration of biotechnology,                                 l
                      medical and computer chip firms in the City. The City s other
                      relatively higher paying sectors were Finance, Insurance and Real                                  o
                      Estate, Engineering and Management, and Education. Those                                           p
                      averaging below $20,000 included the Retail, Hotel & Amusement                                     m
                      and the fast growing Employment Agencies sectors.
                                                                                                                         e
                                                  FIGURE ED-2                                                            n
                                     HIGHEST AND LOWEST AVERAGE SALARIES: 1999                                           t
                                            (IN CONSTANT 2001 DOLLARS)
                      Sources: Stanley R. Hoffman Associates, Inc., Economics & Politics, Inc. July 2000.
                           $70,000
                                       $59,437
                           $60,000
                           $50,000
                                                 $43,196       $42,925    $38,718
                           $40,000
                           $30,000
                                                                                     $19,116
                           $20,000                                                               $16,489       $16,283
                           $10,000
                                $0
                               M                 E                        n
                                                               t                     l
                                                                                    tai        us      Ag
                                an           FI            gm       uc                            e.     en
                                  uf            R          M           ati o
                                                                                Re        Am               cy
                                    ac t.                ./
                                                     gin           Ed               H             pl
                                                    En                               ot             oy .
                                                                                       e&       Em
C   I T Y   O F   T     E M E         C U L A                   G        E N E R A L                       P     L A N
                                        ED-Appdx-3
                   Based on a 1997/98 survey jointly conducted by the cities of
e                  Murrieta and Temecula, about 32.0 percent of the labor force was
                   employed in the Services industry, 18.0 percent in Manufacturing,
c                  and 9.0 percent in Retail. Also, the City for the most part has a
o                  high-skilled labor force. The survey indicated that about 60.0
n                  percent of the adult area labor force holds a professional, technical,
                   or managerial position with an additional 20.0 percent in clerical
o                  and sales occupations. Office development in the City would be
m                  compatible with much of this type of labor force.
i
                   Based on survey commuting data, a large percentage of the area
c                  labor force is commuting to jobs outside of the area. The survey
                   indicated that about 68.0 percent of the area s adult working
d                  residents commute away from the Temecula or Murrieta area to
e                  their work site, with an average one-way commute of 36 miles.
v       TAXABLE    Retail trade increased in Temecula every year since the City s 1989
e   RETAIL SALES
                   incorporation, even during Southern California s recession. As a
l                  result, the City s retail sales growth has exceeded that of Riverside
                   County throughout the decade. Temecula has shown tremendous
o                  retail activity and taxable retail sales in the City have grown by 174
p                  percent from 1991 to 2000 in year 2000 constant dollars. As shown
m                  in Table ED-2, total taxable retail sales in Temecula have increased
                   in real dollars from 1991 to 2000 from about $442.1 million to
e                  about $1.20 billion. Taxable retail sales in the County increased by
n                  57.2 percent during this time period. Additionally, one of the
t                  City s strengths is a growing base of manufacturing firms that
                   generate non-retail taxable goods through taxable sales to other
                   businesses and the public. The City has also been attracting new
                   retail merchants as well as large General Merchandise stores.
                   Increased residential development in the City will continue to
                   provide support for retail growth.
                   As shown in Table ED-2, taxable sales in Temecula in all categories
                   have increased dramatically, particularly in Home Furnishings,
                   General Merchandise, and Auto Dealers. The largest portions of the
                   City s retail sales tax were from Auto Dealers and General
                   Merchandise stores, which comprised about 24 percent and 21
                   percent respectively, of the total taxable retail sales during 2000.
  C I T Y   O F  T   E M E       C U L A          G   E N E R A L             P  L A N
                                    ED-APPDX-4
                                                TABLE ED-2
                         TAXABLE SALES BY CATEGORY: 1991 AND 2000                                         e
                                           CITY OF TEMECULA
                        (IN THOUSANDS OF CONSTANT 2000 DOLLARS)
                                                                                                          c
                                                                                1991 to                   o
                                                                                              Percent
                    Retail Group                   1991             2000         2000
                                                                                              Change      n
                                                                                Change
            Apparel Stores                         $16,394          $52,070      $35,676       217.6%
                                                                                                          o
            General Merchandise                                                                           m
            Stores1
            Food Stores
                                                     70,346
                                                     36,102
                                                                    242,274
                                                                      50,850
                                                                                 171,928
                                                                                  14,748
                                                                                               244.4%
                                                                                                40.9%
                                                                                                          i
            Eating and Drinking Places               47,577         120,134       72,557       152.5%     c
            Home Furnishings                         13,982           52,839      38,857       277.9%
            Building Materials                       33,847           84,163      50,316       148.7%
            Auto Dealers and Supplies                84,017         272,394      188,377       224.2%     d
            Service Stations                         30,631           81,389      50,758       165.7%     e
            Other Retail Stores
            Retail Subtotal
                                                     89,170
                                                 $422,066
                                                                    200,366
                                                                $1,156,479
                                                                                 111,196
                                                                                $734,413
                                                                                               124.7%
                                                                                               174.0%
                                                                                                          v
            All Other Outlets (Non-                                                                       e
            Retail)2
            Total All Outlets
                                                     96,384
                                                 $518,449
                                                                    254,572
                                                                $1,411,051
                                                                                 158,188
                                                                                $892,602
                                                                                               164.1%
                                                                                               172.2%
                                                                                                          l
                                                                                                          o
                                         COUNTY OF RIVERSIDE                                              p
                        (IN THOUSANDS OF CONSTANT 2000 DOLLARS)                                           m
                                                                                  1991 to
                    Retail Group                    1991               2000         2000
                                                                                                 Percent  e
                                                                                                 Change
                                                                                  Change                  n
            Apparel Stores
            General Merchandise
                                                   $432,502           $538,578     $106,076        24.5%
                                                                                                          t
            Stores1                                1,283,994          2,062,738      778,744       60.7%
            Food Stores                              906,415            889,894       -16,521       -1.8%
            Eating and Drinking Places               993,747          1,364,808      371,061       37.3%
            Home Furnishings                         340,399            517,578      177,179       52.1%
            Building Materials                       645,272          1,210,838      565,566       87.6%
            Auto Dealers and Supplies             1,355,583           2,615,997   1,260,414        93.0%
            Service Stations                         798,860          1,196,693      397,833       49.8%
            Other Retail Stores                      997,861          1,793,350      795,489       79.7%
            Retail Subtotal                      $7,754,633       $12,190,474    $4,435,841        57.2%
            All Other Outlets (Non-
            Retail)2                               2,428,208          3,937,231   1,509,023        62.1%
            Total All Outlets                   $10,182,841       $16,127,705    $5,944,864        58.4%
              1.  Drug stores are included in General Merchandise.
              2.  Includes all transactions occurring outside retail establishments such as business-to-
                  business, business/personal services taxable sales.
              Sources: Stanley R. Hoffman Associates, Inc., State Board of Equalization
C I T Y O F T    E M E       C U L A               G     E N E R A L                  P   L A N
                                  ED-Appdx-5
                       Per capita retail sales are a rough estimate of the change in retail
e                      sales, and are calculated by dividing the total retail sales by the
                       City s total population. This is a good indicator of a community s
c                      ability to provide services to its population as the sales tax is the
o                      primary source of municipal finance in California. Figure ED-3
n                      shows per capita taxable retail sales in 1991 and 2000 in constant
                       2000 dollars for the City of Temecula, selected nearby communities
o                      and the County. As shown, Temecula s per capita taxable retail
m                      sales has increased from $15,481 to $20,037 from 1991 to 2000. Per
i                      capita taxable retail sales in the cities of Lake Elsinore and Hemet
                       also rose in real dollars by 28.9 percent and 9.3 percent, while the
c                      County s per capita taxable retail sales rose by 24.4 percent. Per
                       capita taxable retail sales in Corona fell slightly, by 0.5 percent.
d
e                                                      FIGURE ED-3
                         COMPARATIVE PER CAPITA TAXABLE RETAIL SALES: 1991 AND
v                                                          2000
e                                              (in constant 2000 dollars)
l                      Source: Stanley R. Hoffman Associates, Inc., State Board of Equalization.
o
p              $25,000
m              $20,000                     1991        2000
e
n              $15,000
t
               $10,000
                $5,000
                    $0
                            Corona       Lake Elsinore       Hemet         Temecula    Riverside County
    NON-RETAIL         Another common indicator of a community s economic position
                       is the value of commercial land used for non-retail uses,
    REAL ESTATE        specifically industrial/manufacturing and office, within the City.
        MARKET         This market provides employment beyond the retail and service
                       industries, and also tends to be more stable across economic
                       cycles.
  C I T Y  O F       T   E M E      C U L A               G  E N E R A L              P    L A N
                                        ED-APPDX-6
                    INDUSTRIAL/MANUFACTURING MARKET
                                                                                           e
                    Temecula is part of the Inland Empire s industrial real estate         c
                    market, which is among the strongest in the United States. The
                    City s attractive setting, industrial marketing policies, and position o
                    on the I-15 freeway equidistant from San Diego and Orange              n
                    Counties, has allowed it to draw upscale manufacturing firms that      o
                    might otherwise have located in more intensely urbanized areas of
                    the Inland Empire. The City s close proximity to I-15 provides         m
                    access to key transportation facilities needed by industrial firms, as i
                    well as job opportunities for those living in Temecula and nearby      c
                    communities. The City also offers companies access to logistics
                    centers such as the Ontario International Airport and Burlington
                    Northern Santa Fe s (BNSF) Intermodal Rail Yard in San                 d
                    Bernardino. Additionally, the area offers land and lease price         e
                    advantages.
                                                                                           v
      INVENTORY     Coldwell Banker estimates that in April 2000, Temecula had 7.8         e
                    million square feet of strictly manufacturing and distribution space,  l
                    representing 3.3 percent of the Inland Empire s inventory.
                    Temecula s inventory of industrial space increases to about 9.9
                                                                                           o
                    million square feet if multi-tenant sites are included. This           p
                    represents an increase of about 58.4 percent from the 6.25 million     m
                    square feet of industrial space in 1990.                               e
        VACANCY     From 1992 to 1999, the onset of firms into the Inland Empire           n
                    reduced Temecula s industrial vacancy rate from 14.0 percent to 6.0    t
                    percent. In April 2000, Temecula s industrial space vacancy rate was
                    estimated at 10.8 percent. This ranks it in the middle of the 18
                    Inland Empire sub-markets. By size, Temecula s highest vacancy
                    rate was in 50,000 to 99,999 square feet category at 21.5 percent. In
                    the 100,000 square feet and greater category, the rate was about 6.0
                    percent.
      LEASE RATES  The Inland Empire s industrial properties enjoy an advantage in
                   terms of space costs. Manufacturing and distribution firms find that
                   the Inland Empire is the only place where large new facilities can be
                   built. Grubb & Ellis estimates that Temecula s industrial space has
                   an average lease rate of $0.39 per square foot per month. This is
                   lower than the rates in any of Southern California s coastal sub-
                   markets. In San Diego County s Escondido and Vista markets, the
                   average is $0.55 per square foot. Within the Inland Empire,
                   Temecula s $0.39 rate is above the region s $0.33 average. It is also
                   slightly higher than the nearest comparable costs in Corona at $0.37
                   and Fontana and Chino at $0.35.
C I T Y     O F   T   E M E      C U L A          G   E N E R A L            P  L A N
                                    ED-Appdx-7
               OFFICE MARKET
e
c              Recent data on the office market in Temecula is provided by CB
               Richard Ellis, which includes Temecula as part of the San Diego
o              County Office Market. As shown in Table ED-3, as of 4th quarter
n              2001 the Temecula sub-market comprised about 1.13 million square
o              feet, or about 2.7 percent of the San Diego Office Market s total
               45.6 million square feet. The estimated vacancy rate of 2.7 percent
m              for the Temecula sub-market was one of the lowest of all the sub-
i              markets, and was less than the total market area s 9.7 percent.
c              Similar to the industrial market, the office market in Temecula also
               has cost advantages. The average lease rate for Temecula office space
               was $1.26 per square foot per month, compared to the market
d              average of $1.80 per square foot per month. These lower average
e              lease rates could attract new office development in the City,
               providing reduced commute times for those working outside the
v              area.
e
l              Trends indicate that the office market in Temecula will continue to
               remain strong. The Temecula office sub-market increased its share of
o              the total San Diego market area from 1.8 percent at year-end 1999 to
p              2.5 percent of the total at year-end 2001. The vacancy rate in
m              Temecula declined from 1999 to 2001, compared to the market area,
e              which showed an increased vacancy rate during this time period.
n                                              TABLE ED-3
t                          TEMECULA OFFICE MARKET: 1999 AND 2001
                                            Building                     Lease Rate
                                                               % of                     Vacancy
                 4th Quarter Ending           Square                            Per
                                                             Market                      Rate
                                               Feet                     sq.ft/month
                Temecula Sub-Market
                          1999               732,509            1.8%           $1.20       3.29%
                          2001              1,125,341           2.5%           $1.26       2.70%
                  San Diego Market
                          1999              41,000,000        100.0%           $1.62       8.20%
                          2001              45,644,417        100.0%           $1.80       9.70%
               Source:  Stanley R. Hoffman Associates, Inc., CB Richard Ellis.
               The City should continue to attract businesses that generate non-
               retail taxable sales in order to diversify its sales tax base.
  C I T Y O F T  E M E        C U L A            G      E N E R A L                  P L A N
                                   ED-APPDX-8




































































































































































                                                                   GROWTH
                                   MANAGEMENT/PUBLIC
                                           FACILITIES ELEMENT
                    INTRODUCTION
                    T
                            emecula is a highly desirable community in which to live
                            and work. As a result, the City experienced substantial
                            growth during the past decade. To maintain quality of life
                            for residents and businesses, growth must be well-managed,
                    guided, and directed. The City must influence, directly or
                    indirectly, the amount, type (nature and mix of uses), pattern,
                    location, timing or phasing, density, intensity, and quality of
                    growth. The key factor distinguishing growth management from
                    land use planning in general is the deliberate intent to augment
                    market forces in shaping the pace and conditions under which
                    Temecula will mature.
  PURPOSE OF THE    The purpose of the Growth Management/Public Facilities Element
        GROWTH      is to promote orderly growth and development based on the City s
                    ability to provide adequate public facilities and services. This
   MANAGEMENT/      Element sets forth policies and standards to ensure that future
 PUBLIC FACILITIES  development is coordinated with public facilities and services at
         ELEMENT    desired levels of service. Other aspects of growth management are
                    found within the Land Use, Circulation, Air Quality and other
                    elements of the General Plan. Taken together, these sections will
                    influence growth and development within the City and surrounding
                    areas to achieve the quality of life embodied in the Plan.
      SCOPE AND     California Government Code, Section 65303, states that the general
 CONTENT OF THE     plan may include any other elements or address any other subjects
                    which, in the judgment of the City Council, relate to the physical
        GROWTH      development of the        city. Temecula, along with an increasing
   MANAGEMENT/      number of cities, has opted to include growth management and
 PUBLIC FACILITIES  public facilities elements in the General Plan. This Growth
         ELEMENT    Management/Public Facilities Element carries the same force and
                    effect as a required element and is internally consistent with the
                    other elements of the General Plan.
C  I T Y    O F    T   E M E     C U L A           G   E N E R A L          P  L A N
                                        GM-1
                 The growth management component of this Element addresses local
                 and regional growth management issues, including compliance with
                 State laws affecting growth in Temecula. The public facilities
                 component addresses both infrastructure and public services.
                 Infrastructure includes sewer, water, storm drain systems, as well as
                 public facilities. Public services include police, fire, emergency
                 medical, public schools, solid and hazardous waste disposal, and
                 civic and cultural facilities.
  RELATED PLANS  A number of other plans and programs relate directly to the goals
  AND PROGRAMS   of the Growth Management/Public Facilities Element.
                 WESTERN RIVERSIDE COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS (WRCOG)
                 GROWTH MANAGEMENT STRATEGY
                 In response to Riverside County's Growth Management Element,
                 the WRCOG joined forces with the Coachella Valley COG to
                 develop a comprehensive Growth Management Strategy that both
                 city and county governments could support. The Plan includes a
                 Vision Statement and policies concerning land use, governmental
                 organization, local government finance and public services and
                 facilities plans. The WRCOG's Growth Management Strategy is
                 reinforced in the goals, policies, and growth management strategy of
                 this Element.
                 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA ASSOCIATION OF GOVERNMENTS (SCAG)
                 GROWTH MANAGEMENT PLAN
                 SCAG's Growth Management Plan recommends ways to redirect the
                 region's growth to minimize congestion and better protect the
                 environment.      While SCAG lacks the authority to mandate
                 implementation of the Plan, other agencies, such as the Air Quality
                 Management District, are authorized to mandate implementation of
                 the Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP), a program that
                 encompasses provisions of the Growth Management Plan. The City
                 is subject to all AQMP requirements for local jurisdictions, as
                 discussed in the Air Quality Element of the General Plan.
                 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA ASSOCIATION OF GOVERNMENTS (SCAG)
                 GROWTH VISIONING PROGRAM
                 Growth visioning is a tool that has gained widespread attention as a
                 method of stimulating rethinking about how the future
C  I T Y  O F   T   E M E      C U L A          G   E N E R A L         P  L A   N
                                     GM-2
             might be shaped in neighborhoods, communities, and regions. It
             involves identifying desirable future conditions and stimulating
             change to achieve the future image. SCAG conducted a regional
             growth visioning program titled Compass for Southern California:
             the course for a sustainable Southland. Results of the visioning
             program served as a foundation for the 2004 Regional
             Transportation Plan (RTP) update and Regional Housing Needs
             Assessment (RHNA) process.
             The fundamental goal of the growth visioning effort is to make the
             SCAG region a better place to live and work for all residents.
             Decisions regarding growth, transportation, land use, and economic
             development should be made to ensure a sustained environment for
             future generations.
             RIVERSIDE COUNTY SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN
             In 1972, the State Legislature adopted the California Solid Waste
             Management and Resource Recovery Act, requiring each county
             within the State to prepare a solid waste management plan for all
             waste generated in the county and disposed of in or outside of the
             county. In compliance with the Act, the Riverside County Solid
             Waste Management Plan was prepared, and serves as the general
             guideline for waste management in the County.
             CITY OF TEMECULA SOURCE REDUCTION/RECYCLING ELEMENT
             Pursuant to the California Integrated Waste Management Act of
             1989 (AB 939), the City prepared a Source Reduction and Recycling
             Element (SSRE). The purpose of the SSRE was to establish a local
             plan to reduce solid waste by 25 percent by 1995 and 50 percent by
             the year 2000. The Element contains source reduction, recycling
             and composting strategies to meet the diversion goal. In October
             1991, the City began implementation of a curbside residential waste
             separation program.       Recyclable and compost materials are
             separated from household trash. Household waste is transported to
             a processing center in Stanton, and commercial/industrial waste is
             transported to a processing center in Perris. The General Plan
             contains goals and policies that are designed to further the
             reduction objectives of the SSRE.
C I T Y O F T   E M E     C U L A         G  E N E R A L           P  L A   N
                                GM-3
             CITY OF TEMECULA HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE ELEMENT
             California law requires cities and counties to develop programs to
             address household hazardous waste under AB 2707, a companion
             bill to the Integrated Solid Waste Management Act (AB 939), and
             under the Tanner hazardous waste management planning legislation
             (AB 2948). The City prepared a Household Hazardous Waste
             Element (HHWE), which identifies a program for the safe
             collection, recycling, treatment, and disposal of hazardous wastes
             generated by households in the City. The City's HHWE contains
             goals and objectives to address household hazardous waste. The
             program includes semi-annual roundups of household hazardous
             waste. The City also cooperates with ongoing County household
             hazardous waste programs. The General Plan is consistent with the
             objectives of the HHWE.
             RIVERSIDE COUNTY FIRE PROTECTION               AND    EMERGENCY
             MEDICAL RESPONSE MASTER PLAN
             The City contracts with the Riverside County Fire Department
             (RCFD) for fire protection services. Fire Department operations are
             governed by the Comprehensive Fire Protection Master Plan. The
             Master Plan provides guidance for the provision of fire protection
             and emergency services in cities and the unincorporated areas served
             by the RCFD. The Plan provides a description of current and
             projected fire protection and the emergency services environment.
             Countywide goals and objectives related to the provision of fire
             protection and emergency services are also established in the Master
             Plan. The City has established locally appropriate service and
             response standards that are contained in this Element.
             RIVERSIDE COUNTY FLOOD CONTROL DISTRICT MASTER
             DRAINAGE PLAN FOR MURRIETA CREEK AREA
             In 1986, the Riverside County Flood Control and Water
             Conservation District completed the Master Drainage Plan for the
             Murrieta Creek area. The plan identifies and evaluates regional
             drainage needs, and recommends drainage facilities that would
             provide flood protection for development.             Recommended
             improvements consist of the channelization of Murrieta Creek and
             major tributaries.      These backbone system improvements are
             necessary      to     relieve   the     area     of     the    most
C I T Y O F T   E M E     C U L A          G  E N E R A L           P  L A   N
                                 GM-4
             serious flooding problems. Specifically, these improvements would
             result in the removal of a large land area adjacent to Murrieta Creek
             for floodplain status, control of stream bank erosion along Murrieta
             Creek and tributaries, and mitigation of severe flooding potential in
             the Old Town area.
             SCHOOL DISTRICT LONG-RANGE FACILITY PLANS AND MASTER
             PLANS
             To plan for future facility needs, school districts typically take a
             long-range planning approach. Long-range facility plans and master
             plans allow school districts to estimate the number of additional
             students that new development will generate and plan for needed
             improvements to meet demand. The plans may also consider
             demographic trends, such as increased household size, that can
             affect the need for future school services. Coordination with the
             school districts to provide adequate educational facilities is an issue
             addressed in this Element.
             URBAN WATER MANAGEMENT PLANS AND WATER MASTER PLANS
             Water districts use a variety of planning processes to plan for the
             provision of water within their service areas. Urban Water
             Management Plans and Water Master Plans are typically used to
             estimate future demand for water and required improvements to
             meet future need. Sources of water, and other issues that affect the
             provision of water within the service are addressed in the plans. The
             Growth Management/Public Facilities Element addresses the need
             to coordinate with the water districts planning processes to ensure
             adequate water is available for development.
             GROWTH MANAGEMENT PLAN
             The City has two responsibilities with regard to managing growth:
             1) a responsibility within the community to ensure that facilities
             and services are in place when needed to serve growth; and 2) a
             responsibility within Riverside County to join in a cooperative
             growth management effort to effectively address the regional
             implications of local land use decisions and facility planning. The
             purposes of growth management planning are to achieve agreed
             upon physical, social, economic, environmental, and fiscal goals in
             a     cost     effective,   equitable,    and     politically    stable
C I T Y O F T   E M E     C U L A          G   E N E R A L            P   L A   N
                                 GM-5
                             manner. Equity is a major consideration in the formulation of any
                             growth management strategy. Critics contend that certain growth
                             management techniques are inflationary, exclusionary, and often
                             motivated by residents' desires for self-enrichment at the expense of
                             newcomers, especially the less affluent. On the other hand, the lack
                             of a proactive growth management program can lead to public
                             frustration and backlash against growth, as has been the case in
                             many California communities.
              REGIONAL       As previously discussed, the
               GROWTH        Western Riverside Council of
                             Governments         (WRCOG)          is
        MANAGEMENT
                             preparing a Growth Management
               STRATEGY      Strategy for Riverside County.
                             Policies within the City's Growth
PLANS IN ACTION
                             Management/Public            Facilities
The City reinforces and      Element acknowledge and support
supports many of the         WRCOG's          overall   goal     of
policies of WRCOG's
                             cooperative growth management among local jurisdictions in the
strategy that are also
embraced        by    other  County. Successful implementation of a growth management
jurisdictions.               strategy in Riverside County depends on the voluntary and
                             cooperative participation of all jurisdictions.
               GROWTH        Managing growth does not mean stopping change or closing the
        MANAGEMENT           doors to new residents or businesses. Properly designed and
                             implemented, a comprehensive growth management program
               PLAN FOR      provides a framework that will enable Temecula to balance and
              TEMECULA       accommodate diverse and competing interests, while ensuring the
                             quality of life expected by residents of the community.
PLANS IN ACTION              The General Plan establishes a plan for managing growth in
Temecula s          Growth   Temecula, embodied in the goals and policies of this Element. The
Management         Program   City s growth management plan is comprised of the following
(GMP) is linked to other     components:
City programs, including
the     five-year   Capital  LEVEL OF SERVICE STANDARDS
Improvement Program, the
Congestion Management
                             Level of service standards have been established for facilities and
Program, facilities and
services master plans, and   services that are under the direct responsibility of the City. These
fee ordinances.              include: fire protection, police protection, paramedic services,
                             recreation and park land, (see Open Space/Conservation Element)
                             local flood control and drainage, and local government facilities
                             (civic center). Level of service standards are dependent upon a
                             number of key factors, which change over time including:
 C     I T Y       O F      T   E M E      C U L A         G    E N E R A L          P  L A   N
                                                 GM-6
             needs and desires of residents, land use patterns and types of
             development, and the financial ability of the City to maintain levels
             of service.
             In addition, the cost to provide and maintain a particular level of
             service inherently includes an opportunity cost or what has been
             sacrificed to achieve a desired level of service. For example,
             allocating additional resources to police protection may mean the
             City has to forego the opportunity to provide additional recreation
             facilities, and other services. For facilities and services such as
             libraries, schools, and water supply, coordination and negotiation
             with the providers is required to set and maintain standards
             adequate for the community. The GMP includes a system for
             achieving adequacy, which addresses the following considerations:
                 •    Steps to plan, finance, and build facilities;
                 •    Strategies to reduce existing or projected demand; and
                 •    Establishment and modification of desired level of service
                      standards.
             PHASING PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES TO SUPPORT
             DEVELOPMENT
             Guidelines are established requiring the needed public facilities and
             infrastructure to be phased in relation to development. Phasing
             requirements are tailored to individual projects prior to project
             approval. Specific plans should include phasing plans that specify
             when facilities and infrastructure improvements will be
             implemented to satisfy level of service standards. Large scale
             development projects should also define phasing requirements in
             relation to regional infrastructure and facilities plans.
             INTER-JURISDICTIONAL AGREEMENTS
             Agreements will be sought as necessary with the County of
             Riverside, the City of Murrieta, and the County of San Diego to
             address land use, facilities, and infrastructure decisions that have
             cross-jurisdictional impacts. The agreements may involve joint
             planning and review efforts to ensure that new development can be
             adequately served. Additionally, the agreements may involve joint
             measures to provide regionally significant open space corridors and
             the conservation of rural and agricultural lands.
C I T Y O F T   E M E      C U L A          G    E N E R A L           P L A   N
                                  GM-7

             DIRECTING GROWTH IN URBANIZED AREAS
             New development and rehabilitation can be directed to the
             urbanized portion of the Planning Area. The GMP evaluates and
             provides incentives for infill development and intensification where
             appropriate, in the urbanized area. Alternative incentives include
             such devices as: the potential use of lower fees, development
             agreements, joint public/private projects, and density bonuses. The
             key reasons for focusing development within urbanized areas are to
             improve and/or complete infrastructure systems (roads, sewer and
             water); to discourage inefficient leap-frog development; and to
             conserve significant open space and agricultural resources. The
             GMP defines primary growth areas over the next five- to ten-year
             period. Proposed development outside the primary growth areas
             should be evaluated based on the following considerations:
                  •   Does the project contribute to the completion of an existing
                      infrastructure system?
                  •   Does infrastructure exist nearby that can readily be extended
                      to serve the project?
                  •   Will the project contribute to the housing supply for low
                      and moderate income households?
                  •   How soon after entitlement will the project likely be
                      constructed?
                  •   Will the project help to stimulate local or regional economic
                      growth?
             MIXED USE OVERLAY AREAS AND VILLAGE CENTERS
             Primary growth areas include the Mixed Use Overlay Areas
             described in the Land Use Element. Within these areas, a higher
             intensity mix of residential, employment, shopping and service uses
             is encouraged. Mixed use areas will be designed with a pedestrian
             orientation to permit a useful share of local trips to be made by
             foot or bicycle. The design of mixed-use developments should make
             pedestrian access to transit stops more convenient. In larger areas,
             village center plans can accomplish the same result.
             CONSERVING RESOURCES
             An action plan is included within the GMP to establish a
             comprehensive open space system.                Detailed study and
C I T Y O F T   E M E      C U L A          G   E N E R A L            P  L A   N
                                  GM-8

             evaluation of the policies and implementation programs provided
             in the Open Space/Conservation Element is required. A wide range
             of available techniques can be effective at conserving resources. For
             example, transferring development rights from open space edges to
             the urban core can result in more compact development and more
             protected open space.
             This is a critical component of the GMP due to the significance of
             these resources to long-term quality of life within the community.
             Prior to incorporation, the City experienced a severe loss of open
             space, and a shortage of parks and recreation facilities, due to
             inadequate park planning. Repetition of this situation can be
             avoided through proactive growth management planning.
             PUBLIC FACILITIES PLAN
             Facilities and services provided in Temecula include those under the
             direct responsibility and authority of the City, either directly or
             through contract arrangements; or those under the responsibility and
             authority of another unit of government which are vitally important
             to the well being of the City.
             Facilities and services under direct City responsibility include:
                 •    Fire protection (currently contracted to Riverside County
                      Fire Department)
                 •    Paramedic Emergency Services (currently contracted to
                      Riverside County Fire Department)
                 •    Police/Sheriff (currently contracted to Riverside County
                      Sheriff's Department)
                 •    Civic Center
                 •    Flood Control/Drainage
                 •    Parks and Recreation
                 •    Solid Waste (currently contracted to private companies)
             Facilities and services       currently   under    other    governmental
             responsibility include:
                 •    Library (Riverside County Library System)
                 •    Water Supply (Rancho California and Eastern Municipal
                      Water Districts)
                 •    Sanitary Sewer Facilities (Rancho California and Eastern
                      Municipal Water Districts)
                 •    Schools (Temecula Valley Unified School District)
C I T Y O F T   E M E      C U L A          G   E N E R A L              P  L A  N
                                  GM-9

                                     •   Flood Control (major facilities managed by Riverside
                                         County Flood Control and Water Conservation District)
                                The differences are significant in terms of the City's ability to control
                                policies, programs and budgets related to these functions. The City
                                has direct control over services in the first category and therefore
                                exercises direct authority over level of service standards. Where
                                contract services are provided, such as fire and police protection, the
                                City may address level of service standards through the contract
                                process. However, the City may only influence decisions regarding
                                the second category through negotiations.
                                An additional consideration is the degree of control the City has over
                                placing conditions of approval on proposed development projects
                                regarding public services that are impacted by a project. Again, the
                                City has the ability to impose conditions directly regarding the first
                                category and only indirectly in the second.
  FIRE PROTECTION               The       Riverside       County        Fire
   AND EMERGENCY                Department (RCFD), operating in
                                conjunction with the California
MEDICAL SERVICES                Department of Forestry and Fire
                                Protection (CDF), provides fire
                                protection services on a contract basis
                                to the City.          The City contract
PLANS IN ACTION
                                provides funding for 55 firefighters, 7
The Fire Department             engine companies, 2 paramedic
monitors             projected  squads, and one truck company.
population increases, makes
recommendations regarding
                                As of 2003, there were five fire stations serving the Temecula area. The
the addition of personnel
during        the     contract  stations are staffed by both paid and volunteer personnel. Table GM-
renewal process, conducts       1 identifies these fire facilities.
final construction plan
check reviews, and issues                                           TABLE GM-1
certificates of occupancy.
                                                           TEMECULA FIRE FACILITIES
                                                Facility                           Address
                                         Station 12              28830 Mercedes Street
                                         Station 73              27415 Enterprise Circle West
                                         Station 83              37480 Winchester Road
                                         Station 84              30650 Pauba Road
                                         Station 92              32364 Overland Trail (temporary location)
                                         Source: Riverside County Fire Department, 2003.
 C     I T Y          O F      T   E M E       C U L A            G   E N E R A L                P   L A   N
                                                       GM-10

                              According to the RCFD, current contract personnel provide adequate
                              levels of service to the City. The Department s Emergency Response
                              Program handles all fire, life, and environmental emergencies in
                              Temecula within five minutes.
                 POLICE       The City contracts with the
         PROTECTION           Riverside        County       Sheriff's
                              Department for law enforcement
               SERVICES       services.     The current contract
                              provides for the assignment of 76
                              sworn officers and 12 non-sworn
                              officers to the City.           Other
                              manpower resources such as bomb disposal, emergency services team,
                              and internal affairs investigation are provided through various
                              divisions with the Sheriff's Department.
PLANS IN ACTION               Temecula is served by the Southwest Station. The current personnel
The       City      reviews   to population ratio established by the City is one full-time officer per
population           figures  1,000 residents. This LOS standard is currently being met within the
periodically and revises the  City. Among the innovative prevention and enforcement programs
contract with the Sheriff's   offered by the Department are TAG (Temecula Against Graffiti), a
Department to maintain        volunteer anti-graffiti program; Trashbusters, a joint Volunteer/
the one officer per 1,000     Reserve/POP (Problem-Oriented Policing) team program focusing on
residents level of service
                              illegal dumping;        ERACIT,       (Enforce Responsible Alcohol
concurrent with anticipated
growth.
                              Consumption in Temecula), a program using the traffic unit, POP
                              teams, and reserve officers to target
                              alcohol related enforcement; and the
                                ORV Program, which utilizes reserve
                              officers, POP teams, and the mounted
                              posse for off road vehicle enforcement.
                              The Department also sponsors a variety
                              of citizen-based outreach and patrol
                              programs.
                              Temecula currently has three store-front
                              office locations (Old Town Temecula, the Promenade Mall, and
                              Temecula Town Center), a traffic unit, detective bureau, and special
                              teams to deal with drugs and gang-related issues.
                              Figure GM-1 identifies community safety facilities in the Temecula
                              Planning Area.
 C    I T Y        O F       T   E M E      C U L A         G   E N E R A L             P  L A    N
                                                  GM-11
      Figure GM-1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Keller Rd
      Community Safety Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Mc Colery Rd
      CITY OF TEMECULA GENERAL PLAN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Pat Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Specili Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Briggs Rd                                                                 Elliot Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                       Judith St
      Legend                                                                                                                                                           Baxter Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jean Nicholas Rd
                    +
                    ³ ±³
                    ± ³
                                                 Border Patrol
                        ±
                                                                                                                                                                                                           City of Murrieta                                                                          rR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           d                                                                                                                                                                          County of
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sphere of Influence                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Riverside
                    £
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   te
                                                 Fire Station
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                es
                                                                                                                                                                       Lee Ln                                                                                                                ch
                                                                                                                                                      Menifee Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            in
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Liberty Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Briggs Rd                                                                                              Pourroy Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Leon Rd
                    ®
                    u                            Hospital
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Thompson Rd
                    :                            Jail
                    "
                    a
                    )                            Police Station                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Benton Rd
                    "
                    )
                    k                            Caltrans Road Yard
                                                 Temecula City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ÿ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           :    ³
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ±                                       Auld Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Skinner
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Maddalena Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                "                                                                                               Pourroy Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                )
                                                                                                                                                       Calle De Amor
                                                 Sphere of Influence Boundary                                                                                                                                                                                         Leon Rd           Allen Rd
                                                 Planning Area                                            Wh
                                                                                                            it
                                                                                                               ew
                                                                                                                      d Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                              Rd
      Source: Temecula GIS and Cotton/Bridges/AssociatesHunter Rd                                                  oo                                                                                                                                                                                                          r   oy                                                                                                                                                                                                     Borel Rd
                                            Rd
                                           os                                                                 Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                              £ ³
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ±                                                                   Pr om o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Po
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ur
      Ø
      "
      #                  Lo
                              s A
                                  la   m
                                                          Ø
                                                          "
                                                          #                Al
                                                                              t    aM
                                                                                           ur ri
                                                                                                 eta
                                                                                                                                                                                                             yo n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   to   ry             P ky
                                                         ®
                                                         u                   M u rr ie ta
                                                                                                      Ho
                                                                                                              t Springs Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                        C an
                                                                                                                                                                                                     S ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Murrieta Hot Springs Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Buck Rd
               "
               )
               k         City of
                        Murrieta                                             Ja
                                                                              ck s
                                                                                                                                                                                     ire
                                                                                                                                                                                           W
                                                                                                                                                                                               y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   R
                                                                                   on                                                                                           na                                                        sA                                                                  sR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              l ow                                                                        o la                                                                                                                                                                                                                             end
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Butterfield Stage Rd
                                                                                         Av
                                                                                           e                                                                               Bo                                          W il                                                                           N ic                                                                                                                                             V in                                                                                    a
                                                          M                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   oW                                                                          B er
                                                             ad                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    y
                                                                   is o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           la s Rd
                                                                      n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 C
               St                                                                                                                                                                                                                 N ico
                                                                         e
                                                                       Av
          va                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a ll e
     ua
 G                              W                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Vista D el        Rd
                                  as                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Mo nte                                                                                  Co n
                                            n                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            te n
                                         to                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      to
                                      ng
                                    hi                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Via N orte
                                                Av                                                                                                                                                                    rt e                                                                                                                                          L a Se r en a W y
                    D                                                                                                                                                                                          No
                                                 e                                                                                                                         M
                    ou
                                                                                                                                                                               a ri                 Via
                                                                                                                                                                           arg
                        gl
                        as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Rd
                         sA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Rd                                                                                                                                                                                             r   n ia
                                                                                                                                                                               t a Rd
                              ve                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            lif o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Rey                                                                                                                                                                                                Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ho
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              nc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                l                           y
                                                                                                                                         Yn                                                                                                                   De
                                                                                                                                             z
                                                                                                                                             e                                                                                                                                         W                                                                                                                                                                Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a             M
                                                                                                                                                 Rd                                                                                                                                en
                                                                      St                                                                                                                                                                                              Se r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   La                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Dr
                                                                 ry                                                             f                                                                                                                                                                               do                                                                                                                                                           Pla y a
                                                               er                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ra De
                                                                                                                             Je                                                                                                                                                                                      w
                                                          Ch
                                                                                                                                rs                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        M ad e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       s
                                                                                                                              fe                                                                                                                                                                                           Pk
                                                                                                                                    on
                                                                                                              £
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             y
                                                                                              st e
                                                                                                     rR
                                                                                                          d   ³
                                                                                                              ±                      Av  e
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ar g
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ar i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ta R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    n ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rd                                                                                                                                      Pau
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Rd
                                                                                     c   he                                                                                                        M                                                                                                  li   for
                                                                                  in                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ca
                                                                              W
                                                                                                                              Di
                                                                                                                                az                                                                                                                                                           ho
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        nc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ra
                                            Ra
                                                nc
                                                 ho
                                                     Ca
                                                                                                                                    Rd
                                                                                                                                    +
                                                                                                                                    ³
                                                                                                                                    ±                                       "
                                                                                                                                                                            a
                                                                                                                                                                            )     Yn                                                                                                                                                    d                                                                                                                                                              l le
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   L in da R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    se   a Rd
                                                      li f                                                                                                                              ez                ho                                                                                                                   R
                                                                                                                                                                                                    R an c V ista R d                                                                                                       ba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B u t te r
                                                         or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P au
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   C o n te n to
                                     De l O ro             nia                                                                                                                               Rd
                              en ida
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           M e a d ow s Pk y
                                                                                                                                                              d
                         Av                                     Rd                                                                                ni a
                                                                                                                                                                 R
                                                                                                                        R an ch o C a
                                                                                                                                      li f o r
                                                                                                                                                                       £
                                                                                                                                                                       ³
                                                                                                                                                                       ±                                                                                    £³
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ±                              M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    it
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             f ie l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Sta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   De Portola Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                gar
                                                                                                                                                                        "
                                                                                                                                                                        a
                                                                                                                                                                        )                                            Sa n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  go
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     R     d                                                        a Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Yn                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    A nz
                                                                                     Via Sant
                                                                                              a
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Va
                                                                                                                                                                                                   lle
                                                                                                                                                                                                     jo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ez
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           a R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     d      }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ÿ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            79
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Rd
                                                                                          Ro sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                            e                                                                      la
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Av                                                    D e Po rt o                                                                                                                                                                Pk y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ch
                                       an c
                                    B arr
                                           a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     £ ³
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ±                          Va
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      il R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              n
                                   V ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   aR
                                                               o Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                         i nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       aL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   m                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Rd
                                                            a q uer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    k      Pk y                                                                         za
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 aw                                                                                An
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   yR                                                                                dh
                                                          V ia V                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             lle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Va
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    o lf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Pechanga                                                                                      w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Entertainment                                                                            lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ø                                                                                   Sp                                                                             rH
                                                                                                                                                                                                        "
                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             nR                                                               ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Center                                                               ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             yo                                                                      Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     wC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 bo
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                            in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Û
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                c ha n g a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Pe
 µ
                                                     0                                     5,000                                             10,000
                                                                                                                                                 Feet                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Pa rk wa y
                                                                                                                                                  Miles
                                                 0                                                            1                                                        2
C I T Y                                                                    O F                                                      T E M E C U L A                                                                                                                                                                             G E N E R A L                                                                                                                                                                                                    P L A N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GM-12

         SOLID WASTE          The City presently contracts
              DISPOSAL        for solid waste disposal. The
                              City's waste goes to the El
                              Sobrante      and      Badlands
PLANS IN ACTION               Landfills, located in unincor-
Temecula adopted a Source
                              porated Riverside County.
Reduction and Recycling
Element (SSRE) in 1993,       Temecula began a curbside recycling program in 1991. The purpose
and continues to use the      of this program is to reduce solid waste disposal by recycling and
SSRE to address issues        composting waste. Curbside recycling is the easiest, most convenient
related to solid waste        method of recycling. Recyclable materials are picked up and
disposal.                     transported to a center in Perris for processing. Garden materials are
                              hauled to a separate facility for composting, and the remaining waste
                              is hauled to the El Sobrante and Badlands Landfills.
             LIBRARIES        The City is a member of the Riverside County Library District, which
                              operates 38 libraries throughout Riverside County, in both
                              unincorporated and incorporated areas.
                              The Temecula Library is a full-service library offering a wide range of
                              materials, programs, and services for all ages. The library's collection
                              of over 80,000 items supports the needs of customers seeking in-depth
                              information, leisure reading, children's books, videos, DVDs,
                              magazines, and many other types of materials. As a member of the
                              County Library System, the Library affords customers access to over
                              two million items located in branches throughout the system. A
                              reference staff is on duty at all times to assist patrons, and the library
                              offers Internet access on multiple workstations.
PLANS IN ACTION                                                           The issue of greatest
A new 34,000 square foot                                                  importance to the Riverside
full-service  library     is                                              County Library District is
planned for on Pauba                                                      adequate funding to provide
Road. This full service                                                   for adopted library service
facility will feature over                                                standards. The standards
1,000 square feet dedicated                                               call for 1.2 volumes and 0.5
as a homework center with
                                                                          square feet of library space
24 high-speed internet
terminals.                                                                per capita. The District
                              currently provides only 0.97 volumes and 0.13 square feet per capita
                              Countywide. Revenue for the Library District is obtained from a
                              Special District tax collected by the County. However, the District
                              competes with other County agencies for this funding,
 C     I T Y       O F       T   E M E     C U L A           G    E N E R A L             P  L A    N
                                                  GM-13
                            and therefore the level of funding to the County Library is uncertain.
                            Demand for libraries goes hand-in-hand with population increases.
                            The library is often seen as a symbol and source of community
                            identification.
     WATER SERVICE          The Rancho California Water District (RCWD) supplies most of the
                            domestic and commercial water to Temecula, paid for by user fees.
                            Water to supply the City is drawn from the Murrieta-Temecula
                            groundwater basin and supplemented with imported water from the
                            Metropolitan Water District (MWD).            Other sources include
                            reclaimed water and untreated MWD water used for groundwater
                            recharge. The distribution of RCWD water sources is described in the
                            Open Space/Conservation Element. No shortage of water supply is
                            expected in the near future.
                            The City is also served by the Eastern Municipal Water District
                            (EMWD), which obtains water primarily from MWD but also draws
                            groundwater from wells in the Hemet and San Jacinto area. Some of
                            these wells have limited production as a result of the Fruitvale
PLANS IN ACTION             Judgment and Decree, which limits the amount the Fruitvale Mutual
                            Water Company, now part of EMWD, can withdraw from these wells.
The City coordinates with
RCWD and EMWD               EMWD also has wells in the Moreno Valley, Perris Valley, and
regarding timing and        Murrieta areas, and is working to increase supplies of recycled water.
construction of needed      Distribution of EMWD water sources is described in the Open
infrastructure.             Space/Conservation Element.
         WASTEWATER         Wastewater facilities for the Temecula Planning Area are provided by
                SERVICE     the Rancho California Water District (RCWD) and Eastern Municipal
                            Water District (EMWD), under the purview of the San Diego Regional
                            Water Quality Control Board. The Water Districts are currently
                            meeting treatment demand in the Temecula area.
PLANS IN ACTION             The Temecula Valley Regional Water
The City coordinates with   Reclamation Facility is located within
RCWD and EMWD to            the central commercial area of
provide         wastewater  Temecula, within the Santa Margarita
collection and treatment    watershed.        Temporary treatment
services.                   began in 1969, with a permanent
                            facility open for service and with a
                            capacity of 1 million gallons per day
                            (mgd) in 1973.           Present tertiary
                            facilities are rated at 10 mgd, although the plant s secondary facilities
                            have a 8 mgd limit. A $32 million expansion increased the plant s
                            overall capacity to 12 mgd in June 2003.
 C     I T Y      O F      T   E M E       C U L A          G  E N E R A L           P  L A     N
                                                 GM-14
                           The Temecula facility is the smallest of EMWD s five reclamation
                           plants and maintains only 25 mg of temporary on-site storage. When
                           additional storage is required, the Temecula plant pumps reclaimed
                           water north ten miles to the 450 mg storage ponds in Winchester, near
                           Simpson and Leon. This pipeline extension enables additional
                           agricultural customers to hold down expenses for water, relative to
                           their own underground supplies or imported water.
                           A portion of the City (primarily the Westside Business Centre area) is
                           within RCWD s wastewater service area. Wastewater flows within this
                           area are treated at RCWD s Santa Rosa Water Reclamation Facility.
       EDUCATIONAL         The Temecula Valley Unified School District (TVUSD) serves the
             FACILITIES    Planning Area. Service boundaries of the School District extend north
                           to Jean Nicholas Road in French Valley, south to the Riverside
                           County-San Diego County line, east to Vail Lake, and west to the
                           Temecula city limit. TVUSD maintains a full spectrum of educational
PLANS IN ACTION            facilities from elementary to adult schools. The District is meeting the
The City works with
                           education needs of the current student populations through
developers and TVUSD to    permanent and interim facilities. Table GM-2 identifies the public
designate school facility  educational facilities in the General Plan Planning Area, and lists the
locations    when    new   current enrollment levels of each facility.
residential projects are
proposed.                  Availability of adequate school sites and sufficient funding are issues
                           pertinent to all developing areas. Figure GM-2 depicts school
                           locations within the Temecula Planning Area.
                           In addition to public schools, Temecula is home to eight private
                           schools, including: Brentwood Montessori, The Carden Academy,
                           Hillcrest Academy, The Linfield School, Rancho Community
                           Christian School, St Jeanne de Lestonnac School, Temecula Christian
                           School, and Van Avery Prep Elementary School.
                           To meet future educational needs, TVUSD uses a Five-Year Facility
                           Construction Plan. Future school construction projects within the
                           current Plan are summarized in Table GM-3. The projected opening
                           date of schools may change as a result of changes in school
                           enrollment, level of new home construction, and the availability of
                           State funds for school construction/renovation.
 C    I T Y       O F     T   E M E      C U L A         G   E N E R A L             P  L A    N
                                               GM-15
                                                    TABLE GM-2
                                              SCHOOL FACILITIES
                                                                                   Student
                                                                                  Enrollment
                       Name                                    Location         (January 2005)
      ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS (K-5)
      Alamos Elementary1                       38200 Pacific Park Drive                  593
      Barnett Elementary                       39925 Harveston Drive                     387
                                      1
      French Valley Elementary                 36680 Cady Road                         1,037
      Jackson Elementary                       32400 Camino San Dimas                    928
                                       1
      Nicolas Valley Elementary                39600 N. General Kearney Road             918
      Paloma Elementary                        42940 Via Rami                            789
      Pauba Valley Elementary                  33125 Regina Drive                        884
      Rancho Elementary                        31530 La Serena Way                       812
      Red Hawk Elementary                      32045 Camino San Jose                     642
      Reinke Elementary                        43799 Sunny Meadows Drive               1,122
      Sparkman Elementary                      32225 Pio Pico Road                       704
      Temecula Elementary                      41951 Moraga Road                         792
      Vail Elementary                          29915 Mira Loma Drive                     773
      Vintage Hills Elementary                 42240 Camino Romo                       1,069
      MIDDLE SCHOOLS (6-8)
      Bella Vista Middle1                      31650 Browning Road                       697
      Day Middle                               40775 Camino Campos Verde                 978
      Gardner Middle                           45125 Via Del Coronado                    789
      Margarita Middle                         30600 Margarita Road                      982
      Temecula Middle                          42075 Meadows Parkway                   1,349
      Vail Ranch Middle                        33340 Camino Piedra Rojo                  952
      HIGH SCHOOLS (9-12)
      Chaparral High                           27215 Nicolas Road                      2,882
      Great Oak High                           32555 Deer Hollow Way                   1,253
      Temecula Valley High                     31555 Rancho Vista Road                 2,868
      Rancho Vista Continuation                31340 Rancho Vista Road                   227
      ADULT SCHOOL
      Temecula Adult School                    31350 Rancho Vista Road                   n/a
      1
        Located within Sphere of Influence.
      Source: Temecula Valley Unified School District, 2005.
C I T Y        O F          T     E M E        C U L A              G   E N E R A L         P  L A N
                                                          GM-16
      Figure GM-2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Keller Rd
      School Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mc Colery Rd
      CITY OF TEMECULA GENERAL PLAN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pat Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Specili Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Briggs Rd                                                                 Elliot Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                Judith St
      Legend                                                                                                                                                            Baxter Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jean Nicholas Rd
                    !   E                            Elementary School                                                                                                                                            City of Murrieta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           s te
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               rR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           County of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Riverside
                    !   M                            Middle School                                                                                                      Lee Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         he
                                                                                                                                                      Menifee Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       c
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Liberty Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Briggs Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Pourroy Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Leon Rd
                    !   H                            High School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Thompson Rd
                    !   P                            Private School
                                                     Temecula City Boundary                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Benton Rd
                                                     Sphere of Influence Boundary                                                                                                                                                                  }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ÿ                                            Auld Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !        E                                                                                                                                             Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Skinner
                                                     Planning Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Maddalena Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pourroy Rd
                                                                                                                                                       Cal le De Amor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Leon Rd
      Source: Temecula GIS and Cotton/Bridges/Associates
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Allen Rd
                                                                                                          Wh
                                                                                                             i   t
                                                                                                                 ew
                                                                                                                       d Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Rd
                                                                                                                     oo
                                                                                                                                                                        Hunter Rd                                                                                                                                                              y                                                                                                                                                                                            Borel Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Po
                                           Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E
                                                                     Ø
                                                                     "
                                                                                                               Dr                                                                                                                                                                           Pro mo
      Ø                                                              #
                                           os
      "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  n
      #
                                       m                                                          t        a
                                  la                                                         rrie                                                                                                                           Dr
                                                                                          Mu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           to
                              s A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ry                Pk y
                         Lo                                                Al
                                                                                    a                                                                                                                               y on
                                                                             t
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ca n
                                                                                                                                                                                                            S ky
                                                                              Mu r r ie ta
                                                                                                      Ho t                     d
                                                                                                                     Springs R                                                                                                                                                              Mu rrieta H ot Springs Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Buck Rd
                         City of
                        Murrieta                                                                                                                                                                  y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                              Ja                                                                                                              W                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        d
                                                                                                                                                                                       ire                                                              ve
                                                                               ck                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      R
                                                                                   son
                                                                                                                                                                            Bo
                                                                                                                                                                                  na                                                  l ow
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   sA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     E                                                       ola
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   sR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      d                                                                                                                                                                                                        a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Butterfield Stage Rd
                                                                                           Av
                                                                                              e                                                                                                                              W il                                                                               N ic                                                                                                                                         V in                                                                            r en d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    oW
                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                          M                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Be
                                                             ad                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          y
                                                                                                                                                          E
                                                                       n
                                                                   is o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    la s Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                            C
                                                                                                                                                   !
               St                                                      Av
                                                                          e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N ico
          va                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             al le
 G
     ua
                                W
                                  as
                                                                                                                                                                                H                                                                                                                                                                                           Vista D e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      l Mo nte
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             C on
                                          t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    te n
                                    hi ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e                                                                                                                                                                                                    to
                                            on                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Via N ort
                                                Av                                                                                                                                                                          rt e                                                                                                                                            La Ser en a W y
                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     No
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                    D                            e                                                                                                                          M
                    ou
                        gl                                                                                                                                                  arg
                                                                                                                                                                                                  M        Via
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            E
                                                                                                                                                                                a r ita Rd
                        as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Rd
                         sA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rd                                                                                                                                                                                          r n ia
                              ve                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  lif o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Re y                                                                                                                                                                                          Ca
                                                                                                                                          Yn                                                                                                                             De                         y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n   ch o
                                                                                                                                             z
                                                                                                                                             e                                                                                                                             l                   W                                                                                                                                                              Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                a               M
                                                                                                                                                 Rd                                                                                                                                        en
                                                                      St                                                                                                                                                                                                       S er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            La                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Dr
                                                                 ry                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          do                                                                                                                                                    Pla ya
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                 f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ra De
                                                                                                                              Je
                                                               er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              w
                                                          Ch                                                                     r so                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           M a de
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   s
                                                                                                                               fe
                                                                                                                                     n                                                                                                                   M                                                                          Pk y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P
                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                      Av
                                                                                                                         P                                                                                                            d
                                                                                                                                         e
                                                                                                       d                                                                                                                    ta R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Rd
                                                                                                     rR                                                                                                              a ri                                                                                                        Rd                                                                                                                                      Pau
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ba
                                                                                             ste                                                                                                           ar                                                                                                           n     ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     or
                                                                                                                                                                                                             g
                                                                                          he                                                                                                               M                                                                                                  lif
                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                      c
                                                                                   in                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !E    ho
                                                                               W                                               Di
                                                                                                                                az
                                                                                                                                                                                                   E                                                                                       Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                nc
                                                                                                                                                                                              !!
                                                                                                                                     Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              L in da R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                            Ra                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                o
                                                nc
                                                 ho                                                                                                                                                            E                                                                      H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               se   a Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     H !    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                     Ca                                                                                                                              Yn
                                                                                                                                                                                                       P                                                                                P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ll e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             M                                                 Rd
                                                      lif
                                                                                                                                                                                             ez                  h o V is ta R
                                                                                                                                                                                                           R an c                                                                                                                    ba
                                                                                                      !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Bu t t e r
                                                       or                                                                                                                                                                      d                                                                                              Pau
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      C on t en to
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Rd
                                                                                                               P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                           ni
                                nida D el O ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Me ado w s P k y
                                                             a
                         A ve
                                                                                                                                                               d
                                                                Rd                                                                                                R
                                                                                                                                                  n ia
                                                                                                                          Ran c h o C a l
                                                                                                                                          i for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          E         M                                                                                                                             f ie l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ga                                                                                                                                      S ta                                                                  De Portola Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ar                                                                                                                                            ge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           r it a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             d                                                                                                                                                                                                          Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          oR                                                                    Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ia g
                                                                                                                                                                                              !!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            San
                                                                                                                                                                                                      P P
                                                                                        Via Sant
                                                                                                                                                                                                       P          Yn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ez                                                                                                              !      E                                                                                                                                                                                                     A nz
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          d   }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ÿ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              79
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Va l                 Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a R
                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            M
                                                                                                                                                                                                           le j
                                                                                           a Ro sa                                                                                                         P                                                                                    Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                               o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Av                                                                        la
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          De P o r t o                                                                                                                                                           P ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n
                                       an c                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Va
                                            a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             il R
                                    B arr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      a
                                  Via
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !    E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           aR
                                                               ro Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                i nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               aL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E                                                                                                                                                               Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Lo
                                                            a q ue                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            wk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Pk y                                                                     za
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          a                                                                          An
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          dh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Rd
                                                          V ia V                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Va                                                                                   Re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      lle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              olf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Wy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Pechanga                                                                                   w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ø
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Entertainment
                                                                                                                                                                                                               "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ol
                                                                                                                                                                                                               #                                                                                                                                                                                                        H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          d                                                         Sp                                                                            rH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      nR                                                                 ar Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Dee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   yo                                                                           Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            wC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        bo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Û
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   in
µ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       c ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Pe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r k way
                                                 0                                           5,000                                           10,000
                                                                                                                                                 Feet                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ng a P a
                                                                                                                                                  Miles
                                                 0                                                         1                                                            2
C I T Y                                                                    O F                                                       T E M E C U L A                                                                                                                                                                                   G E N E R A L                                                                                                                                                                                             P L A N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GM-17

                                                            TABLE GM-3
                                                 FUTURE TVUSD SCHOOLS
                            Project Name                                    Estimated Completion
                                                                                      Date
                            Elementary Schools
                            Quinta Do Lago1 (in French
                                                                                       2005
                            Valley)
                            Morgan Hill1                                               2005
                            Crowne Hill                                                2005
                            Wolf Creek                                                 2006
                            Old Town                                               Beyond 2006
                            Roripaugh Ranch                                        Beyond 2006
                            Quinta Do Lago1 (in French
                                                                                       2005
                            Valley)
                            Morgan Hill1                                               2005
                            Middle Schools
                            Roripaugh Ranch                                        Beyond 2006
                            Middle School #8 1 (in French
                            Valley within the Winchester 1800                      Beyond 2006
                            Specific Plan)
                            High Schools
                            High School #4 1 (in French
                                                                                   Beyond 2006
                            Valley)
                            1
                              Located within Sphere of Influence.
                            Source: Temecula Valley Unified School District, 2005.
FLOOD CONTROL      Regional flood control facilities, including
       FACILITIES  major channels and storm drains, are under
                   the jurisdiction of the Riverside County
                   Flood Control and Water Conservation
                   District. The District is in the process of
                   completing the Murrieta Creek Flood
                   Control, Environmental Restoration and
                   Recreation Project. The primary goal of
                   this project is to make flood control
                   improvements to Murrieta Creek (located in the Santa Margarita
                   watershed) and its major tributaries.
                   The largest known flood in the Santa Margarita watershed was in 1862,
                   and the second greatest was in 1884. Other major floods occurred in
                   1916, 1938, 1943, 1969, 1978, 1980, 1991 1992, and
C I T Y   O   F   T   E  M     E   C     U    L   A         G     E  N      E    R   A   L     P L A N
                                             GM-18
                              1993. In early 1993, Riverside County was hit by severe storms. The
                              resulting major flood event resulted in two to six feet of sediment
                              deposition in the Murrieta Creek streambed from Winchester Road
                              south into Old Town. Breakout of floodwaters was caused largely by
                              the magnitude of the event, the vegetation density, and
                              sediment/debris accumulations within the channel that severely
                              reduced flow-carrying capacity. The storm caused over $10 million in
                              damage to public facilities along Murrieta Creek. In addition, the
                              Flood Control District incurred $450,000 and the City of Temecula
                              and the Kemper Corporation expended over $1 million in flood
                              clean-up and facility repair costs.
                              Flooding problems in the Murrieta Creek watershed are related to
                              inadequate capacity of the drainage network, particularly in the Old
                              Town. The problem manifests itself as frequent overtopping of the
                              Murrieta Creek channel by floodwaters in a number of channel
                              reaches, flood inundation of structures with attendant damages, and
                              other water-related problems caused by these events.
                              The location and size of Murrieta Creek has been altered since the late
                              1800s. Restoration along the creek banks, within the channel invert
                              and in and around the tributaries and floodplain would restore
                              historic habitat functions, including surface and sub-surface
                              hydrology, and additionally invite a large array of desired wildlife and
                              plant species, including sensitive species. Restoration may also
                              potentially reduce the presence of undesirable exotic species.
                              Ecological resources within Murrieta Creek and adjacent areas are
                              important characteristics of the community.
                              Although currently a source of contention as to the extent, there is no
                              doubt that the ecological resources of Murrieta Creek have suffered
                              from the effects of natural flood events as well as from emergency
                              channel repairs and on-going channel maintenance necessary to
                              provide sufficient flood control for Murrieta and Temecula. As a
                              result, there is a significant opportunity to restore degraded habitat
PLANS IN ACTION
                              along Murrieta Creek in concert with flood damage reduction
Significant     recreational  measures.
opportunities will are
offered within renovation
plans for Murrieta Creek,     A continuous un-maintained vegetated corridor will be established
at the basin site, upstream,  along the entire 7-mile length of Murrieta Creek Channel. The width
and along channel access      of the corridor will vary from 20 to 50 feet within the narrowest areas
roads.                        in Old Town Temecula, opening up to widths averaging 150 to 175
                              feet through the less developed stretches of channel through the City
                              of Murrieta. In some instances the widths of the proposed vegetated
 C    I T Y         O F      T   E M E      C U L A          G    E N E R A L           P  L A     N
                                                  GM-19
                           corridors are more than twice as wide as the current channel.
                           Policies and implementation measures within this Element address the
                           need for construction of safe, effective, and environmentally
                           compatible flood control facilities. Issues involved in planning these
                           facilities include the following:
                                •    Applicability of approved master drainage plans;
                                •    Joint cooperation between the City and Flood Control
                                     District;
                                •    Evaluation and compatibility of current and proposed land
                                     uses in and around existing floodplains and floodways; and
                                •    Establishing guidelines and criteria for the preservation of
                                     natural watercourses and the development of greenbelt areas.
        QUASI-PUBLIC       Quasi-public uses include: churches,
             FACILITIES    counseling centers, cultural facilities
                           (theatres, auditoriums, museums, zoos,
                           etc.), day-care facilities, medical facilities,
PLANS IN ACTION            social service centers, and similar public-
Temecula     accommodates
                           serving uses. Quasi-public uses are
quasi-public uses through  frequently, though not always, funded
land use policies and      and operated by non-profit organizations. Such uses differ from
regulations with special   public facilities and services in that they do not typically have legally
development standards.     prescribed planning standards and are not normally required as a
                           condition of approval for private development projects.
                           Generally, these uses do not have level of service standards.
                           Qualitative standards are part of the evaluation and negotiation
                           process associated with each proposed development project.
                           Clustering quasi-public uses in activity centers, where the facilities can
                           reinforce other activities (such as retail or service businesses) and
                           benefit from the availability of other services (such as public
                           transportation), is desirable.
 C    I T Y       O F     T   E M E       C U L A           G   E N E R A L           P  L A     N
                                                GM-20

               ENERGY          Southern California Edison (SCE)
               SERVICE         supplies electricity to the Temecula
                               Planning Area via underground and
                               overhead lines. SCE's main substation is
                               located on Mira Loma Drive in Temecula.
                               SCE is a public utility, and therefore
                               functions on demand. The hierarchy of
                               establishing electrical power lines from generation stations to
                               customers is as follows: transmission line; sub-transmission line; and
                               service line.
PLANS IN ACTION                Natural gas is provided by the Southern
The City coordinates with      California Gas Company (SCGC).
Southern        California     Plastic and steel underground lines are
Edison,    the    Southern     located throughout the Planning Area.
California Gas Company,        A small number of residents not
and other responsible          serviced by SCGC utilize bottled
companies to provide           propane or butane fuel.
maintenance, development,
and expansion of electricity,
natural      gas,       and
                               Extensions for electrical and gas service to new developments are
telecommunications systems.    governed by rules established by the California Public Utilities
                               Commission (CPUC).                 CPUC regulates investor-owned
                               telecommunications, gas, electric and water companies as well as
                               transportation services such as household goods movers, airport
                               shuttles, limousines and tour buses. CPUC also oversees the safety of
                               electric transmission lines, gas pipelines and railroads.
 C    I T Y        O F        T   E M E      C U L A          G    E N E R A L           P L A    N
                                                   GM-21
                 GOALS AND POLICIES
      REGIONAL   The City's Growth Management Element supports WRCOG's
    PARTNERSHIP  efforts to develop a growth management strategy in which all
                 jurisdictions within Riverside County can participate. Many of the
                 policies in WRCOG's strategy, which the City has helped shape and
                 influence, are incorporated below.
                 Goal 1          Cooperative management of growth among local
                                 governments within Riverside County.
                 Policy 1.1      Continue to participate in the preparation of plans
                                 and programs addressing regional issues.
                 Policy 1.2      Implement, as appropriate, the policies of WRCOG's
                                 Growth Management Strategy that are consistent
                                 with Temecula's Growth Management Program.
                 Policy 1.3      Achieve economic growth and prosperity while
                                 preserving natural beauty and the social quality of
                                 life in southwestern Riverside County.
                 Policy 1.4      Encourage and assist in the establishment of natural
                                 reserves for the preservation of sensitive and
                                 endangered species, and to provide open space for
                                 residents.
                 Policy 1.5      Establish land use compatibility with adjacent
                                 jurisdictions for development standards related to
                                 infrastructure and engineering, while preserving
                                 unique zoning and design standards.
                 Policy 1.6      Work to establish a joint planning and review
                                 process with the County for future development in
                                 the Planning Area to ensure that adequate
                                 infrastructure and services are provided by the City.
                 Policy 1.7      Guide the timing and provision of facilities and
                                 services to support development and protect and
                                 enhance quality of life.
C I T Y   O F   T   E M E     C U L A          G   E N E R A L           P   L A   N
                                     GM-22
                  Policy 1.8    Require development to pay its fair share of the costs
                                of facilities and services necessary to serve the
                                resulting level of growth.
                  Policy 1.9    Pursue joint efforts to achieve fiscal stability for both
                                City and County governments.
                  Policy 1.10   Consider options to jointly contract with other
                                jurisdictions for services or facilities to achieve
                                economies of scale, where possible and appropriate.
  ORDERLY AND     The Growth Management Program contained in this Element is
       EFFICIENT  intended to be the framework for a future Growth Management
                  Program (GMP). It should take into consideration the existing
       GROWTH     communities and resources of Temecula, the Sphere of Influence,
                  and Planning Area.
                  Goal 2        Orderly and efficient patterns of growth that
                                enhance quality of life for Temecula residents.
                  Policy 2.1    Implement and periodically update a Growth
                                Management Program for Temecula.
                  Policy 2.2    Ensure that phasing of public facilities and services
                                occurs in such a way that new development is
                                adequately supported as it develops.
                  Policy 2.3    Establish and maintain level of service standards to
                                document adequacy requirements.
                  Policy 2.4    Encourage mixed-use developments, as defined in the
                                Land Use and Community Design Elements, to
                                reduce public service costs and environmental
                                impacts through compatible land use relationships,
                                and efficient circulation and open space systems.
                  Policy 2.5    Encourage new development that helps create and
                                maintain a balance between jobs and housing
                                opportunities.
C I T Y    O F   T  E M E     C U L A         G    E N E R A L            P    L A    N
                                   GM-23
                  Policy 2.6      Establish priority growth areas within the City and
                                  Sphere of Influence where near-term urbanization
                                  will be encouraged.
                  Policy 2.7      Discourage the use of assessment districts that
                                  promote urban sprawl and premature urbanization
                                  in rural and agricultural areas.
                  Policy 2.8      Coordinate the Growth Management Program with
                                  the Congestion Management Program as necessary.
   PROVISION OF   Adequate levels of police, fire and emergency services are essential to
        SERVICES  the safety of life and property within the Planning Area.
                  Monitoring service levels and projected development will ensure
                  continued adequacy of these services. The ability of emergency
                  service providers to respond in a timely manner is important.
                  Goal 3          Effective and cost-efficient police, fire and
                                  emergency medical services within the City.
                  Policy 3.1      Evaluate police protection services for adequate
                                  facilities, staffing, and equipment based on changes
                                  in population and development and to ensure an
                                  adequate response time for emergencies. Strive to
                                  provide a minimum of one full-time officer per
                                  1,000 residents for police protection services.
                  Policy 3.2      Require new development to address fire and police
                                  protection proactively through all-weather access,
                                  street design, orientation of entryways, siting of
                                  structures, landscaping, lighting and other security
                                  features. Require illuminated addresses on new
                                  construction.        Provide facilities, staffing, and
                                  equipment necessary to maintain a five-minute
                                  response time for 90 percent of all emergencies.
                  Policy 3.3      Discourage the closure of streets that limit or delay
                                  access for emergency services.
                  Policy 3.4      Coordinate with the County of Riverside to locate
                                  and phase new sheriff facilities and fire stations to
                                  ensure that adequate service levels are maintained.
C I T Y    O F   T   E M E     C U L A            G   E N E R A L          P   L A   N
                                     GM-24
                  Policy 3.5     Promote community awareness regarding crime
                                 through the Police Department, public service
                                 organizations, and the establishment of citizen-
                                 involved programs and patrols.
 QUALITY SCHOOL   Adequate school facilities and funding are necessary to ensure that
          SYSTEM  high quality education is extended to City residents. Mitigating
                  development impacts on the school system through the provision of
                  school sites, imposition of statutory development fees and
                  negotiated development fees, as well as providing information to the
                  School District, are the primary methods to sustain quality
                  educational services.
                  Goal 4         A quality school system with adequate facilities
                                 and funding to educate the youth of Temecula.
                  Policy 4.1     Provide information to the Temecula Valley Unified
                                 School District when considering General Plan
                                 amendments, specific plans, zone changes, or other
                                 legislative land use policy decisions.
                  Policy 4.2     Promote and encourage development phasing so that
                                 the School District may plan, finance, and construct
                                 school facilities to serve new development.
                  Policy 4.3     Review proposed legislative land use decisions in the
                                 context of the adequacy of present and future
                                 facilities.
                  Policy 4.4     Coordinate with the School District to provide safe
                                 access for school children walking, bicycling, or
                                 driving to and from school sites.
                  Policy 4.5     Pursue the establishment of a trade school, a junior
                                 college, and/or a four-year college that offers
                                 education required by the engineering, biotechnical
                                 and biomedical industries located in Temecula.
                  Policy 4.6     Plan for the joint use of school/municipal facilities
                                 wherever feasible and desirable, including: school
                                 grounds, buildings, City parks, multi-purpose
                                 buildings, and recreation facilities.
C I T Y    O F   T  E M E     C U L A           G   E N E R A L          P   L A  N
                                    GM-25
     PUBLIC AND    As the City matures and new development consumes
    QUASI-PUBLIC   proportionately less attention and resources, the City will be able to
                   dedicate resources for public and quasi-public facilities and services
       FACILITIES  that contribute to community satisfaction and quality of life.
                   Goal 5         Public and quasi-public facilities and services that
                                  provide for the social, cultural, civic, religious,
                                  and recreational needs of the community.
                   Policy 5.1     Acquire a civic center site and construct a permanent
                                  City Hall facility to create a community focal point
                                  that is accessible to all members of the community.
                   Policy 5.2     Continue to encourage citizens to participate in
                                  community programs and volunteer for public
                                  service positions.
                   Policy 5.3     Evaluate the feasibility of providing child care
                                  facilities in connection with employment-generating
                                  uses.
                   Policy 5.4     Explore opportunities to expand and provide
                                  additional community meeting space.
                   Policy 5.5     Encourage provision of cultural facilities within the
                                  community, including: museums, theaters, a
                                  performing arts center, special exhibitions, an
                                  outdoor amphitheatre, and public art.
                   Policy 5.6     Encourage provision of special recreation facilities
                                  such as a stadium, zoo, and amusement parks to
                                  meet local and area activity needs.
                   Policy 5.7     Encourage sharing or combining public facilities for
                                  educational, cultural, and recreational purposes.
                   Policy 5.8     Provide for library facilities and services that are
                                  consistent with community needs.
C I T Y    O F    T  E M E     C U L A           G   E N E R A L           P  L A    N
                                     GM-26
                Policy 5.9     Continue to assist non-profit community
                               organizations financially and in other ways, to the
                               extent feasible.
    WATER AND   Water availability is a critical determinant for Southern California's
   WASTEWATER   future growth and development. By working closely with the
                Rancho California Water District (RCWD) and Eastern Municipal
        SYSTEM  Water District (EMWD) in developing supply options; conservation
                techniques, including the use of reclaimed water; and development
                monitoring systems; the City can ensure that development does not
                outpace the long-term availability of water. Close coordination with
                EMWD in the timely expansion of wastewater treatment facilities is
                equally important to the community's well-being.
                Goal 6         A water and wastewater infrastructure system that
                               supports development in the planning area.
                Policy 6.1     Require landowners to demonstrate that an available
                               water supply and sewer treatment capacity exists or
                               will be provided to serve proposed development,
                               prior to issuance of building permits.
                Policy 6.2     Require landowners, prior to issuance of building
                               permits, to demonstrate that adequate wastewater
                               capacity exists to serve proposed development.
                Policy 6.3     Coordinate with the water and wastewater districts
                               when considering General Plan amendments,
                               annexations, or development agreements, to assist
                               the districts in planning for adequate capacity to
                               accommodate future growth.
                Policy 6.4     Coordinate with the wastewater district to make
                               reclaimed water available for irrigation purposes in
                               the City.
                Policy 6.5     Encourage preparation of long-term water
                               management programs by local water agencies.
C I T Y  O F   T   E M E    C U L A            G   E N E R A L          P  L A   N
                                   GM-27
                  Policy 6.6      Require all new construction of water and sewer
                                  infrastructure to be consistent with utility master
                                  plans and to implement the policies of the General
                                  Plan.
                  Policy 6.7      Work with local wastewater agencies to extend a
                                  brine line into the City.
FLOOD CONTROL     As urbanization increases, so does the potential for disruption
          SYSTEM  caused by flooding and inadequate flood control facilities. Local
                  and regional flood control facilities need to be comprehensively
                  planned to protect development from flood hazards. As urban and
                  suburban development increases, runoff increases as permeable
                  surfaces are replaced with pavement and structures. The potential of
                  overloading existing drainage facilities is a concern that must be
                  addressed in the Planning Area.
                  Goal 7          An effective, safe and environmentally compatible
                                  flood control system.
                  Policy 7.1      Work with the Riverside County Flood Control
                                  District and other agencies involved with Murrieta
                                  Creek flood control improvements to implement a
                                  solution that maximizes retention of natural
                                  resources and provision of recreation opportunities
                                  along the Creek.
                  Policy 7.2      Develop master drainage plans, when appropriate,
                                  for the Sphere of Influence, in conjunction with the
                                  Flood Control District.
                  Policy 7.3      Wherever possible, give priority to flood control
                                  methods that maintain natural areas, maximize the
                                  beneficial uses of water through natural systems, and
                                  provide additional trail opportunities.
    SOLID WASTE   Increasing amounts of solid waste disposed of yearly, and the
   MANAGEMENT     growing lack of landfill sites has resulted in awareness of the need
                  for source reduction and recycling. The City has adopted a Source
          SYSTEM  Reduction and Recycling Element addressing diversion of waste
                  from landfills.
C I T Y    O F   T  E M E      C U L A          G   E N E R A L           P  L A    N
                                     GM-28
                 Goal 8         A solid waste management system providing safe
                                and efficient collection, transportation, recovery
                                and disposal of waste.
                 Policy 8.1     Coordinate with the County of Riverside to provide
                                and expand solid waste collection, storage,
                                transportation, recovery, and disposal services to
                                meet the needs of the City.
                 Policy 8.2     Establish collection and disposal procedures for
                                household hazardous wastes through the adoption of
                                a Household Hazardous Waste Element.
                 Policy 8.3     Provide solid waste reduction and recycling within
                                the City through implementation of the Source
                                Reduction and Recycling Element.
        ENERGY   Efficient development and use of modern technologies can
        SERVICE  minimize energy demand and consumption. Close coordination
                 with service providers during the development approval process can
                 lead to accomplishment of these objectives.
                 Goal 9         Adequate        electrical,   natural     gas,  and
                                telecommunication systems to meet development
                                demand.
                 Policy 9.1     Coordinate with responsible companies to provide
                                continued maintenance, development, and expansion
                                of electricity, natural gas, and telecommunications
                                systems serving residents and businesses.
                 Policy 9.2     Pursue the undergrounding of utilities along arterial
                                roads, where feasible.
                 Policy 9.3     Encourage installation of new technological
                                infrastructure throughout the City including broad
                                band, fiber optics, wireless and other developing
                                technologies.
C I T Y   O F   T   E M E     C U L A         G    E N E R A L          P   L A N
                                   GM-29
                  IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
                  The following actions, procedures, strategies and techniques
                  implement the goals and policies of the Growth Management/Public
                  Facilities Element.
           GM-1   Continue to participate in the preparation of plans and programs
 REGIONAL PLANS   addressing regional issues, including the Growth Management
                  Strategy, Comprehensive Transportation Plan, Regional Growth
  AND PROGRAMS
                  Visioning Program, Water Resources Strategy, Open Space, Riverside
                  County Integrated Plan, Multi-Species Habitat Conservation Plan,
                  and School Facilities Plan.
                  Agency/Department:            Planning
                  Related Policy:               1.1
          GM-2    Partner with the County, WRCOG, neighboring jurisdictions, and
       REGIONAL   other regional agencies to:
     PARTNERSHIP
                      •    Implement the policies of WRCOG s Growth Management
                           Strategy.
                      •    Implement development standards that address quality of life
                           issues.
                      •    Achieve economic growth and prosperity, while preserving
                           natural beauty and the social quality of life in southwestern
                           Riverside County.
                      •    Establish natural reserves to preserve sensitive and endangered
                           species, and to provide open space for residents.
                      •    Establish land use compatibility with adjacent jurisdictions for
                           basic development standards related to infrastructure and
                           engineering, while preserving unique zoning and design
                           standards.
                      •    Plan for future development in the Sphere of Influence.
                      •    Guide the timing and provision of facilities and services to
                           support new development and enhance the quality of life.
                      •    Achieve fiscal stability.
                      •    Achieve economies of scale in the provision of services or
                           facilities.
C  I T Y   O F   T  E M E        C U L A           G E N E R A L              P  L A   N
                                       GM-30

                  Agency/Department:            City Manager s Office, Planning, Public
                                                Works
                  Related Policies:             1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8, 1.9, 1.10
           GM-3   Implement a Growth Management Program for Temecula that is
       GROWTH     linked to other City programs, including the five-year Capital
                  Improvement Program, the Congestion Management Program,
   MANAGEMENT     facilities and services master plans, and fee ordinances. Program
      PROGRAM     objectives include the following:
                      •    Ensure that new development is adequately supported by
                           public facilities and services through phasing.
                      •    Maintain level of service standards.
                      •    Encourage mixed use development.
                      •    Encourage new development that helps create and maintain a
                           balance between jobs and housing.
                      •    Establish primary growth areas where near-term development
                           will be encouraged.
                  Agency/Department:            City Manager s Office, Planning
                  Related Policies:             2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.6, 2.7, 2.8
           GM-4   Periodically evaluate levels of sheriff, fire and emergency medical
        SERVICE   services, based on changes in population and development, with the
                  County service providers. Strive to provide a minimum of one full-
          LEVELS  time officer per 1,000 residents for police protection services and to
                  provide facilities, staffing, and equipment necessary to maintain a
                  five-minute response time for 90 percent of all emergencies.
                  Implement new programs to meet the changing needs of residents.
                  Agency/Department:            Planning, Police, Fire
                  Related Policies:             3.1, 3.2, 3.4, 3.5
                  Required by General Plan EIR
           GM-5   As part of the development review process, require new development
       SECURITY   to address fire and police protection proactively, through all-weather
                  access street design, orientation of entryways, siting of structures,
       FEATURES   landscaping, lighting, and other security features.                    Require
                  illuminated addresses on new construction.
C I T Y    O F   T   E M E      C U L A           G    E N E R A L               P    L A    N
                                       GM-31

                   Agency/Department:             Planning, Building & Safety
                   Related Policy:                3.3
                   Required by General Plan EIR
           GM-6    Coordinate with developers and the Temecula Valley Unified School
        SCHOOL     District (TVUSD) to ensure that school sites are adequately sized
                   and located to meet increases in demand. Require proposed
       FACILITIES  projects with school sites to include a phasing plan that links
                   project development with provision of a school facility when
                   needed.
                   As permitted under State law, TVUSD imposes developer fees on
                   new residential construction within the District. The TVUSD
                   prepares and adopts a School Facilities Needs Analysis annually as
                   required by law.
                   Agency/Department:             Planning, TVUSD
                   Related Policies:              4.1, 4.2
           GM-7    Maintain, expand, and develop public and quasi-public facilities by:
         PUBLIC/
                       •   Identifying and soliciting funding from additional sources to
    QUASI-PUBLIC
                           supplement cultural, community, and library facilities and
       FACILITIES          services. Such funding sources may include: State and federal
                           grants and loans, public and private donations, sponsorships
                           by local and national corporations, and other private
                           individuals and groups.
                       •   Cooperating with the County to provide a range of health-
                           related facilities in the Temecula area to meet the needs of the
                           growing population, including rehabilitation centers, walk-in
                           medical centers, clinics, and full-service hospitals.
                       •   Coordinating with the County to determine location,
                           facilities, and services of new branch libraries needed to serve
                           the community.
                   Agency/Department:             Planning
                   Related Policies:              5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, 5.6, 5.7, 5.8, 5.9
                   Required by General Plan EIR
C I T Y    O F    T  E M E       C U L A            G    E N E R A L               P    L A   N
                                        GM-32

           GM-8    Meet demands for water and wastewater facilities by:
     WATER AND
                       •  Assisting the Rancho California and Eastern Municipal Water
   WASTEWATER
                          Districts in the process of updating their Urban Water
       FACILITIES         Management Plans to be responsive to the population and
                          housing unit capacities established by the General Plan.
                       •  Requiring new development to use reclaimed water for
                          irrigation purposes, when feasible.
                       •  Encouraging water district programs that promote water
                          conservation and ultimately reduce the demand for water and
                          wastewater capacity.
                   Agency/Department:           Public Works, Planning, RCWD, EMWD
                   Related Policies:            6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5, 6.6, 6.7
                   Required by General Plan EIR
           GM-9    Maintain an effective, safe, and environmentally compatible flood
          FLOOD    control system by:
      CONTROL
                       •  Reviewing developer-funded improvements to determine
          SYSTEM          compatibility with existing and proposed regional, primary
                          and secondary flood control facilities.
                       •  Identifying and prioritizing areas of excessive flooding, and
                          working with the County Flood Control and Water
                          Conservation District to construct appropriate flood control
                          facilities to ensure public safety.
                       •  Participating in the preparation of a master drainage plan to
                          establish a basis for funding and construction of primary and
                          secondary flood control facilities.
                   Agency/Department:           Public Works, Planning, County Flood
                                                Control and Water Conservation District
                   Related Policies:            7.1, 7.2, 7.3
          GM-10    Address community needs for solid waste disposal by:
    SOLID WASTE
                       •  Assisting the Riverside County Solid Waste Management
        DISPOSAL
                          Department to implement the County s Solid Waste
                          Management Plan. When feasible and appropriate, assist the
                          County in locating cost effective and environmentally
C I T Y    O F    T  E M E      C U L A           G    E N E R A L                P L A N
                                       GM-33

                            acceptable solid waste sites and facilities and establish public
                            service litter clean-up programs.
                        •   Encouraging participation by local businesses in household
                            hazardous waste roundups.
                        •   Maintaining a public awareness program to encourage
                            participation in household hazardous waste roundups.
                        •   Promoting awareness of recycling options for businesses.
                    Agency/Department:            Community Services
                    Related Policies:             8.1, 8.2, 8.3
                    Required by General Plan EIR
           GM-11    Provide electrical, natural gas, and telecommunication systems to
         ENERGY     meet development demand by:
        FACILITIES
                        •   Coordinating with Southern California Edison, the Southern
                            California Gas Company, and other responsible companies to
                            provide for the continued maintenance, development, and
                            expansion of electricity and natural gas systems in Temecula.
                        •   Pursuing the undergrounding of utilities along arterial roads,
                            where feasible.
                    Agency/Department:            Public Works, Planning
                    Related Policies:             9.1, 9.2
                    Required by General Plan EIR
          GM-12     Encourage installation of technological infrastructure throughout
            TELE-   the City, including broad band, fiber optics, wireless, and other
                    developing technologies.
COMMUNICATIONS
INFRASTRUCTURE      Agency/Department:            Public Works, Planning
                    Related Policy:               9.3
          GM-13     Prohibit the use of underground storage tanks and conventional
       WELLHEAD     septic tanks/subsurface disposal systems in any area designated
                    within Zone A of a U.S. Environmental Protection Agency wellhead
     PROTECTION     protection area. Require all proposed development projects using
                    septic tanks and subsurface disposal systems for the disposal of
                    wastewater to provide detailed geotechnical analysis of the project
                    site and siting recommendations in accordance with the EPA s
                    Design Manual for On-site Wastewater Treatment and Disposal Systems
                    that will ensure no impact to potable water production wells in any
C  I T Y   O F     T   E M E     C U L A            G    E N E R A L          P  L A    N
                                        GM-34

                area designated within Zone A of a U.S. Environmental Protection
                Agency wellhead protection area.
                Agency/Department:          Public Works, Planning
                Related Policies:           6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5
                Required by General Plan EIR
         GM-14  Require incorporation of recycling as a condition of approval for all
     RECYCLING  multi-family residential, commercial and office projects, and work
                with the private sector contractor providing solid waste services to
   REQUIREMENT  ensure that appropriate recycling containers, procedures, and
                education are readily available.
                Agency/Department:          Planning, Public Works
                Related Policy:             8.3
                Required by General Plan EIR
         GM-15  Continue to compost green waste collected from landscape and park
   GREEN WASTE  maintenance.
    COMPOSTING  Agency/Department:          Public Works
                Related Policy:             8.3
                Required by General Plan EIR
C I T Y   O F  T  E M E     C U L A           G    E N E R A L        P  L A    N
                                  GM-35
               This page is left intentionally blank.
C I T Y O F T E M E     C U L A           G   E N E R A L P L A N
                               GM-36
                                                          LAND USE
                                                             ELEMENT
             INTRODUCTION
             L
                     and use describes the economic, social, physical and cultural
                     dimensions of activity in Temecula. The City is fortunate to
                     have a good mix of affordable housing, high-paying jobs,
                     quality parks, tourist activities, and public facilities.
                     Determining the future location, type, and intensity of new
             development and reuse projects, and establishing the desired mix and
             relationship between such projects are objectives of the General Plan
             Land Use Element.
             Several key community identity and development questions currently
             face the City, including:
                  •    Where and how should the City encourage mixed use
                       commercial and residential projects?
                  •    Where and how can the City preserve rural communities
                       within and surrounding Temecula?
                  •    How can the City influence the type, location and character
                       of future growth in the French Valley area?
                  •    How will Temecula preserve the quality and value of single-
                       family neighborhoods?
                  •    How can the City ensure that surrounding natural resources
                       and the aesthetic look and feel of Temecula are maintained
                       in the face of future growth?
                  •    What is the future role of Old Town in relation to the rest
                       of the community?
                  •    How can the quality of life in Temecula benefit from or be
                       hurt by future regional land use and transportation plans
                       and decisions?
C I T Y O F T   E   M  E   C   U  L   A     G   E N  E  R   A   L    P  L A   N
                                  LU-1

                  Goals, policies and programs presented in this Element seek to
                  answer these questions and provide a long-term strategy to ensure
                  that land use relationships in Temecula are improved and contribute
                  to the community’s outstanding quality of life.
  PURPOSE OF THE  State law requires that Temecula prepare and adopt a General Plan as
       LAND USE   the primary tool for the City to manage growth and development.
                  The Land Use Element is a mandatory element, or chapter, of the
         ELEMENT  General Plan used to describe present and planned land uses and
                  their relationship to the community’s long-range goals for the future.
                  The Land Use Element identifies the proposed general distribution,
                  location, and extent of land uses including residential, commercial
                  and office, light industrial, public/institutional, and open space areas.
                  The element consists of text, maps, and diagrams outlining future
                  land uses within the City and showing how uses are integrated with
                  other General Plan elements and policies.
                  The Land Use Element is often considered the “umbrella” element of
                  the General Plan, encompassing issues and policies that are
                  considered in greater detail in other elements. For example, land use
                  policies both within the City and in the French Valley area have a
                  direct bearing on the planned local street system shown in the
                  Circulation Element. Issues and needs identified in the Housing
                  Element have led to an emphasis on accommodating future mixed
                  use development in areas surrounding I-15. Potential infrastructure
                  and service impacts of development consistent with the Land Use
                  Plan determine the policies and implementation programs of the
                  Growth Management/Public Facilities Element. Other General Plan
                  issues regarding safety, noise and the natural environment directly
                  relate to the policies and Land Use Plan contained in this Element.
                  The Land Use Policy Map (Figure LU-3) is a particularly important
                  feature of the element, since it shows the locations and types of
                  development within the City. The element also describes the
                  intensity or density of development planned for various areas within
                  the community. General locations for mixed use development, rural
                  preservation, and future growth are identified, and policies are
                  established to achieve these diverse objectives within specified areas.
C  I T Y    O F  T   E  M    E  C   U   L  A     G    E  N   E   R  A   L    P  L  A   N
                                       LU-2

MEASURING LAND      When describing land use, areas are differentiated from one another
USE DENSITY AND     by the principal use, whether it is homes (residential), shops and
                    restaurants (commercial), manufacturing businesses (industrial), a
        INTENSITY   park, or a school.
                    DENSITY AND INTENSITY
                    To describe the intensity of use – how much development exists on a
                    property (and presumably, what the associated activity level is) – land
                    use planners have developed quantitative measures called density and
                    intensity.
                    The term density typically applies to residential uses and refers to the
                    population and development capacity of residential land. Density is
                    described in terms of dwelling units per net acre of land (du/ac). Net
                    acreage corresponds to the gross project or lot area, less that portion
                    of the site used for arterial or collector roadways; and/or the
                    floodway portion of a flood plain.
                                              For commercial, industrial, and other
                                              nonresidential uses, intensity describes the
                                              degree to which a property is developed.
                                              The measure of intensity Temecula has
                                              adopted is the floor-area ratio. The floor-
                                              area ratio, or FAR, describes the
                                              relationship between the total square
                                              footage of development on a lot and the
                                              area of that lot. Floor area does not include
                                              area within parking structures. The FAR is
                                              determined by dividing the gross floor area
                                              of all buildings on a lot by the gross land
                                              area of the lot, less any portion used for
                                              arterial or collector roads.
                                              FAR and factors such as building square
                                              footage, building height, and the percent of
                                              lot coverage are all inter-related. For
                                              example, a 20,000-square-foot building on a
                                              40,000-square-foot lot yields an FAR of
                                              0.50. This 0.50 FAR can accommodate a
                                              single-story building that covers half the lot,
                                              or a two-story building with reduced lot
                                              coverage. Figure LU-1 illustrates different
FIGURE LU-1                                   FAR calculations.
EXAMPLES OF FLOOR-AREA RATIO (FAR)
C  I T Y     O F   T   E  M    E C  U   L  A      G    E  N    E  R   A  L    P  L   A  N
                                       LU-3

  RELATED PLANS  A number of other plans and programs help to achieve the goals of
  AND PROGRAMS
                 the Land Use Element. These plans and programs are administered
                 by several federal, State, County and special purpose agencies
                 SOUTHWEST AREA PLAN
                 The Southwest Area Plan (SWAP) was originally adopted by the
                 Riverside County Board of Supervisors in November, 1989 as a part
                 of the Riverside County Comprehensive General Plan. It was
                 updated as part of the Riverside County Integrated Program (RCIP)
                 effort in 2003. The updated County plan envisions substantial
                 amounts of new development around the City. Development in
                 unincorporated areas represents a source of substantial impact to the
                 community that is beyond the City’s ability to control.
                 TEMECULA DEVELOPMENT CODE
                 The Temecula Development Code establishes detailed zoning
                 districts and regulations based upon the General Plan. The
                 Development Code includes all of the City’s zoning ordinance
                 provisions, and has been supplemented over time to include other
                 related procedures such as subdivision regulations, environmental
                 review procedures and a sign code. Development Code regulations
                 and maps must be consistent with the land uses, policies, and
                 implementation programs of the General Plan. It is anticipated that
                 the Development Code will be updated to reflect the land use and
                 development policies contained in this Element.
                 TEMECULA REDEVELOPMENT PLAN
                 Prior to Temecula’s incorporation in 1989, the County of Riverside
                 established a Redevelopment Project Area in accordance with
                 California Community Redevelopment Law to eliminate blight within
                 designated areas. Generally, the Redevelopment Project Area centers
                 on the I-15 corridor and includes the Promenade Mall, Old Town,
                 and industrial and business park areas west of the freeway between
                 Winchester and Rancho California Roads. When established, the
                 Project Area encompassed sections of the community with
                 conditions, such as abandoned buildings, substandard housing, empty
                 parcels, and vandalism that may impede the City's development.
C  I T Y  O  F  T   E  M   E  C  U    L   A    G   E  N   E  R   A  L     P  L  A N
                                      LU-4

             After incorporation, the City of Temecula assumed responsibility for
             administering the Project Area. With the adoption of Assembly Bill
             1290, the Temecula Redevelopment Agency has prepared an
             implementation plan for the area. The Redevelopment Plan is one of
             the tools the City uses to implement Land Use Element policies.
             CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT AND GUIDELINES
             The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) was adopted by
             the State legislature in response to a public mandate for more
             thorough environmental analysis of projects that might affect the
             environment. Provisions of the law and environmental review
             procedures are described in the CEQA Statutes and CEQA
             Guidelines. Implementation of CEQA ensures that during the
             decision making stage of development, City officials and the general
             public will be able to assess the environmental impacts associated
             with private and public development projects.
             RIVERSIDE COUNTY AIRPORT LAND USE COMPATIBILITY PLAN
             POLICY DOCUMENT – FRENCH VALLEY AIRPORT
             French Valley Airport is a general aviation airport owned and
             operated by the County of Riverside. The airport occupies
             approximately 261 acres east of Winchester Road and is located five
             miles north of Temecula’s city center and one and one-quarter mile
             northwest of the City limits within the sphere of influence.
             French Valley Airport is one of 16 airports in Riverside County
             governed by the Riverside County Airport Land Use Commission
             (ALUC). In November 2004, the ALUC adopted the Riverside
             County Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan (ALUCP) Policy
             Document, which establishes policies applicable to land use
             compatibility planning in the vicinity of airports throughout Riverside
             County, including compatibility criteria and maps for the influence
             areas of individual airports. The ALUCP also establishes procedural
             requirements for compatibility review of development proposals.
             The basic function of airport land use compatibility plans is to
             promote compatibility between airports and the land uses that
             surround them. Compatibility plans serve as a tool for airport land
             use commissions in reviewing proposed development plans for
             airports and surrounding land uses. Additionally, compatibility plans
             establish criteria for local agencies to use when preparing or
             amending land use plans and ordinances and for landowners
             (including special district and other local government entities as well
             as private parties) to use when designing new development projects.
C I T Y O F T   E  M   E  C   U    L  A    G   E  N   E   R   A   L   P   L A   N
                                  LU-5

             State law requires each local agency having jurisdiction over land uses
             within an ALUC’s planning area to modify its general plan and any
             affected specific plans to be consistent with the compatibility plan, or
             to overrule the ALUC by a two-thirds vote of its governing body
             after making findings that the agency’s plans are consistent with the
             intent of State airport land use planning statutes. Figure LU-2
             identifies the French Valley Airport Land Use Compatibility Zone, as
             adopted by the Airport Land Use Commission in 2004.
             TEMECULA CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM
             The City's Capital Improvement Program (CIP) serves as a planning
             tool to coordinate the financing and scheduling of major projects to
             be undertaken by the City. These projects generally include: land and
             right-of-way acquisition; design, construction or rehabilitation of
             public buildings, facilities, and parks; public infrastructure design and
             construction; and redevelopment projects. Some projects are
             included which are not capital improvements per se, but are being
             considered for allocation of redevelopment tax increment funds.
             REGIONAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND GUIDE
             The Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG)
             undertakes regional planning efforts for the six-county SCAG region
             which includes Riverside, San Bernardino, Orange, Imperial, Los
             Angeles, and Ventura Counties. SCAG’s efforts focus on developing
             strategies to minimize traffic congestion, protect environmental
             quality, and provide adequate housing throughout the region. The
             Regional Comprehensive Plan and Guide – developed with active
             participation from local agencies, elected officials, the business
             community, community groups, private institutions, and citizens –
             sets forth broad goals and objectives intended to be implemented by
             participating jurisdictions and agencies, such as the South Coast Air
             Quality Management District and Riverside Transit Agency.
             RIVERSIDE COUNTY LOCAL AGENCY FORMATION COMMISSION
             Provisions of the Cortese-Knox-Hertzberg Local Government
             Reorganization Act of 2000 will be applied by the Riverside County
             Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO) in making decisions
             regarding future City annexations of land within the Temecula sphere
             of influence (SOI) and to any reorganization of other service districts
             for the Temecula Planning Area. The Commission's efforts are
             directed to seeing that services are provided efficiently and
             economically while agricultural and open space lands are protected.
C I T Y O F T   E  M   E   C  U   L   A      G  E   N  E   R   A   L     P  L  A   N
                                  LU-6


             NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE AND ELIMINATION SYSTEM
             Temecula is under the jurisdiction of the San Diego Regional Water
             Quality Control Board (SDRWQB), which implements the National
             Pollutant Discharge and Elimination System (NPDES) permit for the
             San Diego area (including the southernmost portion of Riverside
             County). The NPDES permit, a requirement under the Clean Water
             Act, addresses pollution from urban runoff that impacts water quality
             of receiving waters (such as streams and lakes). Under the NPDES
             permit, each jurisdiction must implement measures to reduce urban
             runoff during all phases of development: planning, construction, and
             current uses. Requirements include incorporating Best Management
             Practices (BMPs) to reduce runoff from construction and current
             uses, reporting any violations to the SDRWQB, and education
             regarding the potential negative water quality impacts of urban
             runoff.
             LAND USE PLAN
             The Land Use Plan for Temecula addresses the manner in which the
             City will grow over the next 20 years. Land Uses are classified and
             mapped, showing where the City anticipates residential, commercial
             and industrial development, and identifying areas set aside for
             community purposes, such as parks, schools, and open spaces. The
             Plan also includes provisions allowing high-quality, well-designed
             mixed use projects adjacent to the I-15 Corridor, and provides
             standards for the preservation of several rural areas unique to
             Temecula that help to define the City’s character. At the same time,
             the Plan outlines measures the City can take to preserve single-family
             neighborhoods, conserve natural and aesthetic resources, establish a
             long-term role for Old Town within the fabric of the community, and
             ensure that regional land use and transportation planning decisions
             have positive benefits for the City. Other General Plan elements also
             expand on these key objectives, working to achieve the City’s vision
             for a sustainable, high-quality urban and rural community.
             Specific actions the City will take to achieve these objectives are
             outlined in the Land Use Implementation Programs, listed at the
             conclusion of the Land Use Element.
C I T Y O F T   E  M   E  C   U   L   A     G   E  N  E  R    A L    P  L   A  N
                                  LU-8

   DIVERSE LAND   The diversity of land uses within
            USES  Temecula affects an important
                  balance between generation of
                  public revenues and provision of
                  public services and facilities.
                  Achieving and maintaining a diverse
                  and desirable balance of land uses
                  can ensure the City’s fiscal viability
                  and also promote a desirable
                  community in which people work,
                  shop, live, visit and recreate.
                  Beyond these fiscal considerations, diversity of land use also has
                  positive benefits for community livability and quality of life.
                  Temecula is fortunate to have good shopping and entertainment
                  options for residents and visitors alike, as well as a large, relatively
                  new supply of housing. City businesses benefit from the large
                  number of visitors to the region associated with the wineries and
                  Pechanga Entertainment Center.             Maintaining a variety of
                  complimentary land uses within the City remains a high priority.
                  LAND USE COMPATIBILITY
                  Compatibility between adjacent land uses is essential to achieve a
                  safe, efficient, and well-organized community. The issues involved in
                  examining the compatibility of proposed projects include: traffic
                  generation, access locations, noise impacts, public service demands,
                  site design and visual appearance, and public safety. Land use
                  compatibility is expected to become a greater issue as the community
                  builds out and commercial/employment uses locate nearer residential
                  areas. Residents want adequate buffering from non-residential uses
                  in terms of light, noise, and traffic impacts as well as negative visual
                  impacts. Compatibility between residential projects of different
                  densities is also a major concern. Development of standard single
                  family subdivisions within rural residential areas or adjacent to the
                  wine country for example, can negatively impact the overall character
                  of the area. Site design that involves a gradual transition of densities
                  within a project or an adequate open space buffer should be
                  important considerations in future residential projects.
C I T Y    O F   T   E  M    E  C    U  L  A      G  E  N  E  R   A  L      P  L  A   N
                                       LU-9

             LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
             The Land Use Policy Map (Figure LU-3) graphically represents the
             planned distribution and intensity of land uses in the Planning Area.
             The colors shown on the map correspond to seventeen land use
             designations describing the amount, type and nature of development
             allowed in Temecula, and recommended for the Sphere of Influence
             and Planning Area. While terms like “residential”, “commercial”, and
             “industrial” are generally understood, State General Plan law requires
             a clear and concise description of the designations and categories
             shown on the Land Use Policy Map. In addition, population and
             intensity standards must be specified.
             Table LU-1 provides a description of each General Plan land use
             designation used within the Planning Area and the range of density or
             intensity of development permitted within each category. The
             maximum allowable development on individual parcels is governed
             by these measures. Land use designations are implemented through
             detailed regulations and requirements for permitted uses and
             development standards within the City’s Development Code.
             General Plan land use designations are grouped within four
             generalized types: residential, commercial and office, industrial, and
             public/institutional and open space.
C I T Y O F T   E  M   E   C  U   L  A     G   E  N  E   R  A  L     P   L  A   N
                                 LU-10

             Figure LU-3
             Land Use Policy Map
C I T Y O F T  E M   E C  U  L   A G E N E R A L P L A N
                             LU-11
             Slip Page – Back Side of 11x17” Figure
C I T Y O F T  E  M  E   C U   L  A     G  E  N  E  R A L P L A N
                              LU-12

                                        TABLE LU-1
                                   LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
                          Range of
                                            Target
                         DUs/Net
       Land Use                           DUs/Net                  Summary Description
                           Acre or
                                        Acre or FAR1
                            FAR
Residential Uses
                                                       Very low density housing in areas best
HR Hillside             < 0.1 Du/Ac       0.1 Du/Ac    suited for hillside open space or with
                                                       severe development constraints.
                                                       Very low density housing compatible with
RR Rural               0.1-0.2 Du/Ac      0.2 Du/Ac
                                                       light agricultural activities and vineyards.
                                                       Single-family detached homes on large lots
VL Very Low            0.2-0.4 Du/Ac      0.3 Du/Ac    with a rural ranchette character of
                                                       development.
                                                       Single-family detached homes on larger lots
L     Low              0.5-2.9 Du/Ac      1.5 Du/Ac
                                                       with a custom character of development.
                                                       Typical single-family neighborhoods,
                                                       including single-family detached, single-
LM Low Medium          3.0-6.9 Du/Ac      4.5 Du/Ac
                                                       family zero lot line, patio homes, and
                                                       duplexes.
                                                       Attached and detached residential
                                                       development. Includes single-family zero
                           7.0-12.9
M     Medium                             10.0 Du/Ac2   lot line, patio homes, duplexes,
                           Du/Ac
                                                       townhouses, and multi-family garden
                                                       apartments.
                                                       Attached residential development,
                          13.0-20.0
H     High                               16.5 Du/Ac2   including multi-family or garden
                           Du/Ac
                                                       apartments.
Commercial and Office Uses
                                                       Small scale food markets, drug stores,
                                                       clothing stores, sporting goods, offices,
NC Neighborhood        0.20-0.40 FAR       0.25 FAR    hardware stores, child care centers, other
                                                       retail and personal services, community
                                                       facilities.
                                                       Retail, professional office, and service-
                                                       oriented business including supermarkets,
CC Community            0.25-1.0 FAR       0.30 FAR    department stores, theaters, restaurants,
                                                       professional and medical offices, and
                                                       specialty retail stores.
                                                       Commercial development oriented to the
                                                       needs of tourists, including lodging, auto
HT Highway/
                        0.25-1.0 FAR       0.30 FAR    service stations, restaurants, convenience
      Tourist
                                                       stores, gift shops, and entertainment
                                                       centers.
C   I  T Y     O F     T    E   M   E C  U    L  A   G    E   N    E  R    A    L      P  L   A   N
                                             LU-13
                                                    TABLE LU-1
                                           LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
                                  Range of
                                                       Target
                                 DUs/Net
        Land Use                                     DUs/Net                  Summary Description
                                   Acre or
                                                   Acre or FAR1
                                    FAR
                                                                  Commercial uses that require extensive
                                                                  floor area, including home improvement
SC     Service                 0.25-1.5 FAR           0.30 FAR    stores, discount retail stores, furniture
                                                                  stores, auto dealerships, and light
                                                                  automotive service.
                                                                  Primarily single or multi-tenant offices,
PO Professional                                                   including legal, design, engineering,
                               0.30-1.0 FAR           0.35 FAR
       Office                                                     medical, corporate, government, and
                                                                  community facilities.
Industrial Uses
                                                                  Business and employment centers
                                                                  including professional offices, research and
IP     Industrial Park         0.30-1.5 FAR           0.40 FAR    development, laboratories, light
                                                                  manufacturing, storage, industrial supply,
                                                                  and wholesale businesses.
Public Uses and Open Space
                                                                  Public and private uses including schools,
                                                                  transportation facilities, government
PI Public/
                               0.20-0.70 FAR          0.30 FAR    offices, public utilities, libraries, museums,
       Institutional
                                                                  public art galleries, hospitals, and cultural
                                                                  facilities.
                                                                  Rural, agricultural, and vineyard uses in
                                                                  areas around Temecula. One dwelling unit
VA Vineyards/                  0.01-0.2 FAR           0.03 FAR
                                                                  is permitted per lot, as are non-residential
       Agriculture             0-0.1 Du/AC           0.1 Du/Ac
                                                                  buildings necessary to support vineyard or
                                                                  agricultural operations.
                                                                  Public and private areas of permanent open
                                                                  space for such uses as parks, golf courses,
                                                                  recreation facilities, natural open space,
OS Open Space                  0.01-0.1 FAR             N/A       recreation trails, greenbelts, lakes, utility
                                                                  easements, active fault zones, and
                                                                  undevelopable portions of floodplains
                                                                  along waterways.
                                                                  Tribal lands held in trust that have
TTL Tribal Trust Lands              N/A                 N/A       important economic and environmental
                                                                  benefit to the City.
1. Assumed level of development citywide. Since the development which has occurred to date has not reached
   the maximum allowed level of density or intensity, future development is expected to be less than the
   maximum on a citywide basis. Therefore “target” levels of density/intensity are used in projecting future
   development. The target density/intensity establishes a ceiling within the range which cannot be exceeded
   without Planning Commission/City Council approval.
2. The target density/intensity does not apply to the Medium and High Density residential designations. Values
   listed in the table above are for analysis purposes only.
C    I   T Y        O    F     T    E  M     E   C  U    L   A  G   E    N    E  R    A    L       P    L A    N
                                                        LU-14

              RESIDENTIAL USES
             Residential uses are intended to be the principal and dominant use
             within each of the residential designations. Other uses such as public
             facilities/utilities, churches, schools, agriculture, community care and
             family day care facilities (as defined in the California Health and
             Safety Code), which are determined to be compatible with residential
             areas may also be allowed in accordance with the Development Code.
             Seven residential designations describe the character and density of
             housing development in Temecula: Hillside, Rural, Very Low, Low,
             Low Medium, Medium and High. Types of residential units that may
             be built in each designation are identified in Table LU-2.
                                HR – HILLSIDE RESIDENTIAL
                                Density Range:                0-0.1 units/net acre
                                Target Density:               0.1 units/net acre
                                The Hillside Residential category provides for the
                                development of very low density single-family
                                detached housing in areas that are best suited for open
                                space or have severe constraints to development, such
                                as steep hillsides with slopes over twenty-five percent,
                                limited access and public services, fire hazards and
                                other environmental concerns. The typical lot size for
                                the Hillside Residential designation is 10 acres for
                                sites with minimal slopes with one dwelling unit
                                permitted per lot, however, clustering of development
                                may be appropriate to minimize grading requirements
                                and impacts to environmentally sensitive areas.
                                Larger lot sizes are anticipated in areas with
                                substantial site constraints.
C I T Y O F T  E    M   E   C    U   L  A      G   E  N   E   R   A   L     P  L   A N
                                    LU-15

                                                                     TABLE LU-2
                                       TYPICAL RESIDENTIAL DENSITY / HOUSING TYPE RELATIONSHIPS
                                Housing Type                                            General Plan Residential Land Use Designations
                                 Max. Density                                    Hillside Rural Very Low Low Low Med. Medium High
                                  (du/net ac.)                                    (0.1)    (0.2)     (0.4)   (2.9)    (6.9)    (12.9) (20.0)
Housing Types
Single-Family Detached – One individually owned house per lot, with
                                                                                   ³        ³         ³       ³        ³         ³
conventional front, rear and side setbacks
Single-Family Zero Lot Line – One individually owned house per lot, with
zero setback on one side of the lot, leaving room for a yard on three sides of                                         ³         ³
the house.
Single-Family Patio – One individually owned house per lot, with flexible
setbacks, building orientation, and lot sizes to create gardens and patios
                                                                                                                       ³         ³
through the use of fences and screens. Sometimes includes commonly
owned open spaces under a homeowners association.
Duplex – One single-owner unit per lot, with separate rear and side yards,
                                                                                                                       ³         ³
and a common wall shared between adjacent units.
Townhouse -- A two-story unit attached to other units by common walls.
Each unit and lot may be individually owned, and usually includes commonly                                             ³         ³      ³
owned open spaces under a homeowners association.
Multiple-Family Apartment -- Units grouped within buildings of 2 to 4
stories in height. Each unit usually occupies one floor, so separate units are
                                                                                                                                 ³      ³
available on each level. Single ownership of all units and land is common,
unless a condominium form of ownership is established.
Mobile Home – A manufactured or factory assembled structure without a
permanent foundation, on a designated individual lot (leased or sold).
Mobile home parks usually have common open space/recreation areas and                                                  ³         ³
private streets. Maintenance is provided by a management company or lot
owners association.
                     C    I  T Y        O   F      T    E  M   E  C   U    L   A   G    E  N   E  R   A    L   P   L A    N
                                                                          LU-16

                      RR – RURAL RESIDENTIAL
                      Density Range:              0.1-0.2 units/net acre
                      Target Density:              0.2 units/net acre
                      The Rural Residential designation provides for
                      development of very low density housing compatible
                      with light agricultural activities and vineyards
                      surrounding the City. These areas typically are
                      characterized by limited access and rural services, and
                      a portion of the land on each lot may be utilized for
                      agricultural purposes. The minimum lot size for the
                      Rural Residential designation is 5 acres with one
                      dwelling unit permitted per lot, however, clustering of
                      development may be appropriate to preserve valuable
                      agricultural or vineyard lands. This designation is also
                      consistent with large lot residences that keep horses
                      and other animals, or utilize a portion of the land for
                      agricultural production. Larger lot sizes are expected
                      to be found in areas with steep topography or other
                      site constraints.
                      VL – VERY LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
                       Density Range:              0.2-0.4 units/net acre
                       Target Density:             0.3 units/net acre
                       The Very Low Density Residential designation
                       provides for single-family detached residential
                       development on large lots. This designation is also
                       consistent with large lot residences that keep horses
                       and other animals, or utilize a portion of the land for
                       agricultural production. Typical lot sizes are 2.5
                      acres, however, clustering of development may be
                      appropriate to minimize grading requirements and
                      impacts to environmentally sensitive areas.
C I T Y O F T E M E C  U   L  A     G    E  N   E  R   A   L    P   L  A  N
                          LU-17

                      L – LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
                      Density Range:              0.5-2.9 units/net acre
                      Target Density:             1.5 units/net acre
                      The Low Density Residential designation provides for
                      single-family detached residential development on
                      larger lots with a custom character of development.
                      Typical lot sizes range from 0.5 to 2.0 acres; however,
                      clustering of development may be appropriate to
                      minimize grading requirements and impacts to
                      environmentally sensitive areas.
                      LM – LOW MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
                      Density Range:              3.0-6.9 units/net acre
                      Target Density:             4.5 units/net acre
                      The Low Medium Density designation provides for
                      typical single-family neighborhoods. The range of
                      housing types includes single-family detached, single-
                      family zero lot line, patio homes and duplexes.
                      Congregate care facilities could be approved as a
                      conditional use in accordance with provisions of the
                      City Development Code.
                      M – MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
                      Density Range:              7.0-12.9 units/net acre
                      Target Density:             None
                      The Medium Density Residential designation provides
                      for development of attached and detached residential
                      units. Typical housing types may include single-family
                      zero lot line, patio homes, duplexes, townhouses, and
                      multi-family apartments. Congregate care facilities
                      could be approved as a conditional use in accordance
                      with provisions of the City Development Code.
C I T Y O F T E M E C  U   L  A      G   E  N  E  R   A   L     P  L  A   N
                          LU-18

                        H – HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
                        Density Range:              13.0-20.0 units/net acre
                        Target Density:             None
                        The High Density designation provides for the
                        development of attached residential developments.
                        Typical housing types include multi-family
                        apartments. Congregate care facilities could be
                        approved as a conditional use in accordance with the
                        provisions of the City Development Code. Increases
                        in the density for congregate care may be allowed
                        under special provisions of the Development Code.
             COMMERCIAL AND OFFICE USES
                         Five designations describe the types of commercial
                         and office land uses found in Temecula:
                         Neighborhood, Community, Highway/ Tourist,
                         Service, and Professional Office.
                         NC – NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL
                         Intensity Range:            0.20-0.40 FAR
                         Target Intensity:           0.25 FAR
                         The Neighborhood Commercial designation includes
                         smaller-scale business activities that generally provide
                         retail or convenience services for local residents in
                         surrounding neighborhoods. Typical uses include:
                         traditional small scale food markets (usually less than
                         30,000 square feet), drug stores, clothing stores,
                         sporting goods, offices, hardware stores, child care
                         centers, other retail and personal service uses, and
                         community facilities. Neighborhood commercial
                         centers usually are developed on less than ten acres
                         of land and range between 25,000 and 75,000 square
                         feet. Projects should be compatible in design and
                         scale with adjacent residential areas, and should be
                         designed to encourage pedestrian use.
C I T Y O F T E M  E C   U   L  A     G    E  N   E  R   A   L     P  L   A  N
                            LU-19

                      CC – COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL
                      Intensity Range:           0.25-1.0 FAR
                      Target Intensity:          0.30 FAR
                      The Community Commercial designation includes
                      retail, professional office, and service-oriented
                      business activities serving the entire community.
                      Community commercial areas typically include larger
                      retail uses such as supermarkets, department stores,
                      theaters, restaurants, professional and medical
                      offices, and specialty retail stores. Community
                      Commercial uses usually occupy 10 to 50 acres of
                      land, and include in excess of 100,000 square feet of
                      floor area.
                      HT – HIGHWAY/TOURIST COMMERCIAL
                      Intensity Range:           0.25-1.0 FAR
                      Target Intensity:          0.30 FAR
                      The Highway/Tourist Commercial designation
                      provides for uses located adjacent to major
                      transportation routes oriented to the needs of
                      tourists. Highway/Tourist Commercial development
                      should be appropriately located and developed as
                      clusters of commercial development rather than as
                      shallow commercial frontage along major streets.
                      Typical uses may include tourist accommodations
                      and lodging facilities, automobile service stations,
                      restaurants, convenience stores, gift shops, and
                      entertainment centers. Facilities should be well-
                      landscaped, providing an attractive visual image.
C I T Y O F T E M E C U   L  A     G    E N  E  R   A   L     P   L  A  N
                         LU-20

                            SC – SERVICE COMMERCIAL
                            Intensity Range:            0.25-1.5 FAR
                            Target Intensity:           0.30 FAR
                            The Service Commercial designation provides for
                            commercial uses typically requiring extensive floor
                            area. Typical uses include home improvement
                            stores, discount retail stores, furniture stores, auto
                            dealerships and light automotive service.
                            Warehousing and manufacturing may be incidental
                           uses within a business that is otherwise consistent
                           with the Service Commercial designation.
                           PO – PROFESSIONAL OFFICE
                           Intensity Range:             0.30-1.0 FAR
                           Target Intensity:            0.35 FAR
                           The Professional Office designation includes
                           primarily single or multi-tenant offices and may
                           include supporting uses. Office developments are
                           intended to include low-rise offices situated in a
                           landscaped garden arrangement and may include
                           mid-rise structures at appropriate locations. Typical
                           uses include legal, design, engineering, or medical
                           offices, corporate and governmental offices, and
                           community facilities. Supporting convenience retail
                           and personal service commercial uses may be
                           permitted to serve the needs of the on-site
                           employees.
             INDUSTRIAL USES
                          IP – INDUSTRIAL PARK
                          Intensity Range:            0.30-1.5 FAR
                          Target Intensity:           0.40 FAR
                          To reflect the nature of the industrial community in
                          Temecula and its contributions to the economy, the
                          Industrial Park designation provides for well-designed
                          business and employment centers offering attractive
                          and distinctive architectural design, innovative site
                          planning, and substantial landscaping
C I T Y O F T  E M  E  C   U   L  A     G   E  N   E   R   A  L     P   L  A  N
                              LU-21

                             and visual quality.         Typical uses may include
                             professional offices, research and development,
                             laboratories, light manufacturing, storage, industrial
                             supply, and wholesale businesses. (This designation
                             was previously described as Business Park.)
             PUBLIC USES AND OPEN SPACE
             Four designations describe public and open space uses in Temecula:
             Public/Institutional, Vineyards/Agriculture, Open Space, and Tribal
             Trust Lands.       In addition, a Recreation Commercial overlay
             designation is established to promote tourist-oriented commercial
             recreation uses, such as resorts.
                             PI – PUBLIC / INSTITUTIONAL FACILITIES
                             Intensity Range:             0.20-0.70 FAR
                             Target Intensity:            0.30 FAR
                             The public and institutional facilities designation
                             provides for a wide range of public and private uses
                             including       schools,     transportation      facilities,
                             government offices, public utilities, libraries,
                             museums, public art galleries, hospitals, and cultural
                             facilities.    To the extent possible, public and
                             institutional facilities should be clustered in activity
                             centers to reinforce other uses and benefit from
                             access to alternative modes of transportation.
                             Additional public and institutional uses, including
                             churches and day care facilities, may be developed in
                             other residential or non-residential land use
                             designations under procedures established in the City
                             Development Code.
                             VA – VINEYARDS / AGRICULTURE
                             Density Range:               0-0.2 unit/net acre
                             Target Density:              0.1 unit/net acre
                             Intensity Range:             0.01-0.10 FAR
                             Target Intensity:            0.03 FAR
                             This designation is intended to promote rural,
                             agricultural, and vineyard uses of properties located to
                             the east of the City within the Planning Area.
                             Continued operation of vineyards and agricultural
                             businesses on these properties is vital to the
C I T Y O F T  E   M   E  C   U   L   A     G   E   N   E  R  A   L     P   L  A    N
                                 LU-22

                      economic health of the City.              Through this
                      designation, they are set aside for these purposes in
                      the future. Non-residential buildings necessary to
                      support vineyard or agricultural operations, as well as
                      retail sales, tasting rooms, restaurants, and bed and
                      breakfasts are also permitted.
                      OS – OPEN SPACE
                      Intensity Range:             0.01-0.10 FAR
                      Target Intensity:            None
                      The        Open       Space/Recreation        designation
                      accommodates both public and private areas of
                      permanent open space for such uses as parks, golf
                      courses, recreation facilities, natural open spaces,
                      recreation trails, greenbelts, lakes, utility easements,
                      active fault zones, and undevelopable portions of
                      floodplains along waterways. This designation is
                      intended to include:
                      •    lands acquired by easement, fee and other
                           methods sanctioned by state and federal law for
                           parkland,
                      •    preservation of biological and cultural resources,
                           and
                      •    protecting the public from flood, seismic and
                           other hazards.
                      Only accessory buildings or structures related to parks
                      and recreation facilities are intended within the Open
                      Space designation. These areas may also
                      accommodate certain commercial outdoor recreation
                      uses as a conditional use in accordance with the City
                      Development Code.
                      TTL – TRIBAL TRUST LANDS
                      Intensity Range:      N/A
                      Target Intensity:     N/A
                      The Tribal Trust Lands designation applies to
                      properties within the Planning Area that are held in
                      trust by Federal agencies. These lands can have
C I T Y O F T E M E C  U    L A      G    E  N  E  R   A  L      P   L  A  N
                          LU-23

                             important economic and environmental relationships
                             to both the City and area residents. However,
                             properties within this designation may not be subject
                             to City or County planning, zoning, and building
                             regulations. Cooperative efforts between the City,
                             County, and local Tribal Governments are important
                             to ensuring that areawide issues are appropriately
                             addressed to the benefit of all local residents.
                             RC – RECREATION COMMERCIAL OVERLAY
                             Intensity Range:              Varies
                             Target Intensity:             N/A
                             The Recreation Commercial Overlay designation may
                             be applied to properties designated for Open Space
                             use. This designation provides for operation and
                             development of resort or amusement oriented
                             commercial and recreational uses of regional interest
                             that draw visitors from throughout the City and
                             region. Permitted uses include commercial recreation,
                             conference centers, golf courses, clubhouses, hotels,
                             resorts (including fractional ownership units),
                             restaurants, parks, camp grounds, open spaces and
                             community facilities. Restaurants, hotels, and resort
                             uses are accessory to the underlying open space uses.
             TARGET DENSITIES AND INTENSITIES
             For various reasons, many parcels in the community have not been
             developed to their maximum density or intensity.                  Future
             development is expected to occur at the target level of density or
             intensity stated in Table LU-1 for each land use designation. For
             residential projects, development at a density between the target and
             maximum levels may only occur for the Hillside, Rural, Very Low,
             Low and Low Medium designations, at the discretion of the Planning
             Commission and City Council. In making a determination of density
             beyond the target in these zones, the following community benefits
             may be considered:
             •    Additional active parkland, trails or open space.
             •    Preservation of historic buildings or sites.
C I T Y O F T   E  M   E  C   U   L  A      G   E   N   E  R   A  L     P  L  A  N
                                 LU-24

             •    Preservation and enhancement of natural habitat.
             •    Additional public, community or cultural facilities, or improved
                  public spaces or plazas for community use.
             •    Additional amenities in multifamily developments.
             •    Transit facilities and/or additional right-of-way along future
                  transit corridors.
             •    Housing that meets the needs of very low and low income
                  households.
             •    Alternative non-vehicular transportation.
             These amenities are intended to satisfy a need over and above the
             minimum requirements of the General Plan and other City policies
             and regulations. Some residential development is expected to occur
             below the target level of density and some development is expected
             to occur above the target level, based on provision of public
             amenities (such as schools and parks) within areas designated for
             residential uses. For area-wide planning purposes, the target level of
             density for each residential land use designation and the target FAR
             for each non-residential land use designation is assumed.
             A target level of density is not established for the Medium and High
             density residential designations, so as not to preclude or discourage
             the development of affordable housing. However, for area-wide
             planning purposes, a probable level of development within the
             Medium and High designations is assumed.
             Development at densities or intensities varying from these land use
             designations is permitted within Mixed Use Overlay Areas and
             Specific Plan Areas identified in the Land Use Element at the
             discretion of the Planning Commission and City Council without the
             need for a General Plan Amendment.
             DEVELOPMENT CAPACITY
             The Land Use Plan for Temecula includes target levels of residential
             and non-residential development, where all land in the planning area
             is developed according to the Land Use Policy Map. The target levels
             of development establish a capacity for the Land Use Plan that is
             expressed as estimates of total dwelling units, total population, and
             total square footage of non-residential development in the future.
C I T Y O F T   E   M   E  C   U   L  A     G   E N    E R   A   L    P  L  A   N
                                  LU-25

             Table LU-3 summarizes the development capacity of the Land Use
             Plan. Within the Temecula planning area, capacity is provided for
             approximately 166,250 persons in 53,700 dwelling units.
             SPECIFIC PLANS
             Many areas within the City and Planning Area are subject to the
             plans, policies and implementation measures of currently adopted or
             anticipated future Specific Plans. The purpose of Specific Plans is to
             provide comprehensive planning of large areas consistent with the
             General Plan. A Specific Plan area designation is used to identify 25
             such areas within the Temecula Planning Area, which because of size,
             location, and/or special development opportunities require a
             coordinated and comprehensive planning approach (see Figure LU-
             4). In identified Specific Plan areas of 100 or more acres, approval of
             a Specific Plan is required prior to approval of any discretionary land
             use entitlement or issuance of any building or grading permit. In
             some areas, Village Center Plans, which allow greater intensities, can
             also be used. Planned development overlays can be used for smaller
             areas.
             Specific Plans must be prepared in accordance with the requirements
             of Section 65451 of the California Government Code and the City’s
             Development Code, which contains some additional requirements
             tailored to meet local needs and conditions. Designated areas will
             require detailed plans indicating land uses, circulation, major
             infrastructure and facilities, open space and parks, and appropriate
             implementation measures. All Specific Plans will be evaluated for
             consistency with the goals, policies, plans and programs of the
             General Plan.
             Approved Specific Plan Areas – As shown in Table LU-4, a total of
             23 Specific Plans have been approved within the planning area as of
             May, 2003. Specific Plan documents for each of these areas are
             available for reference at the City Planning Department. Approved
             land uses for each Specific Plan are shown on the Land Use Policy
             Map.
C I T Y O F T   E  M   E  C   U   L  A      G   E  N   E R   A  L     P   L  A  N
                                 LU-26

                                                                                      TABLE LU-3
                                                                              DEVELOPMENT CAPACITY
                                    Assumptions                                                                                     Non-Residential
                            Maximum               Target1           Net Acres4                      Dwelling Units                 Square Feet (1,000s)                 Population
                          Du/                  Du/                   Planning                         Planning                           Planning                       Planning
                           Ac        FAR        Ac    FAR     City3    Area       Total     City3       Area        Total      City3        Area        Total     City3    Area     Total
Residential Uses
HR Hillside                0.1                  0.1            163      860        1,023       16         86            102       0           0              0     50       266        316
RR Rural                   0.2                  0.2            104     2,424       2,528       21        485            506       0           0              0     64      1,498     1,562
VL Very Low                0.4                  0.3           2,424     538        2,962      835        185          1,021       0           0              0 2,580        573      3,153
L Low                       2                   1.5            290      303          593      435        454            889       0           0              0 1,344       1,402     2,746
LM Low Medium               6                   4.5           4,405    3,188       7,593 20,019        14,486       34,504        0           0              0 61,847     44,753   106,600
M Medium                   12                   10             635      124          759    6,350       1,241         7,591       0           0              0   19,618    3,833    23,451
H High                     20                  16.5            378       54          432 6,252           891          7,143       0           0              0 19,315      2,753    22,068
Commercial and Office Uses
NC Neighborhood                       0.4             0.25      57       20           77       0          0               0     621         219            840     0         0           0
CC Community                           1               0.3     566      231          798       0          0               0 7,402          3,021       10,423       0        0           0
HT Hwy/Tourist                         1               0.3     120       36          156       0          0               0    1,565        469          2,034      0        0           0
SC Service                            1.5              0.3     389        0          389       0          0               0 5,082             0          5,082      0        0           0
PO Prof. Office                        1              0.35     333      156          489       0          0               0 5,077          2,378         7,455      0        0           0
Industrial Uses
IP Industrial Pk.                     1.5              0.4    1,008     635        1,644        0          0              0 17,569        11,067       28,636       0        0           0
Public/Institutional and Open Space Uses
PI Public/Inst.                       0.7              0.3     711      544        1,255       0          0               0 9,291          7,106       16,397       0        0           0
VA Vineyards/Ag            0.2        0.1             0.03       0     2,219       2,219        0        222            222       0        2,900         2,900      0       686        686
OS Open Space                         0.1                     2,614    4,449       7,063       0          0               0       0           0              0     0         0           0
TTL Tribal Trust                N/A                N/A         397      699        1,097       0          0               0       0           0              0
Overlay Designation
     Mixed Use2                Varies              TBD         210       0           210 1,760            0           1,760 2,245             0          2,245 5,667         0       5,667
            TOTAL                                            14,805   16,481      31,286 35,688        18,049       53,737 48,852          27,161      76,013 110,486     55,764   166,249
Additional Assumptions: 3.22 persons per occupied housing unit; 4.2% residential vacancy rate; Net Acres measured within City; Net Acres = Gross Acres * 0.8 outside City.
1 The target density/intensity does not apply to the Medium and High Density residential designations. Values listed in the table above are for analysis purposes only.
2 Dwelling unit and square footage values used for Mixed Use Overlay Areas are midpoint values within the ranges identified in Table LU-5. Actual values to be determined.
3. Current City limit as of July 1, 2003.
4. Area calculations exclude existing streets.
                                          C   I   T Y      O   F    T  E    M  E   C   U    L     A    G     E  N    E   R    A   L      P   L   A   N
                                                                                           LU-27
      Figure LU-4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Keller Rd
      Specific Plan Areas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mc Colery Rd
      CITY OF TEMECULA GENERAL PLAN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pat Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Specili Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Briggs Rd                                                                  Elliot Rd                                                                                                                                                                                              Judith St
      Approved Specific Plans
      SP- 1 Roripaugh Hills                                                                                                                                              Baxter Rd                                                                                                                                                                                             #286                                                                                                                                                   Jean N icho las Rd
      SP- 2 Rancho Highlands
      SP- 3 Margarita Village                                                                                                                                                                                      City of Murrieta #106                                                                        rR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   d                                                                                                                                                                    County of
      SP- 4 Paloma/Paseo Del Sol                                                                                                                                         Lee Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sphere of Influence                                                                     es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            te                                                                                                                                                                          Riverside
      SP- 5 Old Town
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #284
                                                                                                                                                       Menifee Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Liberty Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Briggs Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pourroy Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Leon Rd
      SP- 6 Campos Verdes
      SP- 7 Temecula Regional Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Thompson Rd
      SP- 8 Westside/Villages at Old Town
      SP- 9 Redhawk
      SP-10 Vail Ranch
      SP-11 Roripaugh Ranch                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Benton Rd
      SP-12 Wolf Creek
      SP-13 Harveston
      PDO-4 Temecula Creek Village
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ÿ                                             Auld Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #106                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Skinner
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Maddalena Rd
      PDO-5 Rancho Pueblo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Pourroy Rd
      # 106 Dutch Village
                                                                                                                                                        Cal le De Amor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Leon Rd
      # 184 Rancho Bella Vista                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #238
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Allen Rd
      # 213 Winchester Properties/Silverhawk
      # 265 Borel Airpark                 Wh
                                             it
      # 284 Quinta Do Lago                                                                                       ew
                                                                                                                       d Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #265                                                                        Rd
      # 286 Winchester 1800                                                                                          oo
                                                                                                                                                                         Hun ter Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      rr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           oy                                                                                                                                                                                            Borel Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  u
      # 238 Crown Valley Village          Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Po
                                                                         Ø
                                                                         "
                                             Dr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pr o m o
      # 313 Morgan
      Ø
                     Hill
                                                                         #
                  os
      "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    n
      #
                                          ta
              lam                   r rie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #184
                                A                                                                                                                                                                                            Dr
                                                                                            Mu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ry
                            s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pk y
                         Lo                                                             a                                                                                                                            y on
      Future Specific Plans
                                                                                Alt
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ca n
                                                                                                                                                                                                             S ky
                    Y        Specific Plan Area Y
                                                M u rr ie t a
                                                                                                         Ho t                  d
                                                                                                                     Springs R
                    Z        Specific Plan Area Z                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Mu rrieta Hot Springs Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Buck Rd
                         City of                                                                                                                                                                                                    #213
                        Murrieta                                                                                                                                                                  y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SP-11
                                                                                   Ja                                                                                                         W                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   d
                                                                                   ck
                                                                                                                                                                                     i   re                                                            ve                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         R
                                                                                       son
                                                                                                                                                                                  na                                                              sA                                                                            sR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      l ow
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            a
                                                                                                                                                                             Bo                                                                                                                                              ola
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Butterfield Stage Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          en d
                                                                                              Av  e                                                                                                                            W il                                                                             N ic                                                                                                                                      V in
                                                           M                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     oW                                                                      B er
                                                               ad                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     y
                                                                   is on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               la       s Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                        C
               St                                                          Av                                                                                                                                                            Nic o
          va                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          al le
                                                                               e
 G
     ua
                                W                                                                                              SP-13                                                                  SP-1                                                                                                                                                                Vista D e           Rd
                                    as                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              l Mo n te                                                                             C on
                                           t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                te n
                                     hi ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                e                                                                                                                                                                                                  to
                                             on                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Via N ort
                                                Av                                                                                                                                                                            rte                                                                                                                                         L a S eren a W y
                    D                                                                                                                                                                                                 No
                                                  e                                                                                                                          M
                    ou                                                                                                                                                       arg                          Via
                        gl
                                                                                                                                                                                                  SP-6
                                                                                                                                                                              a r ita Rd
                        as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Rd
                         sA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Rd                                                                                                                                                                                         r ni a
                              ve                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               l if o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            R ey                                                                                                                                                                                          Ca
                                                                                                                                          Yn
                                                                                                                                              z
                                                                                                                                              e   SP-7                                                                                                                Del                     W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              n   c ho
                                                                                                                                                  Rd                                                                                                                                      en
                                                                          St                                                                                                                                                                                                 Se r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          La                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Dr
                                                                     ry                                                          f                                                                                                                                                                                           do                                                                                                                                                 Pla y a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ra De
                                                                                                                              Je
                                                             er                                                                  rs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Mad e
                                                           Ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               s
                                                                                                                               fe                                                                                                                                                                                                  Pk
                                                                                                                                     on                                                                                                                                                                                               y
                                                                                                                                      Av
                                                                                                        rR
                                                                                                             d
                                                                                                                                          e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             it a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Rd                                                               SP-3                          Rd                                                                                                                                         ba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Rd
                                                                                                   te                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ia                                                                                                                                      Pau
                                                                                                 es
                                                                                                                                                                                                          arg                                                                                                         rn
                                                                                            ch                                                                                                            M                                                                                                    li   fo
                                                                                       in                                      Di                                                                                                                                                                       o   Ca
                                                                                   W                                                                                                                                                                                                               h
                                                                                                                                az                                                                                                                                                              nc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ra
                                                                                                                                     Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            L ind a R
                                             Ra                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             o
                                                nc
                                                  ho                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                se   a Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ca
                                                     Ca                                                                                                                             Yn                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ll e
                                                       lif
                                                                                                                                                                                       e                         h o V ista R                                                                                                               Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                              z            R a nc                                                                                                                    ba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Bu t t e r
                                                         or                                                                                                                                                                   d                                                                                               Pa u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    C on t en to
                                                            ni                                                                                                                                    Rd
                                 ida D el O ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Me ado w s P k y
                             ve n
                                                               a                                                                                               d
                         A                                         Rd                                                                                              R
                                                                                                                                         l if o r   ni a
                                                                                                                          Ra n c h o C a                                                                                                                                                            M                                                                                                                           fie l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   De Portola Rd
                                                                                                                                                  SP-5                                            SP-2                                                                                               arga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            r it a                      SP-4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            d                                                                                                                                                                                                        Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         oR                                                                     Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t   ia g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             San
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Y
                                                                                                                                                         SP-8                                                        ez                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         A nz
                                                                                            Via Sant                                                                                                     Va l
                                                                                                                                                                                                          lej
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Yn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     d     }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ÿ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           79
                                                                                               a Ro sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                              o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Av                                                                      ola
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Rd                                 Z                                                                                                       Pky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PDO-5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       D e P o rt                                                                                                                                                       ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                an
                                       an c
                                            a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             il R  SP-10
                                     B arr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Va
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #313
                                    Via
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    nd a
                                                                ro Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                         aL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Lo        m                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Rd
                                                          V ia V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        za
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AA                                                                                                                                                                             SP-9   wk P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   An
                                                                a q ue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Rd                                                                   ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        y                                                                     ed      R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ll e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Va
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SP-12                                                              W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Pechanga                                                                             lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     w
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ø
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Entertainment
                                                                                                                                                                                                              "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ol
                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         d                                                          Sp                                                                           rH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     nR                                                               ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Center                                                             ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            a                                                                D
                                                     Temecula City Boundary                                                                                                                                                     an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    yo                                                                          Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             wC
                                                     Sphere of Influence Boundary                                                                                                                                        bo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Û
                                                     Planning Area                                                                                                                                                  in
      Source: Temecula GIS and Cotton/Bridges/Associates
 µ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      c han g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pe
                                                     0                                            5,000                                       10,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             k way
                                                                                                                                                  Feet                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 a P ar
                                                                                                                                                   Miles
                                                     0                                                           1                                                       2
C I T Y                                                                        O F                                                   T E M E C U L A                                                                                                                                                                                    G E N E R A L                                                                                                                                                                                           P L A N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LU-28

                                                                         TABLE LU-4
                                                         APPROVED SPECIFIC PLAN AREAS
 Label in
                                                                                                                                                General Plan
Fig. LU- Adopted Specific Plan              Location                                     Description/Objectives                                               Acres
                                                                                                                                                 Land Uses
     3
City of Temecula
SP-1      Roripaugh Estates         East side of             Pre-incorporation Specific Plan including residential and                         L, LM, M,       200
                                    Winchester Road,         commercial/industrial development.                                                NC,PO,OS
                                    north of Margarita
                                    Road and south of
                                    Nicolas Road.
SP-2      Rancho Highlands          South of Rancho          Pre-incorporation Specific Plan, approved in 1984 including residential and       VL, LM, H, SC,  237
                                    California Road, west    commercial/industrial development.                                                HT, PO, PI, OS
                                    of Ynez Road.
SP-3      Margarita Village         East of Margarita Road   Pre-incorporation Specific Plan, approved in 1988 including residential and       VL, L, LM, M,  1,345
                                    and south of La Serena   commercial/industrial development.                                                NC, PI, OS
                                    Way
SP-4      Paloma Del Sol/Paseo Del  East of Margarita Road   Pre-incorporation Specific Plan, approved in 1988 including residential and       LM, H, NC, CC, 1,368
          Sol                       between SR-79 South      commercial/industrial development.                                                PO, PI, OS
                                    and Pauba Road
SP-5      Old Town                  South of Rancho          To preserve historic character; enhance economic vitality; improve public         LM, M, H, CC,   148
                                    California Road, at the  facilities and services, particularly circulation, parking and drainage; and to   PI, OS
                                    intersection of Old      encourage infill development.
                                    Town Front and Pujol
                                    Streets
SP-6      Campos Verdes             South of Winchester      To provide residential uses near Ynez Road and Winchester Road, designed LM, CC, OS, PO           126
                                    Road and East of         to accommodate bus shelters and other appropriate transit facilities. Land use
                                    Margarita Road           densities and design to provide a transition or buffer from adjacent Very Low
                                                             and Low Medium density residential.
SP-7      Temecula Regional Center  Located between          To develop a regional commercial core to meet area needs and provide a            CC, PO, PI      187
                                    Winchester, Ynez and community focal point with high quality site and building design.
                                    Margarita Roads, and
                                    Overland Drive
SP-8      Westside (Villages at Old South and West of Old To provide complementary land uses to Old Town that increase the vitality of M, H, OS                149
          Town)                     Town, adjacent to City the area; to increase the range of housing opportunities west of I-15; and to
                                    limits.                  encourage sensitive site and building design given the topography of the area.
                        C    I  T Y   O     F     T   E    M   E     C    U    L   A        G     E    N    E   R    A   L       P   L   A   N
                                                                              LU-29
                                                                     TABLE LU-4
                                                       APPROVED SPECIFIC PLAN AREAS
 Label in
                                                                                                                                         General Plan
Fig. LU-    Adopted Specific Plan        Location                                    Description/Objectives                                             Acres
                                                                                                                                          Land Uses
     3
SP-9      Redhawk                 South of Vail Ranch     Pre-incorporation Specific Plan approved in 1988 including residential and    LM, M, PI, OS   1,261
                                  SP.                     commercial/industrial development.
SP-10     Vail Ranch              South of Temecula       Pre-incorporation Specific Plan approved in 1988 including residential and    LM, PI, OS, HT,  628
                                  Creek, between          commercial/industrial development.                                            IP
                                  Margarita and
                                  Butterfield Stage
                                  Roads.
SP-11     Roripaugh Ranch         Along Butterfield Stage To develop a master planned residential community providing a variety of      L, LM, M, NC,    792
                                  Road in the northeast   housing types suited to the terrain and sensitive to natural landforms. The   OS, PI
                                  corner of the City.     maximum density is not to exceed an average of three dwelling units per
                                                          acre. Future development should protect sensitive natural resources of the
                                                          area.
SP-12     Wolf Creek              Southern portion of     To provide a balance of uses with commercial and public uses serving the      LM, NC, CC, PI,  551
                                  the City, along         surrounding area. Intended to be a village center in the southeast portion of OS, M
                                  Pechanga Parkway.       the City.
SP-13     Harveston               Between Margarita       To provide a mix of land uses with higher density residential close to        LM, M, H, SC,    557
                                  Road, and I-15, along   commercial and employment uses, and to provide open space links between       PI, OS
                                  City limits.            residential, public and commercial uses.
PDO-4     Temecula Creek Village  Along SR-79 South,      To achieve comprehensively planned mixed-use developments with                PO                33
PDO-5     Rancho Pueblo           between Jedediah        compatible/complementary mixtures of office, support commercial,                                49
                                  Smith Road and          residential, and services.
                                  Margarita Road.
Sphere of Influence
#184      Rancho Bella Vista      North of Murrieta Hot To provide a residential planned community that protects the natural            LM, PI, OS       797
                                  Springs Road and the resources of Skunk Hollow and hillside areas, provides a range of residential
                                  City limit.             densities connected to a contiguous open space system, and links to adjacent
                                                          open space areas.
#213      Winchester Properties   East side of            Pre-incorporation Specific Plan approved in 1988 including residential and    LM, M, H, IP,   1,036
          (Silverhawk)            Winchester Road,        commercial/industrial development.                                            PI, OS
                                  north of the City.
                       C    I T Y   O    F      T    E  M   E    C     U   L   A      G    E   N   E   R     A   L       P    L   A   N
                                                                          LU-30
                                                                     TABLE LU-4
                                                       APPROVED SPECIFIC PLAN AREAS
Label in
                                                                                                                                               General Plan
Fig. LU-   Adopted Specific Plan        Location                                    Description/Objectives                                                  Acres
                                                                                                                                                Land Uses
    3
#286     Winchester 1800          Northern portion of     To provide a well-planned residential community with supporting commercial LM, M, H, CC,          1,503
                                  Sphere of Influence     uses, recreation and public facilities. Neighborhoods are to be linked to           PI, OS
                                                          schools, recreation and commercial uses by a trail system. A range of housing
                                                          types is to be provided, and development should be sensitive to adjacent rural
                                                          residential areas and Lake Skinner.
#284     Quinta Do Lago           Adjacent to             To provide a balanced community complementing adjacent Specific Plan                LM, M, H, CC,  480
#106     Dutch Village            Winchester 1800 SP, Areas, a range of residential densities (with higher densities adjacent to              PI, OS         654
                                  bordering Winchester commercial areas), provision of transit facilities as appropriate along
                                  Road.                   Winchester Road, open space/trail links from residential to non-residential
                                                          uses, restricted strip commercial development along Winchester Road, and
                                                          parks and recreation facilities designed to serve the community. Must be
                                                          compatible with the French Valley Airport.
#265     Borel Airpark            Surrounding the         To provide a range of industrial, manufacturing and warehousing activities, PO, IP, OS             763
                                  French Valley Airport, attracting uses that are complementary or related to the airport. Development
                                  adjacent to Winchester of a commercial node to serve business and adjacent residential rather than
                                  Road                    strip commercial along Winchester Road. Trails/walkways linking businesses
                                                          to the open space system and recreation amenities, and potential development
                                                          of commercial recreation/entertainment centers to serve surrounding
                                                          communities.
#238     Crown Valley Village     East of the French      To buffer adjacent rural land uses, provide trails to recreation facilities on site LM, PI, OS     163
                                  Valley Airport          and adjacent open space areas, and quality housing design.
Planning Area
#313     Morgan Hill              West of Anza Road       To provide additional housing opportunities.                                        LM, PI, OS     474
                                  and northwest of
                                  Monte Verde Road,
                                  southeast of the City
                      C    I  T Y  O    F       T   E   M    E   C     U   L    A       G    E    N   E   R    A    L      P     L    A    N
                                                                          LU-31
                 Future Specific Plan Areas – The Land Use Plan provides a
                 guideline for future Specific Plan areas in terms of the recommended
                 land use and circulation pattern, maximum density and intensity of
                 development, desired mix of uses and other factors. Future
                 proposals for these Specific Plan areas are expected to include a land
                 use plan that is consistent with the goals and policies of the General
                 Plan. The Development Code contains requirements for the content
                 and processing procedure for Specific Plans.             The Planned
                 Development Overlay and Village Center Plan processes, detailed in
                 the Development Code, may also be used to satisfy Specific Plan
                 requirements for development within these areas. Table LU-5
                 provides additional direction concerning future Specific Plan areas.
  ENCOURAGING    As part of the General Plan process, community members decided
      MIXED USE  that Temecula should encourage mixed commercial, office, and
                 residential development projects at key locations surrounding the I-15
                 corridor. This approach complements and builds upon the village
                 center development strategy employed in Temecula throughout the
                 last decade, where concentrations and mixtures of compatible retail,
                 office, public facilities, open space and housing are encouraged at
                 activity nodes located throughout the City. Most of the village
                 centers proposed by the City have either been developed or are the
                 subject of approved Specific Plans and will be developed in the
                 future.
                 The Land Use Plan addresses infill residential and commercial
                 development within the City of Temecula through designation of
                 three Mixed Use Overlay Areas, shown on Figure LU-5, and listed in
                 Table LU-6. These areas, located within the City’s Redevelopment
                 Project Area and generally surrounding the I-15 corridor, are
                 characterized either by aging commercial centers, traditional
                 commercial development, or vacant/underutilized land.             They
                 provide opportunities for creative mixed reuse as commercial,
                 residential, office, or employment centers. Such reuse has become
                 popular among developers and residents alike in recent years.
                 Notable examples of this style of development have recently been
                 constructed throughout California.
C I T Y   O  F  T   E  M   E   C   U   L  A    G   E  N   E   R  A  L     P   L A   N
                                      LU-32

                                                                       TABLE LU-5
                                                           FUTURE SPECIFIC PLAN AREAS
Label in
                                                                                                                                               General Plan
Fig. LU-     Future Specific Plan         Location                                     Description/ Objectives                                               Acres
                                                                                                                                                Land Uses
    3
Sphere of Influence
Y         Specific Plan Area Y      Northeast corner of     To provide a mix of residential uses and housing types surrounding a village LM, M, CC            40
                                    Butterfield Stage Road  center; with convenient walkways/trails linking residential and commercial
                                    and 79 South            areas.
Z         Specific Plan Area Z      Along SR-79 South,      To achieve comprehensively planned mixed-use developments with                    PO, CC, LM, M,  40
                                    between Jedediah        compatible/complementary mixtures of office, support commercial,                  OS
                                    Smith Road and          residential, and services. Projects adjacent to single family residences shall be
                                    Margarita Road.         limited in height to one or two stories and shall be designed to be compatible
                                                            with surrounding residential. Projects should take advantage of the unique
                                                            opportunity to incorporate open space into the design, scale, and orientation
                                                            of development. Compatibility with surrounding neighborhoods may require
                                                            additional buffering, other measures, or use restrictions necessary to protect
                                                            these areas.
AA        Future Specific Plan AA   Temecula Creek Inn      Resort related activities do not require a specific plan. Resort related uses     OS, Recreation  305
                                                            include a golf course, hotel rooms, fractional ownership units, day spa,          Commercial
                                                            restaurant, conference center and ballroom. Any use of the site for residential, Overlay
                                                            non-resort related, or non-open space related activities will require approval of
                                                            a specific plan and a general plan amendment.
                        C    I  T Y  O    F       T    E  M    E   C     U   L   A       G     E   N    E   R     A   L       P   L   A    N
                                                                            LU-33
      Figure LU-5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Keller Rd
      Land Use Focus Areas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mc Colery Rd
      CITY OF TEMECULA GENERAL PLAN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Pat Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Specili Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Briggs Rd                                                                 Elliot Rd                                                                                                                                                                                              Judith St
      Legend                                                                                                                                                                Baxter Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jean N icho las Rd
                    !
                    (
                    1                               Mixed Use Overlay Areas                                                                                                                                         City of Murrieta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sphere of Influence                                                                       te
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                rR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   d                                                                                                                                                                    County of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Riverside
                    "
                    )                               Rural Preservation AreasLee Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         es
                    1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ch
                                                                                                                                                          Menifee Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Liberty Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Briggs Rd
                    #                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pourroy Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Leon Rd
                    *1                              Future Growth Area                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Thompson Rd
                                                    Temecula City Boundary
                                                    Sphere of Influence Boundary                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Benton Rd
                                                    Planning Area                                                                                                                                                                                  }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ÿ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Skinner
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Auld Rd
      Source: Temecula GIS and Cotton/Bridges/Associates
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Maddalena Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Pourroy Rd
                                                                                                                                                           Cal le De Amor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Leon Rd        Allen Rd
                                                                                                                Wh
                                                                                                                  it
                                                                                                                    ew
                                                                                                                          d Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Rd
                                                                                                                        oo                                                                                                                                                                                                                 oy
                                                                                                                                                                            Hun ter Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Borel Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  u   rr
                                          Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Po
                                                                           Ø
                                                                           "
                                                                                                                   Dr                                                                                                                                                                       Pr o m o
      Ø                                                                    #
                                          os
      "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    n
      #
                                      m                                                          r ri       e ta
                                Ala                                                           Mu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Dr                                                                            to    ry            Pk y
                            s
                         Lo                                                      Al
                                                                                          a                                                                                                                           y on
                                                                                   t
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ca n
                                                                                                                                                                                                            S ky
                                                                                    M u rr ie t a
                                                                                                            Ho t                  d
                                                                                                                        Springs R                                                                                                                                                           Mu rrieta Hot Springs Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Buck Rd
                         City of
                        Murrieta                                                    Ja                                                                                                           W
                                                                                                                                                                                                     y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                      ck                                                                                                    re                                                          ve                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *1
                                                                                           n                                                                                            i                                                          sA                                                                              d
                                                                                         so                                                                                          na                                                l ow                                                                                  ola
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                sR                                                                                                                                                                                                          a
                                                                                                                                                                                Bo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Butterfield Stage Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          en d
                                                                                                Av   e                                                                                                                          W il                                                                            N ic                                                                                                                                      V in
                                                          M                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      oW                                                                      B er
                                                              ad                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      y
                                                                   is on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                la       s Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                       C
               St                                                           Av                                                                                                                                                            Nic o
          va                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          al le
                                                                                e
     ua
 G                              W                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Vista D e           Rd
                                 as                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 l Mo n te                                                                             C on
                                          t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 te n
                                    hi ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e                                                                                                                                                                                                 to
                                            on                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Via N ort
                                               Av                                                                                                                                                                              rte                                                                                                                                        L a S eren a W y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       No
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                    D                            e                                                                                                                              M
                    ou                                                                                                                                                          arg                        Via
                        gl
                                                                                                                                                                                 a r ita Rd
                        as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Rd
                         sA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rd                                                                                                                                                                                        r ni a
                              ve                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               l if o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              R ey                                                                                                                                                                                        Ca
                                                                                                                                             Yn                                                                                                                        De                           y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              n   ch o
                                                                                                                                                 z
                                                                                                                                                 e                                                                                                                       l                     W                                                                                                                                                           Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                a               M
                                                                                                                                                     Rd                                                                                                                                    en
                                                                           St                                                                                                                                                                                                  Se r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            La                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Dr
                                                                     ry                                                             f                                                                                                                                                                                        do                                                                                                                                                 Pla y a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ra De
                                                                                                                                 Je
                                                            er                                                                      rs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Mad e
                                                          Ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               s
                                                                                                                                  fe                                                                                                                                                                                               Pk
                                                                                                                                        on                                                                                                                                                                                            y
                                                                                                                                                                              (
                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                         Av
                                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rd
                                                                                                                                             e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Rd
                                                                                                                   1                                                                                                          it a
                                                                                                             d
                                                                                                           rR                                                                                                          ar                                                                                                          Rd                                                                                                                                         ba
                                                                                                     te                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ia                                                                                                                                      Pau
                                                                                                   es
                                                                                                                                                                                                           arg                                                                                                        rn
                                                                                              ch                                                                                                           M                                                                                                   li   fo
                                                                                         in                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                     W                                            Di                                                                                                                                                               h
                                                                                                                                   az                                                                                                                                                           nc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ra
                                                                                                                                        Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         L ind a R
                                            Ra                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              o
                                               nc
                                                 ho                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 se   a Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ca
                                                    Ca                                                                                                                                 Yn                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ll e
                                                      lif
                                                                                                                                                                                          e                       h o V ista R                                                                                                              Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                 z          R a nc                                                                                                                   ba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Bu t t e r
                                                        or                                                                                                                                                                     d                                                                                              Pa u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    C on t en to
                                                           ni                                                                                                                                        Rd
                                 ida D el O ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Me ado w s P k y
                             ve n
                                                               a                                                                                                  d
                         A                                         Rd                                                                                                 R
                                                                                                                                            l if o r   ni a
                                                                                                                             Ra n c h o C a                                                                                                                                                         M                                                                                                                           fie l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ga                                                                                                                                 Sta                                                                      De Portola Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ar                                                                                                                                         ge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            r it a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             d                                                                                                                                                                                                       Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          oR                                                                    Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  t   ia g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              San
                                                                                                                                                              (
                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                              3                                                       ez                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        A nz
                                                                                              Via Sant                                                                                                    Va l
                                                                                                                                                                                                           lej
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Yn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 a R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     d     }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ÿ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           79
                                                                                                 a Ro sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                               o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Av                                                                 la
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         D e P o rt o                                                                                                                                                      Pky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                an
                                      an c
                                           a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             il R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Va
                                    B arr
                                 Via
                                                                  Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               aL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 i nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            aR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               d                                                                                                                                                                                                                     )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Rd
                                                         V ia V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          a
                                                               a q ue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       k Pk y                                                                          nz
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     aw                                                                            A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            dh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Rd
                                                                      ro                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ll e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Va
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Pechanga                                                                             lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     w
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ø
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Entertainment
                                                                                                                                                                                                               "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ol
                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          d                                                         Sp                                                                           rH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      nR                                                              ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Center                                                             ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            a                                                                D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     yo                                                                         Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              wC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          bo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Û
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     in
 µ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      c han g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pe
                                                    0                                               5,000                                        10,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             k way
                                                                                                                                                     Feet                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              a P ar
                                                                                                                                                      Miles
                                                    0                                                            1                                                          2
C I T Y                                                                         O F                                                     T E M E C U L A                                                                                                                                                                                 G E N E R A L                                                                                                                                                                                           P L A N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LU-34

             BACKGROUND
             Mixed use in Temecula is a long-range planning concept. In some
             cases, residential units would be added within shopping centers and
             districts. In other cases, new mixed use projects would be
             constructed. In either case, residential units may be introduced and
             development intensity will likely increase from current conditions.
             Permitted uses are defined using
             the underlying land use
             designation for non-residential
             uses. An additional residential
             component is also required for
             projects within the Mixed Use
             Overlay Areas. As an example,
             in an area with a Community
             Commercial base designation
             and a Mixed Use Overlay, such as Town Center/Tower Plaza, the
             Community Commercial designation establishes the permitted uses:
             retail, professional offices, and service-oriented businesses. The
             Mixed Use overlay adds residential as a permitted use, and increases
             the maximum and target FARs that apply to the site, pending
             approval of a Development Plan.
             As shown in Table LU-6, each Mixed Use Overlay Area has different
             density and intensity standards, responding directly to the available
             capacity of the surrounding roadway system. For each area, a daily
             trip cap is defined, expressing the maximum number of daily trips
             permitted. Within the daily trip cap for each area, flexible, high-
             quality design and creative mixes of adjacent uses are encouraged,
             consistent with the ranges expressed in Table LU-5. Development
             project proposals that exceed the specified trip caps shall not be
             approved.
C I T Y O F T   E   M  E  C   U   L  A     G   E   N  E   R A   L     P  L   A  N
                                 LU-35
                                                        TABLE LU-6
                                             MIXED USE OVERLAY AREAS
             Mixed Use Overlay Areas                                           Development Capacity
                                                                                                            Daily Trip
                                                                                        Non-Residential
      Name                        Location                   Residential Units1                                  Cap
                                                                                         Square Feet2
                                                                                                               (ADT)
                       Along Jefferson Avenue,
                       north of Las Haciendas Street
1. Jefferson
                       and south of the shopping                   411-822              670,000-900,000        15,000
   Avenue
                       area located at Jefferson
                       Avenue and Winchester Road.
2. Town                North of intersection of
Center/Tower           Rancho California Road and                 668-1,3373          1,090,000-1,460,000      30,000
Plaza                  Ynez Road.
                       Service Commercial areas on
3. South of
                       Front Street south of Santiago               94-189              160,000-210,000         6,000
   Old Town
                       Road
1. Residential range based on 20%-40% residential use of site at 28 units per net acre.
2. Non-residential range based on 60%-80% non-residential use of site at 0.35:1 FAR.
3. Senior housing is strongly encouraged as a part of the residential component of the Town Center/Tower Plaza site.
                                     Mixed use areas and village centers will also be linked via multi-use
                                     trails, and regional and local transit service. The City will work with
                                     regional planning agencies to ensure that mixed use areas are linked
                                     to any future commuter or high speed rail service connecting
                                     Temecula to other parts of the region.
               PRESERVING            Rural areas within the planning area are of special economic and
            RURAL AREAS              aesthetic importance to the City. Community members have
                                     considered future land use options within three Rural Preservation
                                     Areas, and have expressed a desire to keep these areas rural. Rural
                                     Preservation Areas are identified in Figure LU-5, and listed in Table
                                     LU-7.
      C   I  T Y         O   F     T    E   M   E   C    U    L  A       G   E   N    E  R   A  L      P  L A    N
                                                             LU-36
                                                    TABLE LU-7
                                        RURAL PRESERVATION AREAS
            Rural Preservation Areas
                                                                                  Objectives
    Name                      Location
1. Nicolas       Large lot, low density residential    Promote continued rural development of large lot, Very
   Valley        area located in the northeast         Low density residential units, provision of rural
                 corner of the City.                   infrastructure services, and conservation of open space
                                                       surrounding Santa Gertrudis Creek.
2. Temecula      West of Anza Road, north of           Recognize the important role that wineries and agriculture
   Wine          SR-79 South, east of the current      play in the history and future success of Temecula by
   Country       City boundary, and south of           designating a large portion of the area Vineyards/
                 Vista Del Monte Road.                 Agriculture, and promoting only Rural and Very Low
                                                       density residential development that is compatible with these
                                                       uses.
3. South Anza    Adjacent to Morgan Hill, east of      Preserve rural residential densities in the area surrounding
   Road          Anza Road, south of SR-79, and        the Morgan Hill Specific Plan by promoting only Rural
   @ SR-79       southeast of Monte Verde Road.        density residential development, supplemented by open
                                                       space buffers and greenways defining the urban edge of
                                                       Temecula.
                                  Two of the three Rural Preservation Areas are located outside the
                                  current City boundary, under the jurisdiction of the County of
                                  Riverside. Future uses for these areas are also proposed in the
                                  Southwest Area Plan (SWAP), a component of the Riverside County
                                  Integrated Project (RCIP). Interagency coordination and monitoring
                                  of County development plans in these areas is essential to the
                                  preservation of rural character development.
                                                        Each of these areas is characterized by rural
                                                        development. Public services and utilities are
                                                        present in some areas, but are not built to support
                                                        urban levels of service. Residents within many of
                                                        these areas have grown accustomed to a rural
                                                        lifestyle, and have in the past expressed an interest
                                                        in the areas remaining rural. The City will
                                                        encourage developers to provide open space or
                                                        landscaped buffers between rural residential and
                                                        agricultural areas, and will limit the number and
                                                        size of accessory structures on large lots to
                                                        enhance the rural character of these areas.
     C    I T Y       O   F     T    E  M    E  C    U    L   A     G   E   N    E  R   A    L     P   L   A  N
                                                         LU-37
                 The Nicolas Valley area, located within the current City boundary,
                 was the subject of a recent special planning study which concluded
                 that rural residential land uses was the desired plan for the area.
                 Another area to the east of Temecula contains many of the wineries
                 and agricultural properties located along Rancho California Road. In
                 this area, the goal of rural preservation is to ensure that urban uses do
                 not encroach on winery operations and that residential property
                 densities remain rural.
                 The rural preservation area located southeast of the City represents
                 an area where urban growth could expand and create additional land
                 use conflicts and infrastructure problems.
      MANAGING   Over the last decade, Temecula and western Riverside County have
FUTURE GROWTH    grown at a significant rate. Understanding that growth will occur in
                 the future, directing how and where growth will occur is important,
                 as it will have a great impact on the quality of life and economic well-
                 being of the community. To prepare for population increases in the
                 next 20 years, Temecula will direct growth into the French Valley
                 Future Growth Area (see Figure LU-5). By concentrating growth
                 here, the City hopes to improve traffic and circulation conditions,
                 avoid developing more land than necessary at urban densities, and
                 meet urban infrastructure needs (i.e. roads, park, police and fire, etc.).
                 Developing and promoting a land use plan for the French Valley area
                 expresses the City’s planning objectives and recognizes that how this
                 area develops in the future, has a direct impact on quality of life in
                 Temecula. In the future the City will attempt to convert previously
                 approved unplanned urban uses into a functional high quality urban
                 area. This area is currently under the jurisdiction of the County of
                 Riverside but is within Temecula’s sphere of influence, meaning that
                 the City must be consulted regarding proposed development projects.
                 Approved Specific Plans covering most of the Future Growth Area
                 (see Figure LU-4) determine the future land uses.
     PRESERVING  Temecula is composed largely of single-family residential
    RESIDENTIAL  neighborhoods. These neighborhoods are the building blocks upon
                 which the quality of life enjoyed by all Temecula residents is based.
NEIGHBORHOODS    Preserving the desirable characteristics of quiet, calm, safe, family-
                 oriented neighborhoods is a high priority for the City.
                 The City will consider the compatibility of future development
                 projects on surrounding residential neighborhoods in the
                 development review process, including analysis of projects under the
C I T Y    O F  T   E  M    E  C   U   L  A      G   E  N   E   R  A   L     P  L  A  N
                                      LU-38

                                California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). Additionally, traffic
                                impact reports are required for major development projects to
                                identify mitigation measures that ensure adverse traffic impacts of
                                major development projects in residential neighborhoods are
                                minimized.
               NATURAL          Land use decisions in Temecula also must consider the natural
    RESOURCES AND               conditions and resources present in the planning area, as well as the
                                valuable hillside and scenic resources present in the community.
           COMMUNITY            These issues are addressed in detail in the Open Space/Conservation
            AESTHETICS          Element of the General Plan, but they merit attention from a land use
                                policy perspective as well.
                                The City will preserve the quality of hillsides and reduce potential
                                hazards associated with hillside development by incorporating hillside
                                development standards within the Development Code. The Land
                                Use Policy Map identifies potential areas where hillside standards are
                                appropriate using the Hillside Residential land use designation.
                                Temecula will promote use of alternative flood control techniques,
                                such as construction of soft-bottom channels, to reduce the capital
                                and maintenance costs of providing adequate flood control services.
                                This has the added potential benefit of improving the quality of open
                                space resources along Santa Gertrudis, Murrieta and Temecula Creeks
                                and the Santa Margarita River. The City will coordinate with the
                                County of Riverside to ensure that alternative means of flood control
                                are employed within unincorporated portions of the planning area,
                                when feasible.
PLANS IN ACTION                 Urban development can affect the environment in many ways,
Temecula reserves the natural   including water quality, which can be impacted by pollutants from
resources of creeks through     urban runoff. Pollutants such as heavy metals, petroleum products,
adoption of appropriate         animal waste and trash can be carried through the storm drain system
residential densities in areas  into receiving waters, such as Santa Gertrudis, Murrieta, and
surrounding the creeks, and     Temecula Creeks, and into the Santa Margarita River. These
conservation site planning to   pollutants affect the beneficial uses of these receiving waters
maximize open space areas
                                including recreation, aesthetic enjoyment and preservation of fish and
surrounding the creeks.
                                wildlife habitat. To address this problem, the federal Clean Water
                                Act was amended in 1987 to include the National Pollutant Discharge
                                and Elimination System (NPDES) permit. This permit, implemented
                                within the Santa Margarita River watershed by the San Diego
                                Regional Water Quality Control Board (SDRWQCB) requires
                                Temecula to enforce requirements reducing polluted runoff during all
                                phases of development. The City will continue to implement the
                                most recent provisions adopted and mandated by the SDRWQCB.
 C    I   T Y         O   F    T   E  M   E  C   U  L   A     G   E  N   E   R  A  L     P   L  A N
                                                   LU-39
                                  The City will continue to participate in multiple-species habitat
                                  conservation planning efforts in western Riverside County, and will
                                  ensure that City land use policy and decisions are consistent with the
                                  recommendations of adopted habitat plans. Further detail regarding
                                  multi-species habitat planning can be found in the Open
                                  Space/Conservation Element.
             OLD TOWN                                                  Old Town Temecula continues to
               TEMECULA                                                be a strong identification point
                                                                       for the City. This historic area is
                                                                       an attractive destination, located
                                                                       immediately adjacent to I-15,
                                                                       where visitors to the region can
                                                                       shop, dine, or attend a talk,
                                                                       program or tour of the area
                                  offered by the Temecula Valley Historical Museum. A recent Specific
                                  Plan was adopted for Old Town, providing a detailed land use plan
                                  and development standards for the area. Implementation of the
                                  Specific Plan is resulting in successful restoration of older buildings,
                                  streetscape improvements, and integration of civic uses, such as the
                                  Post Office and Historical Museum with other commercial,
                                  administrative/professional and residential uses. The City desires to
                                  ensure that Old Town remains a focal point for social, cultural, civic,
                                  tourist and economic development activities. The Old Town Specific
                                  Plan and the City’s Redevelopment Plan provide effective tools to
                                  achieve these purposes.
PLANS IN ACTION                   The City will continue to implement the Old Town Specific Plan and
The Old Town Specific Plan        will modify or amend it as needed to respond to development trends
requires              historical  in the area. Implementation of the Westside Specific Plan and
architectural       treatments,   potential Mixed Use development in the South of Old Town area can
preservation and reuse of         also encourage economic growth within Old Town by expanding
historic     buildings,     and   residential opportunities and creating a nighttime population on the
adequate parking, and             west side of I-15.
ensures that development in
Old Town is consistent with
the goals and policies of the
General Plan. The future
creek-side trail network will
help connect Old Town with
the rest of the community.
 C     I   T Y         O   F     T   E  M   E  C   U  L   A     G   E  N   E   R  A   L    P   L  A   N
                                                     LU-40

  TEMECULA’S ROLE             Temecula makes substantial contributions to the southern California
            WITHIN THE        economy and affordable housing market, and is subject to more than
                              its share of regional development impacts in terms of air quality,
                REGION        traffic, and natural resource conservation. Proactive participation in
                              regional planning activities is the best way to ensure that positive
                              benefits result for City residents and businesses. The City will
                              continue to coordinate planning decisions with the actions of
                              surrounding jurisdictions, including the City of Murrieta, and the
                              counties of Riverside and San Diego. Specifically, the City will
                              participate in regional planning efforts for open spaces, multi-use
                              trails, multi-species habitat conservation, air quality reduction, water
                              quality improvement, watershed planning, and statewide and regional
                              transit efforts.
PLANS IN ACTION               The French Valley Airport is located north of the City, just east of
The City participates in the  Winchester Road. A Master Plan has been adopted for the airport, as
development review process    well as a County Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan (ALUCP).
with the Airport Land Use     Following annexations of areas within the area of influence, the City
Commission regarding future   will create an Airport Overlay Zoning District for newly-annexed
land uses within the French   parcels within the Area of Influence.
Valley Airport area of
influence.
                              GOALS AND POLICIES
                              Preserving the high quality of life that has attracted so many residents
                              and businesses to Temecula over the years is the primary purpose of
                              the General Plan. The following goals and policies are designed to
                              achieve this objective by addressing eight major issues facing the City:
                              1) encouraging diverse, high-quality land uses, 2) encouraging mixed
                              use development in limited corridors surrounding I-15, 3) preserving
                              the characteristics of rural and historical areas within the City and
                              Planning Area, 4) carefully managing future growth in the French
                              Valley area, 5) preserving the character and value of single-family
                              neighborhoods, 6) conserving natural resources and improving the
                              visual appeal of Temecula, 7) defining the role of Old Town
                              Temecula relative to the rest of the City, and 8) ensuring City
                              interests are achieved by major regional land use and circulation
                              policy.
       DIVERSE LAND           A well-balanced community provides a broad range of planned land
                     USES     uses in desirable patterns and intensities. By providing for a diverse
                              mix of land uses, the City can achieve a suitable inventory of housing
                              for a range of income groups, a viable commercial and employment
                              base for residents and surrounding communities, ample open space
                              and recreational opportunities, adequate public facilities and services,
 C    I    T Y      O   F    T   E   M   E  C  U    L  A     G   E  N   E  R    A  L    P  L   A  N
                                                   LU-41

             and high-quality urban and rural lifestyles for residents and visitors to
             enjoy.
             Goal 1         A diverse and integrated mix of residential,
                            commercial, industrial, recreational, public and
                            open space land uses.
             Policy 1.1     Review all proposed development plans for
                            consistency with community goals, policies and
                            implementation programs of this General Plan, and
                            consider potential impacts on surrounding land uses
                            and infrastructure.
             Policy 1.2     Promote the use of innovative site planning
                            techniques that contribute to development of a variety
                            of residential product styles and designs, including
                            housing suitable for the community's labor force.
             Policy 1.3     Require development of unified or clustered
                            community-level and neighborhood-level commercial
                            centers and discourage development of strip
                            commercial uses.
             Policy 1.4     Support development of light industrial, clean
                            manufacturing, technology, biomedical, research and
                            development, and office uses to diversify Temecula's
                            economic base.
             Policy 1.5     Require the preparation of specific plans as designated
                            on the Specific Plan Areas map to achieve the
                            comprehensive planning and phasing of development
                            and infrastructure.
             Policy 1.6     Encourage flexible zoning techniques in appropriate
                            locations to encourage mixed use development,
                            preserve natural features, achieve innovative site
                            design, achieve a range of transition of densities,
                            provide open space and recreation facilities, and/or
                            provide necessary amenities and facilities.
             Policy 1.7     Pursue opportunities to locate higher density housing
                            with supporting commercial and public uses west of
                            I-15.
C I T Y O F T  E  M    E C   U   L  A     G   E   N   E   R   A  L     P  L   A   N
                                LU-42
                 Policy 1.8       Encourage future development of a community
                                  hospital and related services, as well as a community
                                  college, major college or university.
                 Policy 1.9       Establish paseos, greenbelts, linear parks and trails
                                  within buffer areas between developments and at the
                                  City’s edge.
                 Policy 1.10      Distribute high density housing throughout the
                                  community around transit nodes.
  ENCOURAGING    As Temecula begins to age, development opportunities are emerging
      MIXED USE  within older commercial corridors on both sides of I-15. These areas
                 provide opportunities for creative reuse as commercial, residential,
                 office, employment/technology, or mixed use centers. Three Mixed
                 Use Overlay Areas are identified in the Land Use Plan: Jefferson
                 Avenue, Town Center/Tower Plaza, and south of Old Town. Future
                 development options for these areas are directly tied to potential
                 vehicular traffic impacts, ability of current infrastructure to serve the
                 areas, high-quality pedestrian-oriented design, and full integration of
                 alternative transportation modes. Successful completion of high-
                 quality mixed use projects in Temecula will assist the City in
                 accomplishing multiple housing, circulation, and land use objectives.
                 Goal 2           Successful, high-quality mixed use development
                                  projects containing a mix of residential,
                                  commercial/office, and civic land uses,
                                  supported by alternative modes of transportation.
                 Policy 2.1       Encourage development of mixed use projects to
                                  revitalize older commercial and industrial areas or to
                                  create village centers, provided that adequate capacity
                                  is available on the roadway system to support such
                                  projects.
                 Policy 2.2       Require mixed use projects proposed within Mixed
                                  Use Overlay Areas to include a residential
                                  component, to contain a mixture of compatible uses,
                                  and to provide necessary supporting public and
                                  community facilities.
                 Policy 2.3       Require preparation of a detailed plan and a traffic
                                  study for all proposed mixed use projects within
                                  Mixed Use Overlay Areas.
C I T Y   O  F  T   E  M   E  C    U   L   A     G  E   N   E  R  A   L     P  L   A  N
                                      LU-43

                  Policy 2.4       Link mixed use projects and village centers with trails
                                   and potential transit systems, including RTA bus,
                                   shuttles and commuter/high speed rail.
                  Policy 2.5       Ensure that the architecture, landscape design, and
                                   site planning of mixed use projects is of the highest
                                   quality, emphasizing a pedestrian scale and safe and
                                   convenient access between uses.
                  Policy 2.6       Ensure adequate public gathering areas or plazas are
                                   incorporated within mixed use projects to allow for
                                   social interaction and community activities.
      PRESERVING  Large lot and rural residential/agricultural areas in the community
    RURAL AREAS   represent lifestyle and open space characteristics of Temecula that
                  many residents want to maintain. Three of these areas, located at the
                  periphery of the City, are designated as Rural Preservation Areas in
                  the Land Use Plan: Nicolas Valley, and the winery and agricultural
                  properties east of Temecula. At these locations, rural residential, light
                  agricultural, and vineyard uses will be preserved. Historical resources
                  in the community, including Old Town Temecula and the Butterfield
                  Stage Stop along SR-79 South, are also valued and should be
                  preserved. Future project approvals within or adjacent to Rural
                  Preservation Areas and historical areas will affect the long-term
                  integrity of both resources.
                  Goal 3           A City of diversified development character,
                                   where rural and historical areas are protected and
                                   co-exist with newer urban development.
                  Policy 3.1       Provide physical and visual buffer areas to create a
                                   transition between rural residential and agricultural
                                   areas and commercial, industrial and other higher
                                   density residential development.
                  Policy 3.2       Apply rural development standards within Rural
                                   Preservation Areas to maintain the rural character of
                                   those areas.
                  Policy 3.3       Limit the number and size of additional structures on
                                   large lots to preserve the character of low density
                                   areas.
C I  T Y    O F  T   E  M   E   C   U   L  A      G   E  N  E  R  A  L      P   L A    N
                                       LU-44
               Policy 3.4      Define the rural and historical areas of the community
                               to be conserved, and establish a procedure for adding
                               areas or altering boundaries as necessary.
               Policy 3.5      Discourage the extension of urban infrastructure into
                               Rural Preservation Areas, except in cases where
                               required to protect public health, safety, and welfare.
     MANAGING  Unincorporated areas in the City's northern Sphere of Influence are
FUTURE GROWTH  largely proposed for development through specific plans under the
               jurisdiction of Riverside County. Temecula has an opportunity to
               control land uses, phasing of development, project design, and
               infrastructure improvements by annexing these properties prior to
               project approval by the County. To achieve these purposes, the City
               has developed a land use plan for the French Valley area (shown on
               the Land Use Policy Map), and has designated this area as a Future
               Growth Area. The intent of these steps is to ensure that future
               annexations are beneficial additions to the City, and to minimize
               impacts of future development in the area on City roads and
               infrastructure.
               Goal 4          Orderly annexation and development of
                               unincorporated areas within Temecula's Sphere
                               of Influence.
               Policy 4.1      Annex lands to the City that can be developed in
                               accordance with the General Plan and can be
                               adequately served by public facilities and utility
                               services.
               Policy 4.2      Evaluate proposed annexations using City Fiscal
                               Impact and Traffic Impact Models.
               Policy 4.3      Evaluate the land use pattern and intensity/density of
                               proposed annexations in terms of:
                               •   Links to open space and trails from adjacent
                                   developments.
                               •   Compatibility of the annexation to adjacent uses
                                   in the City.
                               •   Demonstrated needs for additional housing,
                                   industrial, commercial and other uses.
C I T Y  O F  T   E  M    E C   U   L  A      G   E N   E  R   A   L      P  L A   N
                                  LU-45

                 Policy 4.4      Create distinctive open space and other areas around
                                 the City to prevent urban sprawl.
                 Policy 4.5      Influence and limit impacts on the City of
                                 development occurring beyond the Sphere of
                                 Influence.
                 Policy 4.6      Continue to interact and develop strong working
                                 relationships and effective inter-governmental review
                                 procedures with entities such as the Pechanga Band,
                                 City of Murrieta, and County of Riverside.
     PRESERVING  The predominant land use in Temecula is the single-family detached
    RESIDENTIAL  home, ranging from two to eight dwelling units per acre. Many
                 neighborhoods exhibit distinguishable character in terms of design,
NEIGHBORHOODS    landscaping, and hardscape improvements. Future residential and
                 non-residential development should be compatible with the natural
                 features of the site and the adjacent uses, so that the character and
                 value of Temecula’s single-family residential areas are maintained.
                 Goal 5          A land use pattern that protects and enhances
                                 residential neighborhoods.
                 Policy 5.1      Consider the compatibility of proposed projects on
                                 surrounding uses in terms of the size and
                                 configuration of buildings, use of materials and
                                 landscaping, preservation of existing vegetation and
                                 landform, the location of access routes, noise impacts,
                                 traffic impacts, and other environmental conditions.
                 Policy 5.2      Require parcels developed for commercial or
                                 industrial uses to incorporate buffers that minimize
                                 the impacts of noise, light, visibility of activity and
                                 vehicular traffic on surrounding residential uses.
                 Policy 5.3      Require proposed development to evaluate the
                                 incremental traffic impacts on local roads throughout
                                 the proposed project phasing in order to ensure that
                                 any adverse impacts to local roads in residential areas
                                 are avoided or adequately mitigated.
C I T Y    O F  T   E  M   E  C   U   L   A    G    E  N   E R   A   L    P   L  A   N
                                     LU-46

       NATURAL   Temecula is rich in high-quality, diverse biological resources.
 RESOURCES AND   Furthermore, the hillsides in the southeastern portion of the planning
                 area form an aesthetic backdrop for the community.
    COMMUNITY
     AESTHETICS  Goal 6           A development pattern that preserves aesthetics
                                  and enhances the environmental resources of the
                                  Planning Area.
                 Policy 6.1       Preserve the natural aesthetic quality of hillsides and
                                  reduce hazards associated with hillside development
                                  within the Planning Area.
                 Policy 6.2       Whenever possible, use alternative flood control
                                  techniques to reduce capital and maintenance costs
                                  and provide recreational and open space
                                  opportunities.
                 Policy 6.3       Conserve the natural resources of area watercourses,
                                  including Santa Gertrudis, Temecula and Murrieta
                                  Creeks, through appropriate development densities,
                                  managing stormwater runoff, and conservation site
                                  planning.
                 Policy 6.4       Protect and enhance significant ecological and
                                  biological resources within and surrounding
                                  Temecula.
                 Policy 6.5       Create distinctive features at entry points to the City
                                  that     emphasize     Temecula’s       aesthetic    and
                                  environmental setting.
     OLD TOWN    Old Town Temecula came into being in the 1880’s as a stop on the
      TEMECULA   first railroad line to San Diego. Old Town represents the largest
                 concentration of historic buildings within the community. The City
                 adopted the Old Town Specific Plan in 1994 to preserve and enhance
                 this historic district. The primary goal of the Specific Plan is to create
                 a dynamic "Old Town" commercial and residential core that is
                 attractive and of high quality, respectful of its historic buildings and
                 unifying design theme and providing an economically viable setting
                 for a mixture of local and tourist commercial uses,
                 administrative/professional and residential uses with safe, efficient
                 circulation and access. Policies and programs for Old Town are
                 included in the General Plan as well, to emphasize the importance of
                 this area within the City, and to establish the area’s role in Temecula’s
                 future.
C I T Y   O  F  T   E  M    E  C   U    L A     G   E  N   E   R  A   L      P  L   A  N
                                      LU-47

                 Goal 7         A viable, high-quality Old Town Temecula area
                                that enhances the City economically, preserves
                                historic structures, and provides civic, cultural,
                                shopping, and meeting and gathering places for
                                tourists and residents.
                 Policy 7.1     Encourage revitalization of Old Town through
                                implementation of the Old Town Specific Plan.
                 Policy 7.2     Require preservation and reuse of historic buildings in
                                and around the Old Town area.
                 Policy 7.3     Consider locating additional civic, public and cultural
                                facilities in and around the Old Town area.
                 Policy 7.4     Provide infill residential development incentives
                                throughout Old Town.
TEMECULA’S ROLE  Temecula is a regional leader known for high-quality commercial
     WITHIN THE  uses, a strong job base, and high-quality residential development.
                 Land use decisions the City makes will have direct and indirect
        REGION   impacts on surrounding communities (and visa versa). Through
                 inter-governmental coordination, the City can properly address
                 regional land use issues, including compatibility with French Valley
                 Airport, the preservation of agricultural lands, and ensure positive
                 benefits for Temecula from regional land use and transportation
                 plans.
                 Goal 8         A City compatible and coordinated with regional
                                land use and transportation patterns.
                 Policy 8.1     Provide a pattern of land uses that maintains and
                                enhances the viability of neighboring communities
                                including the City of Murrieta, and the counties of
                                Riverside and San Diego, through compatible uses
                                and links.
                 Policy 8.2     Expand the City system of open space and coordinate
                                with regional open space uses to comprehensively
                                address the management of conservation resources.
C I T Y    O F  T   E  M   E C   U   L   A      G   E N   E  R  A  L     P  L  A   N
                                   LU-48

                    Policy 8.3      Ensure development projects within the French
                                    Valley Airport area of influence comply with the
                                    Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan (ALUCP) for
                                    the Airport, and refer all land use actions identified
                                    within the ALUCP to the Airport Land Use
                                    Commission for mandatory review.
                    Policy 8.4      Ensure that development proposals within the French
                                    Valley Airport area of influence fully comply with the
                                    permit procedures specific in Federal and State law,
                                    with the referral requirements of the Airport Land
                                    Use Commission (ALUC), and with the conditions of
                                    approval imposed or recommended by the Federal
                                    Aviation Administration and ALUC.                  This
                                    requirement is in addition to all other City
                                    development review requirements.
                    IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
                    This Implementation Program provides actions to implement the
                    adopted policies and plans of the Land Use Element.
              LU-1  Review implementation of the General Plan and Land Use Policy
 ANNUAL REVIEW      Map to identify the effect of land development and use on City
                    revenues and costs of providing public facilities and services, and to
OF GENERAL PLAN     ensure consistency is maintained between the General Plan and the
   AND LAND USE     Development Code. Ensure that City land use decisions are
       POLICY MAP   consistent with the policies of the Land Use Element, and the land
 IMPLEMENTATION     uses shown on the Land Use Policy Map.
                    Agency/Department:         Planning
                    Related Policies:          1.1, 1.3, 1.4, 1.7, 1.10
                    Required by General Plan EIR
             LU-2   To the extent possible, improve the balance between jobs and
     IMPROVE JOBS-  housing in Temecula through land use decisions. Acreage is
                    designated in the General Plan Land Use Element for development
          HOUSING   of commercial, light industrial, and business space that generates jobs.
          BALANCE   Work with property owners to propose innovative residential project
                    designs that provide affordable housing opportunities for all
                    segments of Temecula’s workforce.
C  I  T Y    O F   T  E   M   E C    U  L  A      G    E N    E  R    A L     P L   A   N
                                       LU-49

                    Agency/Department:          Planning
                    Related Policies:           1.2
             LU-3   Review and update the Development Code to ensure consistency
    DEVELOPMENT     with the General Plan and to help implement mixed use and rural
                    preservation recommendations of the Land Use Element.
    CODE UPDATE
                    Agency/Department:          Planning
                    Related Policies:           1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.6, 1.7, 1.9, 1.10, 2.1
                    Required by General Plan EIR
             LU-4   Continue to implement a site development permit process and use
           CEQA     the California Environmental Quality Act in the review of proposed
                    development projects to promote high quality in urban design and
COMPLIANCE AND      minimize detrimental impacts to surrounding land uses and
              SITE  community infrastructure.
    DEVELOPMENT
          REVIEW    Agency/Department:          Planning
                    Related Policies:           1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.6, 1.7, 5.1
                    Required by General Plan EIR
             LU-5   Continue to implement the procedures, requirements and contents of
   SPECIFIC PLANS   specific plans contained in the Development Code. Properties under
                    single ownership or multiple ownership which are generally over 100
     AND VILLAGE    acres will utilize the specific plan or village center plan as an
   CENTER PLANS     implementation tool. Private landowners or the City may undertake
                    the preparation or amendment of a specific plan, in accordance with
                    Government Code Section 65450.
                    Specific plans shall include the location of land uses; standards to
                    regulate height, bulk and setback limits; standards for constructing
                    proposed streets; standards for population density and building
                    intensity; standards for conservation and management of natural
                    resources; and implementation provisions to carry out the Open
                    Space/Conservation Element.
                    Agency/Department:          Planning
                    Related Policies:           1.5, 4.1, 4.3
                    Required by General Plan EIR
C I  T Y    O  F   T  E   M   E  C  U   L  A      G   E   N    E  R    A   L      P   L  A   N
                                       LU-50
            LU-6    Continue to implement the provisions for preparation of
    DEVELOPMENT     development Plans:
           PLANS    •   For all residential development (excluding individual single-family
                        homes), and all commercial and industrial developments.
                    •   For residential development projects (merchant built
                        subdivisions) for which a tentative tract or parcel map is or was
                        required.
                    •   When several permits or multiple applications are required for the
                        same project, a combined hearing and review process may be
                        permitted, however separate applications shall be filed for each
                        action requested.
                    Agency/Department:           Planning
                    Related Policies:            1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.6
            LU-7    Use development agreements to obtain additional public benefits to
    DEVELOPMENT     be provided from development projects.
     AGREEMENTS     Agency/Department:           Planning, City Manager, Public Works,
                                                 Community Services
                    Related Policies:            1.1, 1.6
            LU-8    Continue to explore opportunities to expand community facilities
         DESIRED    available to residents within the community. Desired future
                    community facilities include a hospital, library, community college,
      COMMUNITY     and major college or university.
        FACILITIES
                    Agency/Department:           Planning
                    Related Policy:              1.8
            LU-9    When possible as a condition of development approval:
 GREENBELTS AND
                    •   Require developers to provide paseos, greenbelts, linear parks and
    DEVELOPMENT         trails within buffers between adjacent developments, and at the
         BUFFERS        City’s edge.
                    •   Require landscaped buffers along roadways in front of residential
                        subdivision walls where feasible in light of noise and other
                        constraints.
C I  T Y   O   F   T  E   M   E  C   U   L  A      G   E   N    E  R    A L P   L  A   N
                                        LU-51

                    •   Create distinctive open space areas around the City to prevent
                        urban sprawl.
                    •   Require buffers between commercial or industrial uses and
                        adjacent single-family residential areas.
                    •   Require parcels developed for commercial or industrial uses to
                        incorporate buffers that minimize the impacts of noise, light,
                        visibility of activity and vehicular traffic on surrounding
                        residential uses.
                    Agency/Department:          Planning
                    Related Policy:             1.9, 3.1, 4.4, 5.2
            LU-10   Amend the Development Code to allow provisions for mixed use
       MIXED USE    development to specifically address required residential uses, land use
                    compatibility, roadway capacity, and other infrastructure issues
  OVERLAY AREAS     associated with mixed reuse of the identified aging commercial
                    centers.
                    Agency/Department:          Planning
                    Related Policies:           2.1, 2.3, 2.2, 2.6
             LU-11  Implement and update as necessary the City’s Redevelopment Plan to
 REDEVELOPMENT      establish consistency with the General Plan and amended
                    Development Code.
                    Agency/Department:          Redevelopment Agency
                    Related Policy:             2.1
                    Required by General Plan EIR
            LU-12   Amend the City-Wide Design Guidelines to incorporate design
       CITY-WIDE    recommendations and a review process for projects within Mixed
                    Use Overlay Areas. Design recommendations for mixed use projects
          DESIGN    are included in the Community Design Element.
      GUIDELINES
                    Agency/Department:          Planning
                    Related Policy:             2.5
C  I T Y    O  F   T  E   M   E   C  U   L  A     G   E   N    E  R A L     P   L   A  N
                                        LU-52

            LU-13  Implement the City’s Multi-Use Trails and Bikeways Master Plan to
 ACTIVITY CENTER   connect Mixed Use Overlay Areas and village centers with multi-use
                   trails. Continue to work with Riverside Transit Agency (RTA) to
            LINKS  establish local transit systems that link Mixed Use Overlay Areas and
                   village centers with residential areas, employment areas and
                   community facilities. Work with regional planning agencies to ensure
                   that the Mixed Use Overlay areas are linked to any future commuter
                   or high speed rail service connecting Temecula to other parts of the
                   region.
                   Agency/Department:           Planning, Public Works
                   Related Policies:            2.4
            LU-14  Establish a process to review and approve development projects
           RURAL   within Rural Preservation Areas, including a pre-zoning process for
                   such areas currently outside City jurisdiction, to ensure that proposed
     PRESERVATION  projects are consistent with the objectives identified for each area.
            AREAS
                   Agency/Department:           Planning
                   Related Policies:            3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 3.5
            LU-15  Prior to annexation of areas to the City of Temecula, an annexation
      ANNEXATION   plan and fiscal analysis must be completed. Within the annexation
                   plan, developers must show how adequate levels of public services
        PLANS AND  and facilities will be provided to serve the new development, without
  IMPACT STUDIES   reducing service levels for currently urbanized areas. The fiscal
                   analysis shall determine the impact that additional development will
                   have on current Temecula neighborhoods and on the community as a
                   whole, including any impact fees necessary to offset public costs
                   caused by the proposed project, and shall include an examination of
                   fiscal and service impacts of the proposed project on roads, water,
                   sewer, storm water runoff, fire, police, schools, libraries and other
                   community facilities.
                   Agency/Department:           Planning, LAFCO
                   Related Policies:            4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.5
                   Required by General Plan EIR
C  I  T Y   O  F  T   E   M  E   C  U    L  A     G   E   N    E  R    A L   P   L  A   N
                                        LU-53

            LU-16   Cooperate with LAFCO and the County of Riverside to direct
  LOCAL AGENCY      growth outside the City limits to the French Valley Future Growth
                    Area, on lands that are served or are planned to be served with a full
       FORMATION    range of urban services, such as public water and sewer, local and
      COMMISSION    regional road networks demonstrating adequate capacity, safety and
         (LAFCO)    emergency response services, parks, trails and open spaces.
                    Agency/Department:           Planning, LAFCO, County of Riverside
                    Related Policies:            4.1, 4.5, 4.6
                    Required by General Plan EIR
            LU-17   The City’s five-year Capital Improvement Program should be
           CAPITAL  reviewed and updated on an annual basis to meet changing needs,
                    priorities, and financial conditions. Consistency between the Capital
     IMPROVEMENT    Improvement Program and the General Plan should be maintained,
        PROGRAM     in accordance with State law.
                    Agency/Department:           Planning,     Public   Works,   Community
                                                Services
                    Related Policy:              4.1
                    Required by General Plan EIR
            LU-18   Require preparation of traffic impact reports for major development
  TRAFFIC IMPACT    projects to ensure that any adverse impacts on local roads in
                    residential areas are avoided or adequately mitigated.
          REPORTS
                    Agency/Department:           Planning, Public Works
                    Related Policy:              5.3
            LU-19   Promote preservation of hillsides surrounding the community
          HILLSIDE  through the following actions:
     DEVELOPMENT
                    •   Enforce hillside grading standards to naturalize the effects of
                        grading.
                    •   Require the preservation of unique natural features.
                    •   Encourage a broad range of architectural and site planning
                        solutions.
C  I  T Y   O   F  T  E   M   E   C  U   L  A      G   E   N   E  R   A  L     P  L A N
                                        LU-54

                  •   Develop hillside development standards that consider site
                      constraints in determining the location, type and intensities of
                      new development along the western escarpment and other
                      surrounding hillside areas.
                  Agency/Department:           Planning
                  Related Policies:            6.1, 6.4
           LU-20  Conserve the resources of Santa Gertrudis, Temecula and Murrieta
     PROTECT AND  Creeks, the San Diego Aqueduct, and other waterways within the
                  planning area through the following measures:
 PRESERVE CREEK
       RESOURCES  •   Work with the Riverside County Flood Control District and other
                      responsible agencies on the design of flood control projects for
                      creeks and waterways within the planning area.
                  •   Wherever possible, require natural flood control methods to
                      reduce capital and maintenance costs and provide recreational
                      and open space opportunities.
                  •   Utilize conservation site planning methods when determining
                      densities, setbacks, landscaping, and site design of projects
                      adjacent to creeks.
                  •   Work with the utility districts to develop a trail system and
                      enhance the natural resources along the San Diego Aqueduct,
                      creeks, and other utility easements where feasible.
                  •   Comply with provisions of the NPDES permit and all applicable
                      requirements of the San Diego Regional Water Quality Control
                      Board.
                  Agency/Department:           Planning, Public Works, Riverside County
                                               Flood Control District, San Diego
                                               Regional Water Quality Control Board,
                                               various utility districts.
                  Related Policies:            6.2, 6.3
C  I  T Y   O F  T  E  M    E  C  U   L   A      G   E  N    E  R    A    L P L  A  N
                                     LU-55

              LU-21  Cooperate with other agencies to develop Multi-species Habitat
 BIOLOGICAL AND      Conservation Plans in western Riverside and northern San Diego
                     Counties. Implement the plans through the development review and
      ECOLOGICAL     approval process.
       RESOURCES
                     Agency/Department:           Planning
                     Related Policy:              6.4
             LU-22   Implement the Old Town Specific Plan to provide for long term
       OLD TOWN      preservation of the valuable benefits of this historic area. Key
                     implementation measures associated with the Old Town Specific Plan
     SPECIFIC PLAN   include:
                     •   Enforcing architectural design guidelines for Old Town to
                         maintain and enhance the historic character of the area.
                     •   Providing adequate public parking in and around the Old Town
                         area.
                     •   Providing infill residential opportunities within the area and the
                         adjacent Westside Specific Plan to create a nighttime population
                         for the area.
                     •   Locating additional public and community facilities within and
                         surrounding the Old Town area.
                     Agency/Department:           Planning
                     Related Policies:            7.1, 7.2, 7.3
             LU-23   Support property owner requests for designations on historic
       HISTORICAL    structures. Promote public awareness and encourage tourism by
                     actively identifying the City’s historic resources.
             AREAS
                     Agency/Department:           Planning
                     Related Policy:              3.4, 7.2
C  I  T Y     O F   T  E   M   E  C   U   L  A      G    E  N   E  R  A  L    P  L  A  N
                                         LU-56

           LU-24  Plan for land use compatibility with the French Valley airport
  FRENCH VALLEY   through implementation of the following measures:
         AIRPORT  •   Refer land use development actions identified within the Airport
                      Land Use Compatibility Plan (ALUCP) to the Airport Land Use
                      Commission.
                  •   Participate in any future updates to the Airport Land Use
                      Compatibility Plan and Master Plan for French Valley Airport.
                  •   Obtain avigation easements as required by the ALUCP to ensure
                      that landowners acknowledge potential impacts associated with
                      aircraft.
                  Agency/Department:        Planning, Riverside County Airport Land
                                            Use Commission
                  Related Policies:          8.3, 8.4
                  Required by General Plan EIR
C  I T Y    O F  T  E   M   E   C U  L  A      G   E  N E   R  A  L     P   L  A  N
                                    LU-57

                This page is left blank intentionally.
C I T Y O F T E  M   E  C    U   L   A     G   E  N    E R A L P L A N
                                LU-58
                                                    NOISE ELEMENT
                  INTRODUCTION
                  T
                           emecula residents have come to the community for the
                           peaceful lifestyle, that is less affected by many of the loud
                           nuisances of other southern California communities.
                           However, the City is not spared from all noisy activities,
                  particularly those associated with automobile transportation.
                  Traffic is projected to increase on I-15, Winchester Road, Highway
                  79 south, Pechanga Parkway and other City roads, and aircraft will
                  continue to use French Valley Airport. Without City actions to
                  protect residents, surrounding areas will become noisy, making it
                  difficult to sleep, work, and learn, and gradually eroding the quality
                  of our community. Noise also does not recognize property or
                  zoning boundaries. Reducing noise impacts from one property on
                  another or between adjacent land uses is necessary.
  PURPOSE OF THE  The City strives to reduce the impacts of noise through a
   NOISE ELEMENT  combination of land use planning, site criteria, noise reduction and
                  enforcement strategies. The policies and programs detailed in this
                  Element focus on protecting the quality of life found within our
                  residential neighborhoods, schools and other noise-sensitive uses
                  from the persistent hazards of excessive noise.
      SCOPE AND   The State recognizes the relationship between noise and noise
 CONTENT OF THE   sensitive uses and has adopted guidelines for Noise Elements. This
                  Noise Element satisfies the requirements of State planning law and
   NOISE ELEMENT  is a mandated component of the General Plan. Government Code
                  Section 65302(f) establishes the required components of the Noise
                  Element. The Element also complies with California Health and
                  Safety Code Section 56050.1 guidelines for Noise Elements.
                  Potential noise sources are identified and programs established to
                  avoid or mitigate noise impacts associated with community
                  development. Future noise conditions associated with both short-
                  and long-term growth are quantified and identified within noise
                  exposure contours. The contours serve as the basis for: developing
                  guidelines to identify compatible land uses; identifying the
C  I T Y    O F  T   E M E      C U L A          G    E N E R A L          P  L A    N
                                        N-1
                 distribution of land uses on the General Plan Land Use Policy Map;
                 and establishing development standards.
                 Concurrently, the Land Use Element contains policies to ensure
                 that environmental conditions, including noise, are considered in
                 all land use decisions. The Noise Element is also linked to the
                 transportation policies in the Circulation Element. The projected
                 noise contours identified in Figure N-2 within this Element directly
                 correspond to the Circulation Plan and the projected traffic
                 generated from proposed land uses.             Both the Noise and
                 Circulation Elements contain policies and programs to minimize
                 the effects of transportation noise.
                 The Noise Element also relates to the Conservation/Open Space
                 Element. Excessive noise can diminish enjoyment of parks and
                 other designated open space. Because of this, noise levels are
                 considered in the planning of new recreational and open space
                 areas. Additionally, open space areas can be used to separate and
                 buffer noise sensitive land uses from noise producers.
MEASURING NOISE  Noise generally is defined as unwanted or intrusive sound. Because
                 noise consists of pitch, loudness, and duration, describing noise
                 with a single unit of measure presents a challenge. The A-weighted
                 decibel scale (dB(A)) has been developed to describe the loudness of
                 a sound or sound environment based on the sensitivity of the
                 human ear.
                 The dB(A) descriptor only reports noise from a single source or
                 combination of sources at a point in time. To allow a more
                 comprehensive description of the noise environment, Federal and
                 State agencies have established noise and land use compatibility
                 guidelines that use averaging approaches to noise measurement.
                 Two measurement scales commonly used in California are the
                 Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) and the day-night level
                 (Ldn). To account for increased human sensitivity at night, the
                 CNEL level includes a 5-decibel penalty on noise during the 7:00
                 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. time period and a 10-decibel penalty on noise
                 during the 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. time period. The Ldn level
                 includes only the 10 decibel weighting for late-night noise. These
                 values are nearly identical for all but unusual noise sources.
C  I T Y  O F   T   E M E     C U L A          G    E N E R A L           P  L A N
                                      N-2
  RELATED PLANS  Several plans and programs enacted through federal, State and local
  AND PROGRAMS   legislation and administered by various agencies relate to Noise
                 Element goals.
                 CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT (CEQA) GUIDELINES
                 The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) was adopted by
                 the State legislature in response to a public mandate for thorough
                 environmental analysis of projects that might affect the
                 environment. Excessive noise is considered an environmental
                 impact under CEQA. The provisions of the law and environmental
                 review procedures are described in the CEQA Statutes and the
                 CEQA Guidelines. Implementation of CEQA ensures that during
                 the decision making stage of development, City officials and the
                 general public will be able to assess the noise impacts associated
                 with public and private development projects.
                 CALIFORNIA NOISE INSULATION STANDARDS (TITLE 24)
                 The California Commission of Housing and Community
                 Development officially adopted noise standards in 1974. In 1988,
                 the Building Standards Commission approved revisions to the
                 standards (Title 24, Part 2, California Code of Regulations). As
                 revised, Title 24 establishes an interior noise standard of 45 dB(A)
                 for residential space (CNEL or Ldn). Acoustical studies must be
                 prepared for residential structures that are to be located within noise
                 contours of 60 dB(A) or greater from freeways, major streets,
                 thoroughfares, rail lines, rapid transit lines or industrial noise
                 sources. The studies must demonstrate that the building is designed
                 to reduce interior noise to 45 dB(A) or lower.
                 OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION (OSHA)
                 The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)
                 provides worker regulations for protection against the effects of
                 noise exposure. The maximum exposure is provided according to
                 health and psychological effects with a reasonable margin of safety.
                 OSHA also identifies whether the threshold applies to activity
                 interference, hearing loss consideration, or both effects.
C  I T Y  O F   T   E M E     C U L A          G   E N E R A L            P   L A   N
                                      N-3
             COUNTY OF RIVERSIDE GENERAL PLAN NOISE ELEMENT
             The unincorporated portion of the Planning Area is subject to the
             Riverside County Noise Element, which establishes parameters for
             compatibility of noise and various land uses, and the location of
             new development. For new residential construction, exterior noise
             must be reduced to 65 dB or less, and interior noise must be
             reduced to 45 dB or less.
             CITY OF TEMECULA NOISE CONTROL ORDINANCE
             The City has adopted the County of Riverside Noise Control
             Ordinance (No. 457.73), which establishes interior and exterior
             noise standards for residential areas. The ordinance provides
             controls for excessive and annoying noise from stationary sources
             such as industrial plants, pumps, compressors and refrigeration
             units. In addition, specific noise standards for daytime and
             nighttime hours are provided. Certain noise sources are prohibited
             and the ordinance establishes an enforcement process.
             RIVERSIDE COUNTY AIRPORT LAND USE COMPATIBILITY PLAN
             POLICY DOCUMENT FRENCH VALLEY AIRPORT
             French Valley Airport is a general aviation airport owned and
             operated by the County of Riverside. The airport occupies
             approximately 261 acres east of Winchester Road and is located five
             miles north of Temecula s city center and one and one-quarter mile
             northwest of the City limits within the sphere of influence.
             French Valley Airport is one of 16 airports in Riverside County
             governed by the Riverside County Airport Land Use Commission
             (ALUC). In November 2004, the ALUC adopted the Riverside
             County Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan (ALUCP) Policy
             Document, which establishes land use, noise and safety policies in
             the vicinity of airports throughout Riverside County, including
             compatibility criteria and maps for the influence areas of individual
             airports. The ALUCP also establishes procedural requirements for
             compatibility review of development proposals.
             NOISE PLAN
             Temecula, like most developed suburban areas, experiences increased
             noise levels associated with transportation and other sources. As
             noise levels in various parts of the community rise, the City must
             seek ways to safeguard the population from excessive noise levels.
C I T Y O F T   E M E     C U L A         G   E N E R A L            P  L A   N
                                 N-4
SEPARATING NOISE               Noise in the community is the cumulative effect of noise from
     SOURCES FROM              transportation activities and stationary sources. Stationary noise
                               typically refers to noise from commercial establishments,
               SENSITIVE       machinery, air conditioning systems, compressors, residential and
           RECEPTORS           recreational uses, and landscape maintenance equipment.
                               Regardless of the type of noise, levels are highest near the source
                               and decrease with distance. Noise becomes a problem when sources
                               and noise sensitive land uses are located in adjacent areas.
                               Residential uses are generally the most sensitive to noise. Other
                               noise-sensitive land uses include schools, libraries, offices, hospitals,
                               churches, hotels, motels, and outdoor recreational areas. Most noise
                               impacts can be avoided when noise sources, sensitive land uses, and
                               information about the future noise environment are considered in
                               planning and development decisions.
                               NOISE STANDARDS AND LAND USE COMPATIBILITY
                               To ensure that noise producers do not adversely affect sensitive
                               receptors, the City uses land use compatibility standards when
                               planning and making development decisions.                  Table N-1
                               summarizes City noise standards for each land use classification
PLANS IN ACTION                defined in the Land Use Element and expressed on the Land Use
Temecula uses the noise/       Policy Map. The standards represent the maximum acceptable
land use compatibility         exterior noise level, as measured at the property boundary, which is
guidelines in Tables N-1       used to determine noise impacts.
and N-2, as well as
interior noise standards in
the State Health and Safety    The City s primary goal with regard to community noise is to
Code to determine the          minimize the exposure of residents to unhealthful or excessive noise
appropriate location and       levels to the extent possible. To this end, the Noise Element
design of future land uses.    establishes noise/land use compatibility guidelines based on
This minimizes potential       cumulative noise criteria for outdoor noise. Table N-2 outlines
impacts of noisy businesses    these criteria, which the City will use to review development
and       industries       on  proposals. In addition, new residential development will comply
residential neighborhoods      with Title 24 standards of the State Health and Safety Code. These
or other sensitive receptors.  standards establish maximum interior noise levels for new
                               residential development, requiring that sufficient insulation be
                               provided to reduce interior ambient noise levels to 45 CNEL.
                               Higher exterior noise levels are permitted for multiple-family
                               housing than for single-family houses, as multiple-family complexes
                               are generally set back farther from property boundaries, and a more
                               integrated mix of activity (residential and commercial) is often
                               desired near such locations.
 C    I T Y          O F      T   E M E     C U L A          G   E N E R A L             P   L A   N
                                                    N-5
                                                TABLE N-1
                            TEMECULA LAND USE /NOISE STANDARDS
                                                                    Maximum Noise Level
                  Property Receiving Noise
                                                                     (Ldn or CNEL, dBA)
            Type of Use               Land Use Designation         Interior        Exterior3
                                     Hillside
                                     Rural
                                     Very Low                         45               65
     Residential                     Low
                                     Low Medium
                                     Medium                           45            65 / 701
                                     High                             45               701
                                     Neighborhood
                                     Community
                                                                      --               70
     Commercial and Office           Highway Tourist
                                     Service
                                     Professional Office              50               70
     Light Industrial                Industrial Park                  55               75
                                     Schools                          50               65
     Public/Institutional
                                     All others                       50               70
                                     Vineyards/Agriculture            --               70
     Open Space
                                     Open Space                       --             70 /652
     1  Maximum exterior noise levels up to 70 dB CNEL are allowed for Multiple-Family Housing.
     2  Where quiet is a basis required for the land use.
     3 Regarding aircraft-related noise, the maximum acceptable exposure for new residential
        development is 60 dB CNEL.
C I T Y      O    F       T    E  M    E   C    U   L   A   G    E   N   E   R  A    L       P L A N
                                                    N-6
                                                        TABLE N-2
                                      NOISE/LAND USE COMPATIBILITY MATRIX
                                                               Community Noise Exposure
            Land Use                                                  (Ldn or CNEL)
                                                55          60         65            70           75         80
Residential1
Transient Lodging Motel,
Hotel
Schools, Libraries, Churches,
Hospitals, Nursing Homes
Auditoriums, Concert Halls,
Amphitheaters2
Sports Arena, Outdoor
Spectator Sports2
Playgrounds, Parks
Golf Course, Riding Stables,
Water Recreation, Cemeteries
Office Buildings, Business
Commercial, and Professional
Industrial, Manufacturing,
Utilities, Agriculture
Source: Modified from 1998 State of California General Plan Guidelines.
1. Regarding aircraft-related noise, the maximum acceptable exposure for new residential development is 60dB CNEL.
2. No normally acceptable condition is defined for these uses. Noise studies are required prior to approval.
          Normally Acceptable: Specified land use is satisfactory, based upon the assumption that any buildings
          involved meet conventional Title 24 construction standards. No special noise insulation requirements.
          Conditionally Acceptable: New construction or development shall be undertaken only after a detailed noise
          analysis is made and noise reduction measures are identified and included in the project design.
          Normally Unacceptable: New construction or development is discouraged. If new construction is proposed,
          a detailed analysis is required, noise reduction measures must be identified, and noise
          insulation features included in the design.
          Clearly Unacceptable: New construction or development clearly should not be undertaken.
    C     I T Y         O F          T   E M E       C U L A            G    E N E R A L                 P   L A   N
                                                             N-7
             In addition, properties within an influence area surrounding French
             Valley Airport are also subject to the more stringent noise/land use
             compatibility standards of the County Airport Land Use
             Compatibility Plan (ALUCP).
             NOISE CONTOURS AND IMPACT AREAS
             The community noise environment can be described with contours
             derived from monitoring major sources of noise. Noise contours
             define areas of equal noise exposure. Future noise contours have
             been estimated with information about baseline and projected land
             use development with transportation activity. The contours assist in
             setting policies for distribution of land uses and establishment of
             development standards.
             A study of baseline noise sources and levels was completed in April,
             2002. Noise level measurements were collected during a typical
             weekday at twenty locations throughout Temecula. Criteria for site
             selection included geographical distribution, land uses suspected of
             noisy activities, proximity to transportation facilities and sensitive
             receptor locations. The primary purpose of noise monitoring was
             to establish a noise profile for the Planning Area that could be used
             to estimate the level of current and future noise impact.
             Measurements represent motor vehicle noise emanating from
             Interstate 15, the local master planned roadway network and aircraft
             associated with the French Valley Airport. Sensitive receptor
             locations monitored include: single-family homes, schools, and
             parks. Noise levels were monitored during the peak traffic hour to
             represent maximum noise levels or during off-peak conditions and
             then modified to reflect peak traffic conditions.
             Figure N-1 shows the CNEL contours for baseline year 2002, and
             identifies noise monitoring locations. As the Figure illustrates,
             major arterials, as well as the railroad and Interstate 15 represent the
             major sources of noise. A number of residential neighborhoods are
             exposed to traffic noise from arterials, such as Winchester Road,
             Margarita Road, Ynez Road, Rancho California Road and Pechanga
             Parkway.
             The Land Use Element indicates that the Planning Area will
             accommodate substantial future growth, accompanied by an
             increase in citywide traffic volumes. Traffic volume increases
             represent the only anticipated measurable new noise source in the
             community over the long term.
C I T Y O F T   E M E     C U L A           G   E N E R A L            P  L A    N
                                  N-8
      Figure N-1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Keller Rd
      Baseline (Year 2002)
      Roadway Noise Contours
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Mc Colery Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Pat Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Specili Rd
      CITY OF TEMECULA GENERAL PLAN                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Briggs Rd                                                                       Elliot Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Judith St
      Legend                                                                                                                                                                Baxter Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jean N icholas Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 City of Murrieta                                                                                                     he
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       County of
      Noise Contours                                                                                                                                                        Lee Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sphere of Influence                                                                                                      s te
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            rR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  in
                                                                                                                                                          Menifee Rd
                                                   Contour Location
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Liberty Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Briggs Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Pourroy Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Leon Rd
                    65                                Noise Level (CNEL)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Thompson Rd
      Noise Monitoring Positions
                    k1                             Position Number
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 k1                                                                          Benton Rd
                                                   Temecula City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ÿ                                                     Auld Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Skinner
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Maddalena Rd
                                                   Sphere of Influence Boundary
                                                                                                                                                           Calle D e Amor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  60                                         Leon Rd
                                                   Planning Area Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Allen Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             k2
      Sources: City of Temecula, Weiland Associates.
       City of Murrieta                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Rd
                                                                                                                                                                            Hunter Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                65                                                                                                                  r     oy                                                                                                                                                                                                              Borel Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ur
                                             Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Po
                                                                                                                     Dr                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pr om o
                                            os
      Ø
      "
      #                   Lo
                               s A
                                   la   m
                                                                        Ø
                                                                        "
                                                                        #    Al
                                                                                   t      aM
                                                                                                     u rr
                                                                                                             ie ta                                                                                                                               on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a ny
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         to    ry             Pky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sk y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              C
                                                                                 Mu r r ie ta
                                                                                                              Ho t                 d
                                                                                                                          Springs R                                                                                                                                                                                            Murrieta Hot Springs Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Buck Rd
                                                                                 Ja                                                                                                                        y
                                                                                                                                                                                                      W                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               d
                                                                                   ck
                                                                                         so n
                                                                                                                                                                                       na
                                                                                                                                                                                            ire
                                                                                                                                                                                                               k3                                          l ow
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      sA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ola
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             sR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Butterfield Stage Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                  Bo                                                             W il                                                                                         N ic
                                                                                                Av    e                                                                                                    65                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         V in                                                                                  r e nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             oW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a
                                                           M
                                                                 is o                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              y
                                                               ad                                                                                                                  60                      70
                                                                        n                                                                                                                                                                                                  la s Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              N ico                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         k5 k
               St
                                                                           e
          va
                                                                         Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      a l le
     ua
 G                               W                                                                                   70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Vista D el        Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Co n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     rR
                                   as
                                                                                                                               60                                                      70                        s te                                                                                                                                                                                                   Mo nte
                                     hing                                                                                                                    60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          te n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 to
                                                                                                                                                                                   k4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                he
                                            ton                                                                                                                                                            in c                                                                            Via N ort e
                                                                                                                          75                                                                                                                     te
                                                 Av                                                                                                                                                         W                                  or                                                                                                                                                            L a Se r e n a W y
                    D                                                                                                                                                                                                                    N
                                                  e
                    ou                                                                                                              65                                      70                                              Via
                        gla
                                                                                                                                                                                        M a rg ar ita Rd
                                                                                                                      75                             70
                         ss                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Rd
                                e                                                                                                         65                                                                                                                                                                               Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                        r ni a
                              Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Rey                                                                                                                                                                                                       a     l if o
                                                                                                                     70
                                                                                                                                                                              60                                                                                                                De
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             a      W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                k7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             nch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   oC
                                                                        St                                                                 70
                                                                                                                                                                             65                                                                                                                          ren                                               do                                                                                                                                                                                  Dr
                                                               ry                                                                                                                                                                          y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Pla ya
                                                             er                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 L a Se                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ra De
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                W                                                                                                                             w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ma d e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S o la n a                                                                                                                                        sP
                                                           Ch                                                        65        65                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ky
                                                                                                                                         75                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               60
                                                                                                60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ta R                           60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    65
                                                                                                         d                                                                                                                             ar i                                                                                                       ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     R      d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Rd
                                                                                                    rR                                                         65                                                           ar                                                                                                               rn                                                                                                                                                                             ba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P au
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              g
                                                                                               te                                                                                                                          M                                                                                                  lifo
                                                                             W
                                                                                 in
                                                                                    c   he
                                                                                           s
                                                                                                                                     60
                                                                                                                                                70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                k8                                            60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      nc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        h o 65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  60
                                                                                                                                     D
                                                                                                                                         ia z               75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          k9                                                   k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10                                                                               k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                12                                                                                                                                                 L in da R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              B u tt e r f i e l d
                                             Ra                                                                                            Rd
                                                   ho                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      60                                                                                                                                                                       os   e a Rd
                                                 nc                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ca
                                                      Ca
                                                        lif
                                                         or
                                                                                                                                                60
                                                                                                                                                         75
                                                                                                                                                                                       Yn
                                                                                                                                                                                            ez
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             R an ch V ista R d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     M                                       P au b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    a         Rd           k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           11                                                                                                                                                                          ll e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    C on t en to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     St a g
                                                            ni                                                                                                                                        Rd                                                                                                  ar
                                  ida D el O ro                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       M e ad o ws Pk y
                              ve n
                                                               a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ga
                                                                                                                                                d                75
                          A                                      Rd                                           R a n ch o C a lifo r n i a R
                                                                                                                                                    65                                                                                                                                           60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             rit    a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rd     k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15                                                                                                                                        eR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               d
                                                                                                                                                                              70
                                                                                                                                                                                       k
                                                                                                                                                                                       13                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   De Portola Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                           75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      t   ia g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               o          Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                70                             Sa n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                A nz
                                                                                           Via Sant
                                                                                                    a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Va
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             lle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 jo                                                                                             Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     d       }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ÿ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             79
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      60                                                               la
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    rto
                                                                                                    Ro sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Av                                       60                 De P o                                                                                                                                                                                  Pk y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ch
                                        an c
                                     B arr
                                            a
                                                                                                                                                                                                           60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            17             65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Va
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         il R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n
                                    V ia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         60                                            d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    60                                                                                       aR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Li   nd
                                                                o Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                60                         Lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               70                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Rd
                                                              a q uer                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   za
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        70                                                                                                                                                          Rd                                                                                 aw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          k               Pk y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   An
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    65                                                                                                                    lle                                                                          dh
                                                           V ia V                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     a                                                                              Re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   fV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          75                                    60                                                             k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               19            65           W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     65                  75                                                                                                                65                                                                                        y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Pechanga                                                                               lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Entertainment                                                                     rH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ø
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #                                                                                                      Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Dee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          wC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                65                                                                                                                                                                           Û
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             a n yon R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Pe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  w ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ga Pa rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     75
 µ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   cha n
                                                   0                                                 5,000                                      10,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       bo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ra
                                                                                                                                                    Feet
                                                                                                                                                     Miles
                                                   0                                                             1                                                          2
C I T Y                                                                      O F                                                         T E M E C U L A                                                                                                                                                                                                              G E N E R A L                                                                                                                                                                                                              P L A N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                N-9

PLANS IN ACTION               Potential future ambient noise levels can be estimated by modeling.
Noise contours describe       Figure N-2 displays projected year 2025 noise contours based upon
locations        surrounding  future traffic levels.
major roadways, rail-roads
and airports that are         Figure N-3 identifies the estimated CNEL noise contours associated
exposed to similar noise      with current operations at the French Valley Airport. Figure N-4
characteristics. The City     identifies the projected future CNEL noise levels associated with
uses the contours identified
                              Airport operations in 2013. These figures should be used in
in Figures N-1, N-2, N-3,
and N-4 along with the
                              conjunction with the Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan to
standards shown in Table      determine land use compatibility and potential noise mitigation
N-2 to determine when         requirements for projects that fall within a noise contour area
noise mitigation measures     associated with the Airport.
are required.
                              CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
                              The provisions of the State Noise Insulation Standards (Title 24,
                              Part 2, California Code of Regulations) are enforced in Temecula.
                              Title 24 specifies that combined indoor noise for multi-family living
                              spaces shall not exceed 45 CNEL. This standard must be
                              implemented when the outdoor noise level exceeds 60 CNEL. Title
                              24 requires that the same standard be applied to all new hotels,
                              motels, apartment houses, and multi-family projects. Furthermore,
                              construction activity shall be limited during the early morning, late
                              evening, weekends and holidays to prevent noise intrusion during
                              these periods. Parameters for these limitations are provided in the
                              City s Noise Control Ordinance (Section 8.32 of the Temecula
                              Municipal Code).
  NOISE TRANSFERS             The City also has the opportunity to control noise and vibration
                BETWEEN       transfers between adjacent land uses. Particular problems arise in
                              cases where noise-producing uses are located immediately adjacent
     ADJACENT USES
                              to sensitive uses, such as industrial areas near residences or schools.
                              Mixed-use projects often present unique problems in this area, such
                              as when restaurants with nighttime entertainment are located below
                              residential units.
  NOISE AND LAND              Sensitive receptors must be protected from excessive noise generated
       USE PLANNING           by commercial and industrial centers, restaurants and bars, and civic
                              centers. Other noise sources commonly referred to as nuisance
                              noises also contribute to the overall noise environment. Noise
                              generated by new development is most appropriately controlled
                              through the site design review process, and compliance with CEQA,
                              and noise standards contained in the Noise Element. During
                              preliminary stages of the development process, potential noise
                              impacts and mitigation measures must be identified.
 C    I T Y          O F     T   E M E      C U L A         G  E N E R A L             P  L A    N
                                                    N-10
        Figure N-2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Keller Rd
        2025 Noise Contours
    CITY OF TEMECULA GENERAL PLAN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Pat Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Specili Rd
    Legend                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Briggs Rd                                                                 Elliot Rd                                                                                                                                                                                        Judith St
                                                                                                                                                                                 Baxter Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jean Nicholas Rd
    Noise Contours                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ab
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 eli
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               City of Murrieta                                                                        he                                                                                                            d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                County of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  aR                  65
                                                Contour Location                                                                                                                 Lee Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         s te
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             rR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   in c
                   65
                                                                                                                                                                Menifee Rd
                                                    Noise Level (CNEL)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Liberty Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Briggs Rd                Leon Rd
                                                    Temecula City Boundary                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Thompson Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Pourroy Rd
                                                    Sphere of Influence Boundary                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Benton Rd
                                                    Planning Area Boundary                                                                                                                                                                                                                        65
        Source: Wieland Associates, 2004.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ÿ                                                         Auld Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Skinner
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Maddalena Rd
                                                                                                                                                                 Calle De Amor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Leon Rd
                                                                                                               Wh
                                                                                                                    it
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         60
                                                                                                                          d Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      60 60
                                                                                                                       oo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Rd                                                                                                                                                                                      Borel Rd
                                                                                                                     ew
                                                                                                                                                                                 Hunter Rd                                                                                                                                                                             y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ur
                                          Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Po
                                                                                                           D        r                                                                                                                                                                                                    Bor el Rd
                                          os                                                          e ta
        Ø
        "
        #               Lo
                             s A
                                 la   m
                                                                    Ø
                                                                    "
                                                                    #      Al
                                                                              t    aM
                                                                                             u r ri
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            a ny
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sk y                                                                                                                                        65
                                                                                          M ur r ie
                                                                                                                                         Spr ings
                                                                                                                                                                           Rd                                                                C
                                                                                                               ta
                                                                                                                           H ot                                                                                                                                                                                            Murrieta Hot Springs Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Buck Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                               w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   y               70
                        City of                                                                                                                                                                  le
                                                                                                                                                                                                      y
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pk
                                                                                                                                                                                              al
                       Murrieta                                                                                                                                                       h
                                                                                                                                                                                          V                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 d
                                                                              Ja
                                                                              ck                                                                                        e        nc                          60                                                                                                                                                                        65                                                                                                                                                                                   R
                                                                                       n                                                                             Fr                                                                                                                                                                                       sR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 d                                                                                                                                                                                                    a
                                                                                    so                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              re nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ola
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             N ic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Stage Rd
                                                         M
                                                                                             Av  e                                                                                                                                 65                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               V in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           oW                                               An                     Be
                                                            ad                                                                                  70                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              y                                                za
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        70
                                                                      n
                                                                  is o                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  as R
              St                                                       Av
                                                                          e
                                                                                                                                                                                      60                                                                          N ic ol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e Co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Butterfield
          a
        av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Cal l
G
    u
                               W                                                                                                   65                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Vista D el        Rd
                                 as
                                         t                                                                                                                                                                                                     rn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    y                                                                                                                                                       Mon te                                                                                     n te
                                      ng                                                                                                                                                                                                   a
                                   hi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   60                   Ke                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    n to
                                           on                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Via N orte
                                               Av               am                                                       75                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      La Ser en a W y
                   D
                                                              Ad                                                                                                    Rd
                                                e                                                                                                                                         M
                   ou                                                                                                                                          er
                                                                                                                                                                                                   a rit a
                                                                                                                                                          st
                       gl                                              s
                                                                                                                                                     he
                                                                                                                                                                                               arg                          r al
                       as
                                                                                                                                                 c                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                d
                                                                                                                                              in                                                                       ne                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ia R
                        s
                            Av
                              e
                                                                                           65
                                                                                                               Je
                                                                                                                                          W                                                                  Ge                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        n
                                                                                                                  ff e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Rd                                                                                                                                                                                  al i
                                                                                                                      on                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   60                                                                                          oC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  y
                                                                                                                    rs                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ch
                                                                           70                                                                                                                    Rd                                                                                                                        W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ra n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    y
                                                                                                                          Av                                                                                                                                                               l Re                               a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        De                               en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Se r                                      ea
                                                                                                                              e
                                                                  St
                                                                                                                                                           land                                                                                                                                         La                                                  do                                                                                                                                                 a      Dr
                                                                                                                         65                      er                                                                                                                                                                                                           w                                                                                                                                        e Pla y
                                                             ry                                                                            Ov                                                                                                                                                                                                                    sP                                                                                                                             e ra D
                                                       er
                                                                       dy                                                                                                                                                   So lan             y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                60                                                                     Mad
                                                                                                                                                           Yn ez Rd
                                                     Ch
                                                                    en
                                                                                                                                                                                 65                                                  a W                                                                                                                             ky
                                                                  D
                                                                                  60                       60                                                                                                                                                     d
                                                                                                                                                                                               65                                                         ta R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Rd
                                                                                                      rR
                                                                                                           d                       65                                                                                                   ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ar i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            aR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 d                                                                       0                                                  Pau
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ba
                                                                                            s   te                                                                                                                                         g                                                                                                       ni
                                                                                                                     o                                                                                                                  M                                                                                                       or
                                                                                     c   he                   r   ad                                           70                                                                                                                                                                      a   li f
                                                                              W
                                                                                  in
                                                                                                      Al
                                                                                                           va
                                                                                                                                  Di
                                                                                                                                    az
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    oC                                                                                                         65
                                                                                               id
                                                                                                  a
                                                                                                                                    Rd                                                                                                                      60                                                       Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        n                                                                                                                                           60
                                                                                          en                                                                         75                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Lin da
                                           Ra                                      Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      60
                                               nc
                                                ho
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   60                                                                              65                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ro  s e a Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ca
                                                    Ca
                                                                                                                                                           70                                              Yn                                  o                                                                                                                     ba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rd                    60                                                                                                                            ll e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     B u t te r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        R an ch Vi sta Rd
                                                     li f
                                                        or                                                                                                                                                      ez                                                                                                                                           Pa u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           C o n te n t o
                                    D el O ro             nia                                                                                                                                                          Rd
                             en ida
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              M e ad o ws P k y
                        Av                                    Rd
                                                                                                                                                                     75                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   f ie l
                                                                                            60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S ta
                                                                                                                                                               O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         g ar                                                                                                                          ge                                                                   De Portola Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ar
                                                                                                                                                                    ld
                                                                                                                                                                             To
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   d                                                                                                                        Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            it a R                                                                                                                                                     60
                                                                                                                                                                                  w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  d
                                                                                                                                                                                      n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       75                                             go
                                                                                                                                                                                          Fr o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                tia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sa n
                                                                                                                                                                                                nt
                                                                                                                                                                                               1s
                                                                                                                                                                                                  t   St                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           60            65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ÿ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |79                     65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            An
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Yn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    65               60
                                                                                                  a
                                                                                         Via Sant
                                                                                                                                                                                                               70                                    ez
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       la
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            za
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                       ecu                                                                                                          Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          T em                                                                                               Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       d                                                                                                        Rio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       60                                                 tol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  aR                                                70 70                                         Via
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            65
                                                                                             Ro sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ll
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   65                                                                                   De P o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ch      Pk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                y                                                                Hi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          R
                                      an c
                                   B arr
                                          a
                                                                                                                                                                                                               60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   75                     ÿ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | 79
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  70 65                                                     70                                                                                                  Va
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   il
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       orga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          60                                                                                           60
                                  V ia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 65                                       d                                                                                                                                                                      65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           aR
                                                             o Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 L in d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   65                om
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a
                                                           aq uer                                                                                                                                                                                  75 60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              k           Pk y                                                              za
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           aw                                                               An
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  dh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     yR
                                                         V ia V                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Va
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       d                                                                        Re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 lle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            o lf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            70                                                                                                       Pe                                                                                                          65 60 60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ch                                                                   y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             a                                                               W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pechanga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    a                     60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       65                                                              Entertainment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Pk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ollo w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              rH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ø
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #                              Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Center                                                          ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ny
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          bo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Û
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               cha ng a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pe
                                                    0                                          5,000                                          10,000
µ                                                   0                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                  Feet
                                                                                                                                                   Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Pa rk wa y
C I T Y                                                                       O F                                                         T E M E C U L A                                                                                                                                                                                                                    G E N E R A L                                                                                                                                                                                       P L A N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        N-11

  Figure N-3
  French Valley Airport                                                                      Lee Ln
  Noise Contours                                                                                                                                                     Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Pourroy Rd
                                                                                                                                                                ste
                                                                                Liberty Rd                                 Briggs Rd
  CITY OF TEMECULA GENERAL PLAN                                                                                                                                     r
                                                                                                                                                  Leon Rd
                                                                                                                                                                he
                                                                                                                                                             i nc
  Legend                                                                                                                                                    W
                             Contour Location
                             Noise Level (CNEL)                                              Thompson Rd
     65
                             Temecula City Boundary
                             Sphere of Influence Boundary
                             Planning Area Boundary
                                                                                                                                                            Benton Rd
                   City of Murrieta
  Source: Coffman Associates, December 2003.
                                    Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                      ÿ
                                                                                                                      |
                                                                                                                      79
                                                                                                                                                            Auld Rd
                                                                                                             French                                         Allen Rd
                                                                                                             Valley
    Calle De Amor
                                                                                      r Rd                   Airport
                                                                                 h e ste                                65
                                                                                                                                                 Leon Rd
                                                                               W inc                                     60
                    Hunter Rd                                                                                                          55                                                             Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                  y
                                                                                                                                                                                             ro
                                                                                                                                                                                           ur
                                                                                                                                                                                      Po
                                                                                                                                                            Promonto
                                                                                              Dr                                                                        ry
                                                                                             on
                                                                                             ny                                                                              ky
                                                                                                                                                                             P
                                                                                        Ca
                                                                                 S ky
                    M ur
                           riet a
                                    H ot
                                           S pr i
                                                    ng s
                                                           Rd                                                                                               Murrieta Hot Springs Rd
                                                                           y
                                                                       W
                                                              i   re
                                                           na
                                                      Bo
                                                                                                                  e
                                                                                                             Av
                                                                                                        ws
                                                                                                     llo
                                                                                                  Wi
                                                                                                                      Willows Ave
 µ
                      0                                           2,500                           5,000
                                                                                                      Feet               d
                                                                                                                  la s R
                                                                                                           N i co
                                                                                                        Miles
                                                                                                                                          Rd
                      0                                                0.5                              1
                                                                                                                                     as
                                                                                                                               Nic ol
C I T Y                               O F                                  T E M E C U L A                                                     G E N E R A L                                          P L A N
                                                                                                                      N-12

 Figure N-4
 French Valley Airport
 Future (2013) Noise Contours                                                                Lee Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                  d
 CITY OF TEMECULA GENERAL PLAN                                                                                                                                                rR
                                                                                Liberty Rd                                                                                                                             Pourroy Rd
                                                                                                                                                                           he
                                                                                                                                Briggs Rd
                                                                                                                                                                             s te
                                                                                                                                                             Leon Rd
 Legend                                                                                                                                                                 inc
                                                                                                                                                                       W
                           Contour Location
   65                      Noise Level (CNEL)                                                Thompson Rd
                           Temecula City Boundary
                           Sphere of Influence Boundary
                           Planning Area Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                       Benton Rd
                    City of Murrieta
 Source: Coffman Associates, December 2003.
                  Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                           ÿ
                                                                                                                           |
                                                                                                                           79
                                                                                                                                                                       Auld Rd
                                                                                                                  French                                               Allen Rd
                                                                                                                  Valley
        Calle De Amor
                                                                                      r Rd                        Airport
                                                                                 heste
                                                                               W inc                                                                        Leon Rd
                        Hunter Rd
                                                                                                                                            65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                         r   oy
                                                                                                                                                     60                                               ur
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Po
                                                                                                                                                                       Prom onto
                                                                                                                                                                                ry
                                                                                               Dr                                                     55
                                                                                             ny                                                                                       ky
                                                                                               on                                                                                     P
                                                                                        Ca
                                                                                 Sky
                        M ur
                               riet a
                                        H ot
                                               S pr i
                                                        ng s
                                                               Rd                                                                                                      Murrieta Hot Springs Rd
                                                                           y
                                                                       W
                                                                 ire
                                                               na
                                                          Bo
                                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                                  Av
                                                                                                             ws
                                                                                                       llo
                                                                                                    Wi
                                                                                                                           Willows Ave
 µ
                          0                                         2,500                       5,000
                                                                                                    Feet             d
                                                                                                               las R
                                                                                                         N ic o
                                                                                                      Miles
                                                                                                                                             as Rd
                          0                                            0.5                                   1                      N icol
C I T Y                                  O F                               T E M E C U L A                                                                G E N E R A L                                           P L A N
                                                                                                                           N-13

                               BUSINESS ACTIVITY NOISE
PLANS IN ACTION                When reviewing a proposed industrial, commercial or public
The      City        requires  project, noise generation and potential impacts to surrounding
preparation of acoustical      development are considered in accordance with CEQA. Common
analyses for projects that     mitigation measures include acoustically treated and quiet-design
generate noise that may        furnaces, fans, motors, compressors, valves, and pumps. The City
affect sensitive receptors.    may also require limited delivery and operation hours in order to
Mitigation measures are        minimize impacts to adjacent residential users or other sensitive
required when significant
                               receptors.
impacts are identified.
                               In addition, all City departments must comply with State and
                               federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)
                               standards. Any new equipment or vehicle purchased by the City
                               will comply with local, State and federal noise standards.
                               NUISANCE NOISES
                               Several noise sources can contribute to the overall noise
                               environment in the community, including barking dogs, loud audio
                               equipment, defective or modified auto and motorcycle mufflers and
                               activities at parks and civic, community or religious institutions.
                               These nuisance noises can be addressed through strict enforcement
                               of City s Noise Control Ordinance, while potential new noise
                               impacts may be avoided or reduced through the site design review
                               process, review of proposed developments per CEQA and
                               mitigation of potential nuisance noise impacts.
TRANSPORTATION-                Motor vehicles are the dominant source of continuous noise.
              RELATED          Interstate 15, SR-79, Rancho California Road, Jefferson
                               Avenue/Front Street, Winchester Road, and Pechanga Parkway all
                   NOISE       carry appreciable volumes of commuter traffic. Neighborhoods
                               bordering these roadways are thus subject to loud noise levels.
                               Properties adjacent to freeways can experience decibels as high as 70
                               to 75 dB(A). Sound attenuation walls, landscaped buffers, and dirt
                               mounds all help to reduce the sound intensity of the freeway.
                               The French Valley Airport is also a source of noise in Temecula.
                               The aircraft mix at this airport includes mostly single-engine
                               aircraft, although some multi-engine aircraft and a small number of
                               business jets and helicopters also use the Airport. Larger aircraft
                               represent a more intrusive noise source. Impacted future uses
                               include office park areas and residential neighborhoods.
 C    I T Y         O F       T   E M E      C U L A        G   E N E R A L            P  L A   N
                                                   N-14
                               NOISE CONTROL AT RECEPTION SITES
                               The most efficient and effective means of controlling noise from
                               transportation systems is to reduce noise at the source. However,
                               the City has limited direct control over noise produced by
                               transportation sources because State noise regulations preempt local
                               regulations. Because the City cannot control noise at the source,
                               City noise programs focus on reducing the impact of transportation
                               noise reception sites.
                               During the planning stages of the development process, potential
                               impacts from transportation noise will be identified and mitigation
                               measures required as needed to meet City noise standards. Site
                               planning, landscaping, topography and the design and construction
                               of noise barriers are the most common method of alleviating
                               vehicular traffic noise impacts. Setbacks and buffers can also be
                               used to reduce noise.
PLANS IN ACTION                Noise-attenuating barriers are
Temecula supports efforts by   commonly incorporated into
Caltrans, RTA, and other       projects and can be extremely
agencies      to     provide   effective in reducing noise levels.
acoustical protection for      The effectiveness of barriers
noise sensitive uses. Also,    depends on: 1) the relative height
noise barriers should be       and materials of the barrier; 2)
constructed as part of
                               the noise source; 3) the affected
future     highway        and
roadway projects.
                               area; and 4) the horizontal distance between the barrier and the
                               affected area. Noise barriers should also be included in the design
                               of freeway/tollway, roadway and rail improvements.
                               Although noise barriers can be effective, the aesthetic effect of
                               barriers on neighborhoods must be considered during the
                               preliminary stages of the development process.             Potentially
                               significant visual impacts associated with noise barriers must be
                               addressed and mitigated through landscaping or other project
                               design measures in all new public and private projects.
                               NOISE CONTROL AT THE SOURCE
PLANS IN ACTION                The California Vehicle Code contains noise regulations pertaining
The City regulates traffic     to the operation of all vehicles on public roads. These standards for
flow and coordinates with      cars, trucks, and motorcycles are enforced through coordination
CHP to enforce speed limits    with the California Highway Patrol (CHP) and the Riverside
and reduce traffic noise.      County Sheriff s Department.
 C    I T Y         O F       T   E M E     C U L A          G   E N E R A L           P  L A    N
                                                   N-15
                   GOALS AND POLICIES
                   Four major issues are addressed in the Noise Element: 1) ensuring
                   the separation of significant noise generators and sensitive receptors
                   including residential areas and schools, 2) noise and vibration
                   transfers between adjacent land uses such as residences located
                   upstairs from nighttime commercial uses in mixed use
                   environments, 3) considering noise in the land use planning
                   process, and 4) minimizing the impacts of transportation-related
                   noise.
       SEPARATING  Separating noise generators from sensitive receptors will result in
   NOISE SOURCES   exterior environments that require minimal mitigation to meet
                   acceptable noise levels. Land use planning will ensure that sensitive
   FROM SENSITIVE  receptors are not impacted by noise hazards by locating these land
       RECEPTORS   uses distant from each other. Noise hazard areas will be considered
                   to include locations within the 65 CNEL contour of master planned
                   roadways, railroad corridors, aircraft flight paths, and industrial
                   facilities.
                   Goal 1          Separate significant       noise    generators    from
                                   sensitive receptors.
                   Policy 1.1      Discourage noise sensitive land uses in noisy exterior
                                   environments unless measures can be implemented
                                   to reduce exterior and interior noise to acceptable
                                   levels. Alternatively, encourage less sensitive uses in
                                   areas adjacent to major noise generators but require
                                   sound-appropriate interior working environments.
                   Policy 1.2      Limit the hours of construction activity next to
                                   residential areas to reduce noise intrusion in the
                                   early morning, late evening, weekends and holidays.
                   Policy 1.3      Use information from the noise contour map in the
                                   General Plan in the development review process to
                                   prevent the location of sensitive land uses near major
                                   stationary noise sources.
  NOISE TRANSFERS  Exterior and interior noise standards determine the design and
BETWEEN ADJACENT   location of various land uses. The City has the opportunity to
                   control noise between land uses through use of the City Noise
        LAND USES  Control Ordinance or other means.
 C  I T Y   O F   T   E M E     C U L A          G   E N E R A L            P  L A    N
                                        N-16
                 Goal 2         Minimize transfer of noise impacts between
                                adjacent land uses.
                 Policy 2.1     Limit the maximum permitted noise levels crossing
                                property lines and impacting adjacent land uses.
                 Policy 2.2     Establish criteria for placement and operation of
                                stationary outdoor equipment.
                 Policy 2.3     Require that mixed use structures and areas be
                                designed to prevent transfer of noise and vibration
                                from commercial areas to residential areas.
 NOISE AND LAND  Noise issues should always be considered during the planning
   USE PLANNING  process so that needed measures are incorporated in design and
                 location of land uses. In addition, the economic impacts of noise
                 attenuation measures can then be incurred by the property
                 developer and not by future owners who may not anticipate noise
                 impacts.
                 Goal 3         Minimize the impact of noise levels throughout
                                the community through land use planning.
                 Policy 3.1     Enforce and       maintain   acceptable noise limit
                                standards.
                 Policy 3.2     Work with the County of Riverside and the City of
                                Murrieta to minimize or avoid land use/noise
                                conflicts prior to project approvals.
                 Policy 3.3     Encourage the creative use of site and building
                                design techniques as a means to minimize noise
                                impacts.
                 Policy 3.4     Evaluate potential noise conflicts for individual sites
                                and projects, and require mitigation of all significant
                                noise impacts as a condition of project approval.
C I T Y    O F  T   E M E    C U L A          G   E N E R A L            P  L A    N
                                     N-17
TRANSPORTATION-  Many transportation-related noise sources exist in Temecula,
  RELATED NOISE  including freeways, major arterial and collector roadways, and
                 aircraft overflights. The City recognizes the importance of the
                 French Valley Airport to the region. Future land use patterns in the
                 General Plan have been designed to accommodate the flight paths
                 and noise contours of the airport as established by the Airport Land
                 Use Commission.
                 Goal 4          Minimize impacts from transportation noise
                                 sources.
                 Policy 4.1      Minimize noise conflicts between land uses and the
                                 circulation network, and mitigate sound levels where
                                 necessary or feasible to ensure the peace and quiet of
                                 the community.
                 Policy 4.2      Ensure the effective enforcement of City, State and
                                 federal noise standards by all City Divisions.
                 Policy 4.3      Enforce the speed limit on arterials and local roads
                                 to reduce noise impacts from vehicles, particularly in
                                 residential areas.
                 Policy 4.4      Coordinate with Caltrans to ensure the inclusion of
                                 noise mitigation measures in the design of new
                                 highways or improvement projects in the Planning
                                 Area.
                 Policy 4.5      Participate in the planning and impact assessment
                                 activities of the County Airport Land Use
                                 Commission and other regional or State agencies
                                 relative to any proposed expansion of the airport or
                                 change in flight patterns.
C  I T Y  O F   T   E M E    C U L A           G    E N E R A L           P  L A   N
                                     N-18
                   IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
                   The following actions, procedures and techniques are designed to
                   implement the goals and policies of the Noise Element.
              N-1  Incorporate measures into all development projects to attenuate
 NOISE/LAND USE    exterior and interior noise to acceptable levels. The City s noise
                   compatibility standards for each General Plan land use designation
    COMPATIBILITY  are provided in Table N-1. These standards shall be adhered to and
      STANDARDS    implemented during review of all development projects.
                   Review development proposals to ensure that the noise standards
                   and compatibility criteria are met. Require mitigation measures,
                   where necessary, to reduce noise levels to meet the noise standards
                   and compatibility criteria.
                   Agency/Department:          Planning
                   Related Policies:           1.1, 3.1, 3.4, 4.1
                   Required by General Plan EIR
             N-2   Minimize noise in Temecula through the following measures:
  CITY AND STATE
                   •   Require all non-emergency construction activity to comply with
           NOISE
                       the limits (maximum noise levels, hours and days of activity)
    REGULATIONS        established in State and City noise regulations (Title 24
                       California Code of Regulations, Temecula Development Code
                       and Chapter 8.32 of the Municipal Code).
                   •   Amend the City Noise Control Ordinance to establish criteria
                       for acceptable placement and operation of stationary outdoor
                       equipment.
                   •   Require proposed industrial or commercial projects located near
                       residential areas to demonstrate that the project, when
                       constructed, will meet with City noise reduction requirements.
                   •   Review the City Noise Control Ordinance for adequacy and
                       amend as needed to address community needs and development
                       patterns.
                   Agency/Department:          Planning
                   Related Policies:           1.2, 2.2, 4.2
                   Required by General Plan EIR
C  I T Y   O F    T  E M E      C U L A          G    E N E R A L         P  L A   N
                                      N-19

            N-3   Ensure that current noise hazard areas in the City are identified,
    USE OF NOISE  quantified, and mapped within the City s Geographic Information
                  System (GIS). Review discretionary development proposals for
   CONTOURS IN    potential on- and off-site stationary and vehicular noise impacts per
   DEVELOPMENT    the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). Any proposed
         REVIEW   development located within a 60 dB or higher noise contour (per
                  Figures N-2 and N-3) shall be reviewed for potential noise impacts
                  and compliance with City noise and land use compatibility
                  standards. The thresholds established in the Development Code,
                  Noise Control Ordinance, the noise contour maps and Tables N-1
                  and N-2 of the Noise Element will be used to determine the
                  significance of impacts. If potential impacts are identified,
                  mitigation measures (including those described in Program N-7) will
                  be required to reduce the impact to a level less than significant. If
                  the impact cannot be reduced to a level less than significant or
                  avoided with accepted noise reduction methods, the proposed
                  project will be determined Clearly Unacceptable and will not be
                  approved.
                  Agency/Department:          Planning
                  Related Policies:           1.3, 3.3, 3.4, 4.1
                  Required by General Plan EIR
            N-4   During review of development applications, consider the noise and
      NOISE AND   vibration impacts of the proposed land use on the current or
                  planned adjacent uses. Establish and enforce standards for noise
      VIBRATION   transfer between non-residential and residential components of
       TRANSFER   mixed use development projects.
     STANDARDS
                  Agency/Department:          Planning
                  Related Policies:           2.1, 2.3
            N-5   Implement the following measures for all discretionary development
    ACOUSTICAL    projects as a condition of development approval:
         STUDIES
                  •   Require proposed projects with potential to exceed established
                      noise-land use compatibility thresholds to have an acoustical
                      study prepared, including recommendations for special design
                      measures if the project is to be located close to current or
                      planned noise sensitive uses.
C I T Y    O F   T   E M E     C U L A          G    E N E R A L          P  L A   N
                                     N-20

                    •   Require proposed noise sensitive projects within noise impacted
                        areas to have an acoustical study prepared, including special
                        design measures to protect noise sensitive uses from ultimate
                        projected noise levels.
                    Agency/Department:          Planning
                    Related Policies:           1.3, 3.4
                    Required by General Plan EIR
              N-6   Implement the following measures to ensure coordination of noise
 NOISE CONTROL      control efforts:
  COORDINATION
                    •   Designate the Planning Director as the noise control
                        coordinator for new development, charged with the
                        responsibility to enforce City noise policy.
                    •   Work with the noise control coordinators for the County of
                        Riverside and City of Murrieta to ensure mitigation of potential
                        land use / noise conflicts near the City s edge.
                    •   Work with Caltrans and Riverside Transit Agency (RTA) to
                        ensure inclusion of acceptable mitigation measures in the design
                        of new highways or other improvements within the Planning
                        Area.
                    Agency/Department:          Planning
                    Related Policies:           1.3, 3.4
              N-7   Consider site design techniques as the primary means to minimize
MITIGATING NOISE    noise impacts. Require developers to consider alternative site
                    layouts and architectural features as a means of meeting City noise
   IMPACTS IN SITE  reduction requirements. Discourage projects that are incapable of
          DESIGN    successfully mitigating excessive noise. Site design and architectural
                    features recommended to reduce noise include (but are not limited
                    to) the following:
                    •   Utilize building setbacks to increase the distance between the
                        noise source and receiver.
                    •   Promote the placement of noise tolerant land uses such as
                        parking lots, maintenance facilities, and utility areas between the
                        noise source and receptor.
                    •   Orient buildings to shield outdoor spaces from a noise source.
                        Quiet outdoor spaces can be provided by creating a          -shaped
                        development with faces away from the roadway, or by clustering
                        land uses.
C   I T Y   O F    T  E M E      C U L A          G    E N E R A L            P  L A    N
                                        N-21

                 •   Place bedrooms on the side of the house, facing away from
                     major roadways. Use noise tolerant rooms such as garages,
                     bathrooms and kitchens to shield noise-sensitive areas.
                 •   When bedrooms cannot be located on the side of a house away
                     from a major roadway, require extra insulation and double-pane
                     windows.
                 •   Avoid balconies facing major travel routes. Development
                     proposals including balconies in the design will need to be
                     evaluated for potential noise impacts during the environmental
                     review process.
                 •   Where architectural design treatments fail to adequately reduce
                     adverse noise levels or will significantly increase the costs of
                     land development, require the combined use of noise barriers
                     and landscaped berms.
                 Agency/Department:         Planning
                 Related Policy:            3.3
                 Required by General Plan EIR
           N-8   Employ the following measures to mitigate transportation activity
        REDUCE   noise impacts to acceptable levels:
VEHICULAR NOISE
                 •   Incorporate noise control measures, such as sound walls and
                     berms, into roadway improvement projects to mitigate impacts
                     to adjacent development.          Measures will emphasize the
                     establishment of buffers between roadways and adjacent noise
                     sensitive areas.
                 •   Request that Caltrans provide noise control for highway projects
                     within the City, including interchange improvements along I-15,
                     widening of SR-79 south, SR-79 north, and the proposed Date
                     Street/I-15 interchange.
                 •   Provide noise control for City streets within the Planning Area
                     experiencing unique noise problems, such as Pechanga Parkway.
                 •   For projects close to master planned roadways, use the ultimate
                     roadway capacity at LOS C and the posted speed limit to
                     estimate maximum future noise impacts.
                 •   Coordinate with the Riverside County Sheriff s Department and
                     the California Highway Patrol to enforce the California Vehicle
                     Code noise standards for cars, trucks, and motorcycles.
                 Agency/Department:         Planning
                 Related Policies:          4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4
                 Required by General Plan EIR
C I T Y   O F   T  E M E      C U L A         G    E N E R A L          P   L A  N
                                      N-22

             N-9  Upon any update of the French Valley Airport Master Plan, the
  FRENCH VALLEY   County Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan, or the Caltrans
                  Airport Planning Handbook, review and revise as necessary Figure
         AIRPORT  N-3, and the goals, policies and noise plan within the General Plan
                  Noise Element to correspond with the updated plans.
                  Agency/Department:         Planning
                  Related Policy:            4.5
C  I T Y    O F  T  E M E     C U L A          G  E N E R A L           P  L A   N
                                    N-23
               This page left intentionally blank.
C I T Y O F T E M E    C U L A          G   E N E R A L P L A N
                               N-24
                                                         OPEN SPACE/
                         CONSERVATION ELEMENT
                  INTRODUCTION
                  T
                          he rolling hills, championship golf courses, hot-air
                          ballooning activities, picturesque wineries and open space all
                          help define the character of Temecula and the lifestyle
                          preference of City residents. Protecting and enhancing these
                  defining features contribute to the quality of life desired by the
                  community.
                  The Open Space/Conservation Element contains goals and policies
                  to encourage the conservation and proper management of
                  community resources. Furthermore, the Element ensures the
                  provision of parks and recreation opportunities, as well as
                  preservation of cultural heritage for residents.
  PURPOSE OF THE  The purpose of the Open Space/Conservation Element is to:
     OPEN SPACE/
                  •   Assure continued availability of predominantly open land for
  CONSERVATION
                      enjoyment of scenic beauty, for recreation, and to conserve
         ELEMENT      natural resources and agriculture;
                  •   Guide development in order to make wise and prudent use of
                      natural, environmental, and cultural resources;
                  •   Maintain and enhance valuable natural resource areas necessary
                      for the continued survival of significant wildlife and vegetation
                      through proactive open space planning;
                  •   Provide the foundation for a comprehensive open space
                      management system involving designated categories of open
                      space;
                  •   Establish the basis for City collaboration with State, national,
                      County, and non-profit agencies and organizations in broader
                      open space and environmental resource management, including
                      establishment of linkages with adjoining open spaces and trail
                      systems; and
C  I T Y    O F  T  E M E      C U L A          G   E N E R A L           P  L A   N
                                      OS-1

                 •   Maintain and promote the cultural, historic, and archaeological
                     heritage of Temecula.
     SCOPE AND   State legislation mandates that an Open Space Element and a
 CONTENT OF THE  Conservation Element be included in all local government general
                 plans. Due to the interrelationship of the goals and policies of the
    OPEN SPACE/  Open Space Element and Conservation Element and the overlap in
  CONSERVATION   State requirements, these two Elements are combined into a single
        ELEMENT  Element.
                 The Open Space Element contains goals and policies concerned
                 with managing all open space areas, including undeveloped
                 wilderness lands and outdoor recreation uses. The Government
                 Code defines that open space should be preserved for:
                 •   Preservation of natural resources;
                 •   Managed production of resources;
                 •   Recreation; and
                 •   Public health and safety.
                 These requirements ensure that cities and counties recognize that
                 open space land is a limited valuable resource that must be
                 conserved wherever possible. They also assure that every local
                 jurisdiction prepare and carry out open-space plans which, along
                 with State and regional open space plans, accomplish the objectives
                 of a comprehensive open space program.
                 The Government Code requires a Conservation Element for the
                 conservation, development, and utilization of natural resources,
                 including water and its hydraulic force, forests, soils, rivers, and
                 other waters, harbors, fisheries, wildlife, minerals, and other natural
                 resources. The Conservation Element may further address the
                 control of soil erosion, the conservation of watersheds, and flood
                 control methods to protect land in floodplains.
                 The Open Space/Conservation Element overlaps with provisions
                 found in the Land Use, Public Safety, and Growth
                 Management/Public Facilities Elements of the General Plan.
                 However, it differs by being almost exclusively oriented toward
                 natural resources. The conservation component contains goals
C I T Y    O F  T   E M E     C U L A          G   E N E R A L            P   L A   N
                                    OS-2

                 and policies that further the protection and maintenance of the
                 State s resources in the Temecula Planning Area. These resources
                 include water, soils, wildlife, minerals, and other natural resources
                 that should be considered to prevent wasteful exploitation,
                 degradation, and destruction.
                 The Open Space/Conservation Element also incorporates goals and
                 policies related to parks and recreation. This section of the Element
                 focuses on the relationship of park space to the entire Temecula
                 open space system and on the dedication and provision of parkland,
                 trails, and recreation facilities.
  RELATED PLANS  A number of other plans and programs enacted through federal,
  AND PROGRAMS   State and local legislation relate directly to the goals of the Open
                 Space/Conservation Element.
                 FEDERAL ENDANGERED SPECIES ACT
                 The Federal Endangered Species Act (ESA), administered by the U.S.
                 Fish and Wildlife Service, applies to federally listed species and
                 habitat occupied by federally listed species. ESA Section 9 forbids
                 specified acts that directly or indirectly harm listed species. Section
                 9 also prohibits taking any species of wildlife or fish listed as
                 endangered. These restrictions apply to all federal agencies and all
                 persons subject to United States jurisdiction.
                 U.S. FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE AND STATE DEPARTMENT OF FISH
                 AND GAME REGULATIONS
                 Both the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and California Department
                 of Fish and Game have regulations to protect wildlife resources.
                 Special permits are required for alteration, dredging, or any activity
                 in a lake or stream, as well as other activities that may affect fish
                 and game habitat. Both agencies also regulate impacts to sensitive
                 plant and animal species. Future development in Temecula that has
                 the potential to affect wildlife habitat will be subject to the
                 regulations of these federal and State agencies.
                 FEDERAL CLEAN WATER ACT
                 The Federal Clean Water Act (CWA), administered by the
                 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), employs a variety of
C  I T Y  O F   T   E M E      C U L A           G  E N E R A L           P   L A   N
                                      OS-3
             regulatory and non-regulatory tools to sharply reduce direct
             pollutant discharges into waterways, finance municipal wastewater
             treatment facilities, and manage polluted runoff. These tools are
             employed to achieve a broader goal of restoring and maintaining
             the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the nation's waters
             so that they can support the protection and propagation of fish,
             shellfish, and wildlife.
             NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
             The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
             permit, a requirement under the Clean Water Act, addresses
             pollution from urban runoff that impacts water quality of receiving
             waters (such as streams and lakes). Under NPDES, each jurisdiction
             must take measures to reduce urban runoff during all phases of
             development: planning, construction, and operation. Requirements
             include incorporating Best Management Practices to reduce runoff
             from construction and operation, reporting any violations to the
             San Diego Regional Water Quality Control Board (SDRWQCB)
             and education regarding the negative water quality impacts from
             urban runoff.
             CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT
             The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) was adopted by
             the State legislature in response to a public mandate for thorough
             environmental analysis of projects impacting the environment. The
             provisions of the law and environmental review procedures are
             described in the CEQA statutes and CEQA Guidelines. CEQA will
             continue to be instrumental in ensuring that the environmental
             impacts associated with local development projects are appropriately
             assessed and mitigated.
             CALIFORNIA ENDANGERED SPECIES ACT
             The California Endangered Species Act (CESA) generally parallels
             the main provisions of the Federal Endangered Species Act and is
             administered by the California Department of Fish and Game.
             CESA prohibits the taking of listed species except as otherwise
             provided in State law. Any future development or redevelopment in
             Temecula that has the potential to affect wildlife will be subject to
             the restrictions contained in CESA.
C I T Y O F T   E M E      C U L A        G   E N E R A L             P  L A    N
                                 OS-4
             CALIFORNIA SUBDIVISION MAP ACT
             Section 66477 of the Government Code provides local jurisdictions
             with the authority to acquire parklands in association with new land
             divisions. This provision of State law allows a city, by ordinance, to
             require the dedication of land, dedication of improvements,
             payment of an in-lieu fee, or any combination of these items, for
             park and recreational purposes as a condition on approving a
             subdivision map. These provisions have also been included in a
             local ordinance.
             CITY OF TEMECULA PARKS AND RECREATION MASTER PLAN
             The City has prepared a Master Plan of Parks and Recreation to
             comprehensively address the long-term park and recreation needs of
             residents. The Master Plan contains: a) current and projected
             recreational needs; b) park development and design standards; c) a
             park and trails classification system; d) parks, trails and recreation
             facilities improvements; e) target locations for acquisition of future
             parkland; future trail connections to the regional trail system; f) a
             Citywide bicycle route and recreation trails system; g) timing and
             phasing of parks, recreation facilities and trails; and h) cost
             estimates for park acquisition and development costs. The Master
             Plan will support implementation of the goals and policies in the
             Open Space/Conservation Element.
             CITY OF TEMECULA MULTI-USE TRAILS AND BIKEWAYS MASTER
             PLAN
             The City has also completed a trail master plan to address local trail
             and bikeway needs. The Plan establishes a trail network and sets
             facility standards for pedestrian, bicycle and equestrian users. The
             Master Plan also addresses trail connections to the countywide trail
             network. The Multi-Use Trails and Bikeways Master Plan further
             supports implementation of the goals and policies of the Open
             Space/Conservation Element.
C I T Y O F T   E M E     C U L A          G  E N E R A L             P  L A   N
                                 OS-5
             WESTERN RIVERSIDE COUNTY MULTI-SPECIES HABITAT
             CONSERVATION PLAN
             The Western Riverside County Multiple Species Habitat
             Conservation Plan (MSHCP) is a comprehensive, multi-
             jurisdictional Habitat Conservation Plan (HCP) focusing on
             conservation of species and their associated habitats in Western
             Riverside County. This Plan is one of several large, multi-
             jurisdictional habitat-planning efforts in Southern California, with
             the overall goal of maintaining biological and ecological diversity
             within a rapidly urbanizing region. The MSHCP will allow
             Riverside County and the cities within the County to better control
             local land-use decisions and maintain a strong economic climate in
             the region while addressing the requirements of the State and federal
             Endangered Species Acts.
             The MSHCP Plan Area encompasses approximately 1.26 million
             acres, including all unincorporated Riverside County land west of
             the crest of the San Jacinto Mountains to the Orange County line.
             It includes the cities of Temecula, Murrieta, Lake Elsinore, Canyon
             Lake, Norco, Corona, Riverside, Moreno Valley, Banning,
             Beaumont, Calimesa, Perris, Hemet, and San Jacinto. The HCP
             covers multiple species and multiple habitats within a diverse
             landscape, from urban centers to undeveloped foothills and forests,
             under multiple jurisdictions. The Plan extends across many
             bioregions, including the Santa Ana Mountains, Riverside
             Lowlands, San Jacinto Foothills, San Jacinto Mountains, Agua Tibia
             Mountains, Desert Transition, and San Bernardino Mountains and
             establishes a coordinated implementation program to preserve
             biological diversity and maintain the region's quality of life.
             NATIONAL RECREATION AND PARK ASSOCIATION
             The National Recreation and Park Association (NRPA) is a
             membership organization that focuses on advancing parks,
             recreation and environmental conservation efforts that enhance the
             quality of life for all people. The NRPA provides many services
             related to parks and recreation, including the development of youth
             programs, parks and recreation career information, safety and
             education. The NRPA also publishes national guidelines for parks
             and recreation development and conservation.
C I T Y O F T   E M E     C U L A         G   E N E R A L            P    L A N
                                 OS-6
                   OPEN SPACE/CONSERVATION PLAN
                   The Open Space/Conservation Element establishes an approach to
                   protect and enhance Temecula s park, recreation trail, water,
                   biological, energy, open space, historical and cultural, agricultural,
                   and other resources.
     PARKS AND     Parks and recreational facilities offer a broad range of benefits for
  RECREATIONAL     residents including:
       FACILITIES
                   •   Improving health and wellness, building self esteem, reducing
                       stress and providing opportunities for learning, and living a
                       more balanced productive life.
                   •   Building stronger families and enhancing community spirit.
                   •   Protecting open space areas and natural resources, enhancing air
                       and water quality, providing and protecting wildlife habitat, and
                       improving overall community livability.
                   •   Attracting business relocation and expansion, contributing to a
                       healthy and productive work force, attracting tourists and
                       retirees and enhancing real estate values.
                   The City of Temecula owns 31 parks with a total of area of
                   approximately 200 acres and about 60,000 square feet of recreational
                   space. These facilities include two recreation centers, an outdoor
                   amphitheater, a gymnasium, two swimming pools, a senior center,
                   as well as the Temecula Valley and Temecula Children s Museums.
                   Table OS-1 provides a summary of the existing parks and
                   recreational facilities within Temecula. Locations of these parks and
                   facilities are shown on Figure OS-1.
                   Temecula has 22 neighborhood parks. Neighborhood parks are
                   intended to provide for the daily recreation needs of residents in the
                   immediate area of the park. The neighborhood park usually serves
                   residents within a half-mile radius. The optimum size of the park is
                   from three to ten acres. The facilities should include open field
                   play areas, picnic areas and tot lots. Neighborhood parks should be
                   easily accessible by pedestrians and bicyclists.
C I T Y   O F     T   E M E       C U L A         G  E N E R A L           P  L A    N
                                        OS-7

                                                 Table OS-1
                           City of Temecula Parks and Recreation Facilities (2004)
                                                                                                                                                                                           Other Uses
                                                                                                                                                 Swimming
                                           Basketball                                     Volleyball
                                                                  Soccer/                                                                                   Wildlife             Meeting
                                                                                                                                   Tot Lot
                                                                                                       Roller   In-line                                                Amphi-
                                                                             Tennis
                                                                                                                          Picnic
                                                            BBQ
                                                                  Baseball                             Hockey   Skating   Tables
                                                                                                                                                   Pool     Viewing    theater   Room
Parks and Recreation
Facilities
Neighborhood Parks
Bahia Vista Park
Butterfield Stage Park
Calle Aragon Park
Crowne Hill Park
John McGee Park
Kent Hintergardt Memorial Park
Loma Linda Park
Long Canyon Creek Park
Meadows Park
Nakayama Park
Nicholas Road Park
Pablo Apis Park
Pauba Ridge Park
Riverton Park
Rotary Park
Sam Hicks Monument Park
Serena Hills Park
Stephen Linen Jr. Memorial Park
Vail Ranch Park
Veteran’s Park
Voorburg Park
Winchester Creek Park
Specialty Parks
Temecula Duck Pond
Temecula Skate Park
Sports Parks
Harveston Community Park
Margarita Community Park
Pala Community Park
Paloma del Sol Park
Patricia H. Birdsall Sports Park
Ronald Reagan Sports Park
Temeku Hills Park
Recreational Facilities
Community Recreation Center
Imagination Workshop / Temecula
Children’s Museum
Mary Philips Senior Center
Sam Hicks Monument Park
Temecula Community Center
Temecula Valley Museum
           C       I   T Y         O   F                T   E     M    E     C        U   L            A        G   E     N   E    R         A      L         P        L   A     N
                                                                                          OS-8

      Figure OS-1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Keller Rd
      Parks & Recreational Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mc Colery Rd
      CITY OF TEMECULA GENERAL PLAN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Pat Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Specili Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Briggs Rd                                                                    Elliot Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                Judith St
      Legend
      1. Bahia Vista Park                                                                         20. Temecula Skate Park Baxter Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jean N icho las Rd
      2. Butterfield Stage Park                                                                   21. Veterans Park
      3. Calle Aragon Park                                                                        22. Voorburg Park
      4. John Magee Park                                                                          23. Long Canyon Creek Park                                                                                      City of Murrieta                                                                                  rR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      d                                                                                                                                                                        County of
      5. Kent Hintergardt Memorial Park                                                           24. Stephen Linen Jr. Memorial
                                                                                                                            Lee Ln
                                                                                                                                    Park                                                                        Sphere of Influence                                                                           es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                te                                                                                                                                                                             Riverside
      6. Loma Linda Park                                                                          25. Pablo Apis Park                                                                                                                                                                                     ch
                                                                                                                                                        Menifee Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         in
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Liberty Rd
      7. Nakayama Park                                                                            26. Winchester Creek Park                                                                                                                                                                          W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Briggs Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Pourroy Rd
      8. Nicolas Road Park                                                                        27. Mary Philips Senior Center                                                                                                                                                      Leon Rd
      9. Temecula History Museum                                                                  28. Margarita Community Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Thompson Rd
      10. Pala Community Park                                                                     29. Chapel at Sam Hicks Memorial Park
      11. Paloma Del Sol Park                                                                     30. Imagination Workshop
      12. Rancho California Sports Park                                                           31. Temeku Hills Park
      13. Riverton Park                                                                           32. Crowne Hill Park                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Benton Rd
      14. Rotary Park                                                                             33. Meadows Park
      15. Sam Hicks Memorial Park                                                                 34. Harveston Community Park
      16. Temecula Community Center
      17. Temecula Duck Pond
                                                                                                  35. Serena Hills Park
                                                                                                  36. Pauba Ridge Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ÿ                                                Auld Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Skinner
      18. Community Recreation Center                                                             37. Patricia H. Birdsall Sports Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Maddalena Rd
      19. Vail Ranch Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pourroy Rd
                                                                                                                                                         Cal le De Amor
                                                     Temecula City Boundary                                                                                                                                                                                                       Leon Rd            Allen Rd
                                                     Sphere of Influence Boundary
                                                                   hi                                        W
                                                                      t
                                                                                                                  ew
                                                                                                                        d Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Rd
                                                     Planning Area                                                    oo                                                                                                                                                                                                                        oy
                                                                                                                                                                          Hun ter Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Borel Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      u    rr
                                          Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Po
                                                                     Ø
                                                                     "
                                                                                                                 Dr                                                                                                                                                                              Pr o m o
      Ø
      Source: Temecula and Riversider riCounty GIS, 2001
                                                                     #
                                          os
      "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         n
      #         lam                     e ta                                                                                                                                                                                Dr
                                A                                                          Mu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                to   ry             Pk y
                            s
                         Lo                                                   Al
                                                                                       a                                                                                                                            y on
                                                                                t
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ca n
                                                                                                                                                                                                          S ky
                                                                                 M u rr ie ta
                                                                                                         Ho t                   d
                                                                                                                      Springs R                                                                                                                                                                  Mu rrieta Hot Springs Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Buck Rd
                         City of
                        Murrieta                                                 Ja                                                                                                            W
                                                                                                                                                                                                   y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      d
                                                                                  ck
                                                                                                                                                                                      i   re                                                             ve                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               R
                                                                                      son
                                                                                                                                                                                   na                                                               sA                                                                              sR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       l ow
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a
                                                                                                                                                                              Bo                                                                                                                                                 ola
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Butterfield Stage Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              W il                                                                                  N ic                                                                                                                                                                                                                        r en d
                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                              Av                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                V in
                                                                                                                                                                      26
                                                                                                 e
                                                          M                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            oW                                                                      Be
                                                             ad                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             y
                                                                   is on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               la         s Rd        ! 7                                                                                                                                                                                                 C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !!
               St                                                        Av                                                                                                                                                              Nic o
          va                                                                                                                                                                                                            8 22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                                                                                                                                                       al le
                                                                             e
 G
     ua                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13
                                W                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Vista D e           Rd
                                    as                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   l Mo n te                                                                              C on
                                           t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ten
                                        ng
                                     hi
                                             on
                                                Av                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                       34
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             rte
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Via N ort
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L a S eren a W y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     No
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                    D                              e                                                                                                                        M
                    ou
                        gl                                                                                                                                                    arg                        Via                                                                                                                               35
                                                                                                                                                                               a r ita Rd
                        as
                         sA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     a   Rd
                             ve                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Rd                                                                                                                                                                                 l if   or ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               R ey                                                                                                                                                                                             Ca
                                                                                                                                           Yn
                                                                                                                                               z
                                                                                                                                               e
                                                                                                                                                   Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                   23                                                                   Del
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !  31
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    n   ch o
                                                                        St                                                                                                                                                                                                      Se r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             La                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Dr
                                                                   ry                                                             f                                                                                                                                                                                          do                                                                                                                                                       Pla y a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ra De
                                                                                                                               Je
                                                            er                                                                    rs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Mad e
                                                          Ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                fe                                                                                                                                                                                                     Pk
                                                                                                                                      on                                                                                                                                    21                                                             y
                                                                                                                                       Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Rd
                                                                                                                                           e
                                                                                                          d                                                                                                                 it a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rd
                                                                                                        rR                                                                                                           ar                                                                                                                Rd                                                                                                                                           ba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Pau
                                                                                                ste                                                                                                      arg                                                                                                              rn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ia
                                                                                             he                                                                                                          M                                                                                                              fo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                         c                                                                                                                                                                                                                         li
                                                                                  W
                                                                                      in                                        Di
                                                                                                                                 az                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                               28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     nc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ho
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ca                                                                                                                                          36
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!
                                                                                                                                      Rd
                                             Ra                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1                                                                                                                                                                                                              L in da R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  o
                                                nc                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3
                                                  ho
                                                     Ca
                                                       lif                                                                                                                           Yn
                                                                                                                                                                                        e
                                                                                                                                                                                            !  17
                                                                                                                                                                                               z          R a nc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                h o V ist a R                                                                                                            ba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !   33
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ll e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          se   a Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Bu t t e r
                                                        or                                                                                                                                                                    d                                                                                                   Pa u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          C on t en to
                                                           ni                                                                                                                                      Rd
                             nida D el O ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Me ado w s P k y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                             a
                         A ve
                                                                                                                                                                d
                                                                                                                                                                    R
                                                                                                                                                      !                                                                                             !! !
                                                               Rd
                                                                                                                                                     nia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 32
                                                                                                                           Ra n c h o C a
                                                                                                                                          l if o r
                                                                                                                                                     !!!15 29
                                                                                                                                                           9 27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     18 12 20                                            M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          arga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     fie l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               St a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         De Portola Rd
                                                                                                                                                       !                     30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           oR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r it a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rd            !        2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t   ia g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            San
                                                                                                                                                       !                     14
                                                                                           Via Sant
                                                                                                                                                        !                       16
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Va l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Yn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ez
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Rd                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    A nz
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         a R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             d   }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ÿ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 79
                                                                                                                                                                                                         le j
                                                                                              a Ro sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                             o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Av                                                                    la
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          D e P o rt o                                                                                                                                                          Pky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        e
                                       an c
                                     B arr
                                            a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !   4                                                                                                      Va
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              il R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !24
                                    Via
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      i nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               aR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ! 25
                                                              ro Rd
                                                            a q ue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Lo            m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    aL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !    5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            k Pk y                                                                            za
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          aw                                                                             An
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 dh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Rd
                                                          V ia V                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            y                                                                              Re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ll e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6                                      f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Va
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Pechanga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   37
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ø
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Entertainment
                                                                                                                                                                                                             "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ol
                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          d                                                              Sp                                                                            rH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       nR                                                                  ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Center                                                             ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                a                                                                 D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   yo                                                                               Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            wC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        bo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Û
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   in
µ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           c han g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pe
                                               0                                    5,000                                              10,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  k way
                                                                                                                                           Feet                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             a P ar
                                                                                                                                            Miles
                                               0                                                      1                                              2
C I T Y                                                                      O F                                                      T E M E C U L A                                                                                                                                                                                       G E N E R A L                                                                                                                                                                                           P L A N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OS-9

                               The City also offers two specialty and five sports parks. Specialty
                               parks are facilities that support one or two activities, such as the
                               Temecula Skate Park designed to meet the needs of skateboarders
                               and in-line skaters. Sports parks are larger parks that offer facilities
                               for a variety of sports, including basketball, football, soccer, and/or
                               tennis. The largest sports park in Temecula is the Ronald Reagan
                               Sports Park, which has an area of 73 acres.
                                                               In addition, the City maintains six
                                                               recreational facilities, including a
                                                               recreation center with an outdoor
                                                               amphitheater, a community center, a
                                                               senior center, two museums, and a
                                                               historic chapel.
PLANS IN ACTION                The City has a joint-use agreement with the Temecula Valley
School facilities provide      Unified School District which allows the City to light and utilize
additional       recreational  school facilities. These facilities are generally open to the public
space and facilities to the    during non-school hours, weekends and vacations, and as such are
overall recreation system in   considered adjuncts to the citywide park system. The following
Temecula.                      school sites are presently joint-use facilities:
                               •   Temecula Middle School (Illuminated baseball and soccer fields)
                               •   Temecula Elementary School (Pool)
                               •   Temecula Valley High (Illuminated tennis courts)
                               •   Chaparral High School (Pool)
                               Private recreation facilities are found primarily in planned
                               communities and apartment complexes. These facilities usually
                               include tennis or basketball courts. The existing facilities are
                               limited, but they help meet the demand for parks and recreation
                               facilities within the community.
                               Several commercial recreation facilities,
                               including three golf courses, are located
                               within the City and Planning Area.
                               These facilities include the Temecula
                               Creek Inn Golf Resort, Temeku Hills
                               Golf Course, and the Redhawk Golf
                               Club.
 C    I T Y          O F      T  E M E       C U L A         G    E N E R A L            P  L A    N
                                                   OS-10

                               Temecula residents can also enjoy the 600-acre Lake Skinner
                               Regional Park, located several miles east of Temecula. The park
                               offers overnight camping, fishing, swimming, sailing, picnicking,
                               and other activities. Additional regional recreation facilities include
                               the Cleveland National Forest to the southeast of the City. The
                               U.S. Forest Service is responsible for the long-term management of
                               recreation activities, vegetation, water and air quality, wilderness
                               resources, fire safety, historical and cultural resources, and land use
                               within forest boundaries. Demand for the types of activities and
                               experiences offered in the Cleveland National Forest is strong.
PLANS IN ACTION                The basic park acreage standard for the City of Temecula is 5.0 acres
Several funding sources are    of usable City-owned parkland per 1,000 residents. This standard
used to develop additional     does not include special use facilities, natural open space or trails.
park land, including           Sufficient acreage to meet the needs of residents is anticipated by
Quimby Act in-lieu fees,       the year 2013 through the acquisition and dedication of parks and
development impact fees        school facilities within specific plan areas.
and developer agreements.
                WATER          Protection of water quality and the
          RESOURCES            adequate water supplies are critical for
                               the health and quality of life of
                               Temecula residents, employees, and
                               visitors.    Within Temecula, surface
                               waters requiring conservation and
                               management to protect quality and
                               quantity include the Santa Margarita River, Temecula Creek,
                               Murrieta Creek, Pechanga Creek, and Santa Gertrudis Creek.
                               Surface water sources are subject to pollutants and sediment carried
                               in runoff. Pollutants such as heavy metals, petroleum products,
                               animal waste, and trash can be carried through the storm drain
                               system into receiving waters. These pollutants affect the beneficial
PLANS IN ACTION                uses of the receiving waters, including recreation, aesthetic
Temecula requires use of       enjoyment and preservation of fish and wildlife habitat.
Best Management Practices
(BMPs) to reduce runoff        To address the problem of urban runoff, the Clean Water Act was
from construction and
                               amended in 1987. One of the amendments included the National
current land uses, consistent
with NPDES permit              Pollutant Discharge Elimination Permit (NPDES). This permit
requirements.                  requires jurisdictions to enforce requirements reducing polluted
                               urban runoff during all phases of development.
 C    I T Y         O F       T   E M E     C U L A           G    E N E R A L           P  L A    N
                                                    OS-11
                              The local ground water basin is the Murrieta-Temecula Basin, which
                              is the largest groundwater basin in the San Diego water region. This
                              aquifer is recharged by underflow, surface flow from the creeks in
                              the area, and by direct precipitation in the valley.
                              Water drawn from underground aquifers may be susceptible to
                              pollutants originating at industrial sites. Water from wells is treated
                              and examined regularly to ensure public safety. One groundwater
                              production well was contaminated by a MTBE plume but
                              subsequent aquifer remedial cleanup activities have allowed this
                              facility to be placed back into service. Furthermore, other
                              groundwater production wells were nearly contaminated by a
                              separate MTBE plume, but subsequent aquifer remedial cleanup
                              activities have allowed these facilities to remain in operation.
      WATER SUPPLY            Water quality is a regional issue regulated at the county, State and
        AND QUALITY           federal levels. The Rancho California Water District (RCWD)
                              supplies most of the domestic and commercial water to Temecula,
                              paid for by user fees. Water supply to the City is drawn from the
                              Murrieta-Temecula groundwater basin and supplemented with
                              imported water from the Metropolitan Water District (MWD).
                              Other sources include reclaimed water and untreated MWD water
                              used for groundwater recharge. The current and future projected
                              distribution of water sources are provided below. The local water
                              agency expects that there will not be a shortage of water supplies in
                              the future.
                                                            TABLE OS-2
                                   RANCHO CALIFORNIA WATER DISTRICT WATER SOURCES
                                                                                        Future/
                                              Sources                        Present
                                                                                      Build-Out
                              Local Groundwater                                  35%          26%
                              MWD Water                                          37%          55%
                              Reclaimed Water                                     3%           9%
                              Groundwater Recharge                               24%          10%
PLANS IN ACTION
                              Source: Rancho California Water District, 2002
Temecula supports and
promotes      safe    water
supplies and construction of  The City is also served by the Eastern Municipal Water District
needed water infrastructure   (EMWD), which derives its water primarily from MWD but also
for the community through     draws groundwater from its wells in the Hemet and San Jacinto
program coordination with     area. Some of these wells have limited production as a result of the
RCWD and EMWD, as             Fruitvale Judgment and Decree, which limits the amount the
well as other responsible     Fruitvale Mutual Water Company, now part of EMWD, can
regional, State, and federal  withdraw from these wells. The current distribution of EMWD
agencies.                     water sources is provided in Table OS-3. EMWD also has wells
 C    I T Y         O F      T   E M E      C U L A           G    E N E R A L          P  L A    N
                                                   OS-12
                 in the Moreno Valley, Perris Valley, and Murrieta areas. EMWD is
                 working to increase supplies of recycled water.
                                                  TABLE OS-3
                         EASTERN MUNICIPAL WATER DISTRICT WATER SOURCES
                       Local Groundwater                              75%
                       MWD Water                                      25%
                       Source: Eastern Municipal Water District, 2002
     BIOLOGICAL  Although much of Temecula is
     RESOURCES   comprised of urbanized and/or
                 disturbed areas that generally
                 have low habitat value for native
                 wildlife, a great variety of
                 sensitive biological resources are
                 known to exist or potentially
                 exist        within         remaining
                 undeveloped portions of the
                 Planning Area. Some sensitive
                 biological resources, as well as wildlife corridors are found in the
                 City. Sensitive resources in the Planning Area are closely associated
                 with coastal sage scrub and riparian communities. In general,
                 identified resources are threatened, deteriorated or damaged
                 primarily due to the effects of urbanization, hillside agriculture and
                 an expanding population base.
                 Thirteen vegetation communities have been identified within the
                 Temecula Planning Area. Native vegetation communities include: a)
                 Diegan Coastal Sage Scrub, b)                 Riversidian Sage Scrub, c)
                 Riversidian Alluvial Fan Sage Scrub, d) Disturbed Alluvial, e)
                 Chaparral, f) Vernal Pool, g) Southern Cottonwood-willow
                 Riparian, h) Southern Sycamore-alder Riparian Woodland, i)
                 Riparian Scrub, j) Mule Fat Scrub, k) Southern Willow Scrub and
                 l) Oak Woodland. Four additional categories, consisting primarily
                 of non-native vegetation with reduced biological value, were also
                 identified within the Planning Area. Non-native Grassland is
                 considered to be a semi-native vegetation community because
                 remnants of these other vegetation communities may be found in
                 grassland areas. These categories also include areas of Open Water/
                 Reservoir/Pond, Residential/Urban/Exotic lands, Field Croplands
                 and Groves/Orchards.
C I T Y   O F   T   E M E      C U L A           G    E N E R A L            P  L A   N
                                       OS-13
                               Temecula is located within the Western Riverside County Multiple
                               Species Habitat Conservation Plan (MSHCP) area. The overall
                               biological goal of the MSHCP is to maintain and restore biological
                               diversity and natural ecosystem processes that support diversity in
                               natural areas within Western Riverside County known to support
                               threatened, endangered or key sensitive populations of plant and
                               wildlife species. The MSHCP identifies five geographic locations
                               within the planning area that contain potential regional wildlife
                               corridor linkages, including French Valley, Lower Tucalota Creek,
                               Temecula Creek, Pechanga Creek, and Murrieta Creek.
                               Sensitive habitats in the Temecula
                               Planning Area include, but are
                               not limited to: a) alkali sink
                               scrub; b) native grassland; c)
                               alkali meadows; d) alkali and
                               freshwater seeps; e) freshwater
                               marshes; f)      vernal pools; g)
                               riparian vegetation including
                               cottonwood-willow riparian forests, willow riparian forests, coast
                               live oak riparian forest, southern sycamore riparian woodland;
                               southern riparian scrub, and riparian herb communities; h) coast
                               live oak woodland; and i) Englemann oak woodland. These
                               vegetative communities are considered important for sustaining an
                               ecologically viable habitat in the region.
PLANS IN ACTION
The       City      preserves                               According to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
important          biological                               Service (April 2003), the following plant
resources within open space                                 species that were historically located in
areas left in a natural state                               the Planning Area are endangered: the
to support habitat for plant                                slender-horned spineflower, California
and animal species, assesses                                Orcutt grass, and Munz's onion. In
development proposals for
                               addition, the following animal species are listed by the federal
potential      impacts     to
sensitive resources pursuant
                               government as endangered and/or by the State government as
to CEQA and consults           threatened: Stephens' kangaroo rat, California gnatcatcher,
with natural resource          southwestern pond turtle, orange-throated whiptail lizard, and
regulatory agencies when       Riverside fairy shrimp. The Federal Endangered Species Act of 1973
necessary.                     prohibits any action that would harm, harass, kill, or further
                               endanger a listed species or its habitat.
 C     I T Y         O F      T   E M E     C U L A          G   E N E R A L            P  L A   N
                                                   OS-14
                 ENERGY        Energy requirements, and pollutants resulting from the generation
     CONSERVATION              of energy, can be reduced through innovative architectural design,
                               building construction, structural orientation, and landscaping. The
PLANS IN ACTION                City will continue to promote energy conservation by implementing
Temecula conserves energy
                               State Title 24 energy performance requirements through building
in public buildings, and       codes. In addition, the relationship between project design and
encourages provision of        future energy requirements will be considered when reviewing
electric vehicle charging      proposals for new development. Promotion of utility company
areas in new public and        incentive programs to retrofit existing development with energy
private developments.          efficient lighting, air conditioning and heating systems can be
                               beneficial.
           HISTORICAL          Temecula is a community with a rich
     AND CULTURAL              history. Due to the presence of reliable
                               water sources and a fertile valley floor, the
           RESOURCES           Temecula area has always been a desirable
                               place to live. The Indians known as the Luiseño were inhabiting the
                               area in the 1700 s when the first Spanish padres visited. In 1858,
                               Temecula became a stop on the Butterfield Overland Stage route.
                               In 1859, only ten and one-half years after California's first post
                               office was established, Temecula was established as the first post
                               office in inland southern California.
                               Historic structures and sites identified by the City of Temecula are
                               identified in Figure OS-2. In addition, the City includes: 23
                               recorded archaeological sites; 47 properties listed on the Historic
                               Resources Inventory prepared by Riverside County; four listings on
                               the California Inventory of Historic Resources; and several historic
                               resources of local importance, including the Butterfield Overland
                               Stage Route.
                               Other sites listed on the California Inventory of Historic Resources
                               include the Murrieta Creek Archaeological Area, Temecula's first
PLANS IN ACTION                Post Office at the Wolf store, Temecula granite quarries, and the
The       City       reviews   Little Temecula Rancho Adobe. Archaeological sites include
development proposals to       prehistoric sites, sites occupied by
ensure historic and cultural   Native Americans, and historical sites
resources are conserved, in    associated with the occupation of
compliance      with     this
                               Temecula Valley by Europeans and
Element and CEQA.
                               Euro-Americans.
 C     I T Y        O F       T   E M E      C U L A        G   E N E R A L           P  L A   N
                                                   OS-15

                                                                                                                               e                      ea
                                                                                                                       er
                                                                                                                  La S                                     do
                                                                                                                                                                  ky
                                                                                                                                                               wsP
                                                                                                Rd
                                                                                                                     Ø
                                                                                                                     "
                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                     A.   Saint Catherine's Church, 1920
                                                                                            a                                                        B.   Welty Building, 1897
                                                                                         ni
                                                                                  fo r
             Ø
                                                                                                                                                     C.   Machado Store, 1910
Gonzales
             "
             #                                                               li                                                                                    Rd
                                                                                                                                                     D.    Clogstone Restaurant, 1932
                                                                          Ca                                                                                 a
 Adobe                                                           o                                                                                       rni
                                                                                                                                                     E.   First National Bank, 1914
                                                             nch
                                                           Ra                                                                                        lifo
                                                                                                                                                     F.   Palomar Hotel, 1915
                                                                                                                                      C          a   G.   Alec Escallier House, 1927-28
Di
   az                                                                              J e ff e                                      nc
                                                                                                                                   ho                H.   Burnham Store, 1902
                                                                                                                              R a                    I.   Friedeman Meat Market, 1901
   Rd                                                                                 rs o                       A                                   J.   Welty House, 1891
                                                                                                                                                     K.   J.D. Welty, 1936
                                                                                          nA              St. Catherine's                            L.   Arviso House, 1920
                                                                                                ve       Catholic Church
                                   Yn
                              Rd     ez                                                                                  F                                                 Rd
                                                                                                                                                                  ba
                      ia
                                          Rd
                                                                                                                                     L                        Pau
                       rn
              alif o
 Ra n c h o C                                                                         M                                          M                         G
                                                                                                                               H E               C
                                                                                   N                                                            d
                                                                                                                                          ita R
                                                                                                                                                          D
                                                                                                                                       gar
                                               Temecula
                                                                                                         O                                   B
                                                                                                                                     ar
                                               Cemetery                                                                                  I
                                                                             R    d                          P
                                                                         ago
                                                                                                                                     J
                                                                    ti
                                                              San                                            Q                           K
                                                            M.   Unnamed Residence, 1928                             R Old Station California
                                               Old Pujol    N.   Bill Friedeman House, 1922                              Southern Pacific
                                                           Yn
                                                            O.   Nienke House, 1936
                                                School      P.
                                                            ez   McConville House, early 1890's                          S
                                                            Q.   Albert Nienke House, early 1920's
                                                  Va        R.   Rd
                                                                 G.A. Burnham House, early 1880's
                                   Slaughter       lle      S.   Al Otto House, 1882
                                     House          jo
                                                       Av                                                                                                      Vail Ranch
                                                                                                                             d
                                                                                                                         la R                                   Complex
                                                          e
                                                                                                             De P o r to
                                                                                                                                                  Casa Loma
                                                                                                                                                  Vail Cattle
                                                                                                                                                 Ranch Home
                                           Temeku
                                          Village Site                                                                               a       Rd
                                                                                                                                 ind
                                                                                                                               aL
                                                                                                                         Lo   m
                                                              Stone                                           Wolf's
                                                              House                                                                                                        Rd
                                                                                                              Tomb
                                                                                                                                                                   Va
                                                                                                                                                                      lle
                                                                                                                                                                          y
                                                                                                                                                               f
                                                                                                                                                              ol
                                                                                                             Granite                                       W
                                                                                                             Quarries
                                                                                                                                                                                                       W
  Figure OS-2                                                                                                                               Pechanga                                                lo w
  Historic Structures and Sites                                                                                                         Entertainment                                           ol
                                                           Ø
                                                                                                                                     Sp
                                                           "
                                                                                                                                                                                               H
                                                           #
                                                                          d                                                                                                                     r
  CITY OF TEMECULA GENERAL PLAN                                       nR                                                               ar
                                                                                                                                          t
                                                                                                                                             Center                                        ee
                                                                                                                                             a                                             D
  Legend                                                           n yo                                                                          Ln
                                                                 Ca                                                                                                Rancho
                  Historic Structures                                                                                                                             Del Pasado
                                                              ow                                                                                               "Esealler House"
                  Historic Sites                           inb
                  Old Town Temecula Study Area             Ra
                                                                          µ
                  Temecula City Boundary
                                                                                                     0           1,250       2,500                         5,000
                  Sphere of Influence Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                   Feet
                  Planning Area
                                                                                                                                                                   Miles
  Source: City of Temecula                                                                           0           0.25         0.5                              1
C I T Y                 O F             T E M E C U L A                                         G E N E R A L                                                      P L A N
                                                                         OS-16

                The historic core of Temecula is in Old Town. This area contained
                the first railroad station and civic uses, and constituted all of
                Temecula until the 1950 s. The City adopted the Old Town Specific
                Plan in 1994 to protect the remaining historic structures and
                maintain the area s historic character. The City continues to work
                with the local historical society to identify and protect significant
                historic resources outside of the Old Town area.
  AGRICULTURAL  Agriculture and related activities
     RESOURCES  form a large portion of Riverside
                County s economic base. Riverside
                County ranks ninth among
                Counties in California in terms of
                agricultural production. Riverside
                County is divided into four
                agricultural districts: Coachella
                Valley, Palo Verde Valley, Riverside/Corona                      and    San
                Jacinto/Temecula Valley.
                The Farmland Mapping and Monitoring Program (FMMP)
                administered by the California Department of Conservation assigns
                one of four designations to significant farmlands: Prime Farmlands,
                Farmlands of Statewide Importance, Unique Farmlands and
                Farmlands of Local Importance. Urban growth pressures in
                Riverside County in recent decades have resulted in the conversion
                of farmland to urban uses. Table OS-4 summarizes the changes in
                agricultural land in Riverside County between 2000 and 2002.
                Riverside County had 13,166 fewer arces of farmland in 2002 than
                in 2000. Most of this loss was due to urbanization.
                                                TABLE OS-4
                            FARMLAND CONVERSION IN RIVERSIDE COUNTY
                                                 2000-2002
                                                             Total Acreage Inventoried
                          Farmland Category
                                                               2000              2002
                  Prime Farmland                              151,011           141,175
                  Farmland of State Importance                 49,446            48,046
                  Unique Farmland                              40,950            39,049
                  Farmland of Local Importance                243,414           240,672
                  Grazing Land                                124,714           126,887
                  Total                                       609,535           596,369
                  Source: California Department of Conservation, Farmland Mapping and
                  Monitoring Program, 2004.
C I T Y   O F  T   E M E       C U L A          G   E N E R A L               P   L A   N
                                      OS-17
                              As shown in Figure OS-3 and Table OS-5, only small portions of
                              significant farmland remain in Temecula. Much of the land
                              designated for agricultural purposes in Temecula had already been
                              developed or entitled prior to the City s incorporation.
                              Approximately 1,000 acres of prime farmland and some small areas
                              designated as unique farmland are located in the southern and
                              eastern portions of the Temecula Planning Area.
                                                              TABLE OS-5
                                                       SIGNIFICANT FARMLAND
                                            WITHIN THE TEMECULA PLANNING AREA 2002
                                                                                     Percent of Total
                                         Farmland Category              Acres
                                                                                        Farmland
                                 Prime Farmland                            1,076             8%
                                 Farmland of State Importance                203             2%
                                 Unique Farmland                           1,724            14%
                                 Farmland of Local Importance              8,716            69%
                                 Grazing Land                                974             7%
                                 Total                                   12,693            100%
                                 Source: California Department of Conservation, Farmland Mapping and
                                 Monitoring Program, 2002.
PLANS IN ACTION               Riverside County designates all properties with Williamson Act
Williamson Act contracts      contracts as Agricultural Preserves. Under a Williamson Act
are located throughout the    contract, the local jurisdiction and landowners agree to continue
Planning Area and much        agricultural activities for at least ten years.            In return, the
of the land east of the City  jurisdiction agrees to assess the property at agricultural value rather
is used as vineyards or as    than at market value. Termination of the contract may be initiated
citrus and avocado groves.    by either the property owner or jurisdiction.
This area is designated as a
Rural Preservation Area
in the Land Use Element.
                              Approximately 18 wineries are located in and adjacent to the eastern
                              Planning Area. These wineries constitute the most important wine-
                              making region in Southern California, and make important
                              contributions to the City in terms of trade, tourism and the
                              aesthetic character of the area. The farmland and wineries in the
                              Planning Area offer opportunities for both agricultural innovation
                              and business development within the City.
                   TRAIL      Recreation or transportation-oriented trails for walking, horseback
                  SYSTEM      riding, and bicycling provide City residents and visitors with
                              increased opportunity for physical activities. Exercise gained in
 C    I T Y         O F      T   E M E      C U L A           G   E N E R A L              P   L A    N
                                                   OS-18
      Figure OS-3
      Agricultural Resources                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Keller Rd
      CITY OF TEMECULA GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mc Colery Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Pat Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Specili Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Briggs Rd
      Legend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Elliot Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                      Judith St
                                                    Grazing Land                                                                                                      Baxter Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jean Nicholas Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                              City of Murrieta                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          County of
                                                    Farmland of Local Importance                                                                                                                                                                                                                          rR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                      Lee Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Sphere of Influence                                                                     es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      te
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ch
                                                    Prime Farmland
                                                                                                                                                     Menifee Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               in
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Liberty Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Briggs Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pourroy Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Leon Rd
                                                    Farmland of Statewide Importance                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Thompson Rd
                                                    Unique Farmland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Benton Rd
                                                    Temecula City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ÿ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Skinner
                                                    Sphere of Influence Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Auld Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Maddalena Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Pourroy Rd
                                                                                                                                                      Calle De Amor
                                                    Planning Area                                                                                                                                                                                                        Leon Rd           Allen Rd
                                                                                                           W
      Sources: Temecula and California Farmland
                                        hi
                                           t
      Mapping and Monitoring Program, GIS 2002.                                                                       d Rd
                                                                                                                   oo                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Rd
                                                                                                                 ew                                                                                                                                                                                                                oy
                                                                                                                                                                      Hunter Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Borel Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ur
                                           Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Po
                                                                                                                Dr                                                                                                                                                                     Pr om o
                                          os
                                                                    Ø
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      n
      Ø
      "
      #                  Lo
                            s   Ala
                                      m
                                                                    "
                                                                    #       Al
                                                                                t    aM
                                                                                             ur ri
                                                                                                   e       ta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                yon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Dr                                                                            to   ry             Pky
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ca n
                                                                                                                                                                                                       S ky
                                                                               M u r rie ta
                                                                                                          H ot                d
                                                                                                                     Springs R                                                                                                                                                         Murrieta Hot Springs Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Buck Rd
                         City of
                        Murrieta                                               Ja                                                                                                            W
                                                                                                                                                                                                 y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      d
                                                                                ck
                                                                                                                                                                                    i   re                                                        ve                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    R
                                                                                    son
                                                                                                                                                                                 na                                                          sA                                                                           sR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 l ow                                                                                  ola                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Butterfield Stage Rd
                                                                                           Av    e                                                                        Bo                                              W il                                                                            N ic                                                                                                                                          V in                                                                                  r e nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               oW
                                                         M
                                                             ad                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      y                                                                              a
                                                                      n
                                                                  is o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          la       s Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                             C
               St                                                       Av
                                                                           e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Nico
          va
     ua                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Co n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     all e
 G                              W                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Vista D el         Rd
                                 as
                                          t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mo n te
                                       ng                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   te n
                                    hi                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             to
                                            on                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Via N orte
                                               Av                                                                                                                                                                        rte                                                                                                                                         L a S er en a W y
                    D                                                                                                                                                                                             No
                                                 e                                                                                                                        M
                    ou
                                                                                                                                                                              a rit a Rd
                        gl                                                                                                                                                                             Via
                                                                                                                                                                          arg
                        as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Rd
                         sA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Rd                                                                                                                                                                                            r   n ia
                              ve                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              lif o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Rey                                                                                                                                                                                               Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ho
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               nc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   l                           y
                                                                                                                                          Yn                                                                                                                     De
                                                                                                                                           ez                                                                                                                                             W                                                                                                                                                              Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           a              M
                                                                                                                                               Rd                                                                                                                                     en
                                                                       St                                                                                                                                                                                                S er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      La                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Dr
                                                                  ry                                                            ff                                                                                                                                                                                 do                                                                                                                                                          Pla y a
                                                           er                                                                Je                                                                                                                                                                                         w                                                                                                                                                ra De
                                                         Ch                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ma d e
                                                                                                                                  s                                                                                                                                                                                      s
                                                                                                                               er                                                                                                                                                                                            Pk
                                                                                                                                 on                                                                                                                                                                                            y
                                                                                                                                      Av
                                                                                                                                      e                                                                                         d                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Rd
                                                                                                          Rd                                                                                                            ta R
                                                                                                     er                                                                                                          ar i                                                                                                        Rd                                                                                                                                      Pau
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ba
                                                                                                st                                                                                                     ar                                                                                                               ia
                                                                                           he
                                                                                                                                                                                                         g                                                                                                       rn
                                                                                       c                                                                                                              M                                                                                                  li    fo
                                                                                    in                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ca
                                                                                W
                                                                                                                              Di
                                                                                                                                az                                                                                                                                                              ho
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           nc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ra
                                                                                                                                     Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              L in da R
                                            Ra                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        o
                                               nc
                                                 ho                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   se   a Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ca
                                                    Ca                                                                                                                              Yn                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   l le
                                                      li f                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        R     d
                                                                                                                                                                                       e                     ho V ista R
                                                                                                                                                                                             z         Ra nc                                                                                                                   ba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         B u tt e r
                                                        or
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Rd                      d                                                                                              Pa u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     C o n te n to
                                                            a
                                 ida D e l O ro           ni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            M e a do w s P k y
                             ve n
                                                                                                                                                            d
                         A                                    Rd                                                                                                R
                                                                                                                                                     ia
                                                                                                                                           lifo rn
                                                                                                                         R a nc ho C a                                                                                                                                                         M                                                                                                                               fi e l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ga                                                                                                                                      S ta                                                                       De Portola Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ar                                                                                                                                            ge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ri t a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        R     d                                                                                                                                                                                                    Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     go                                                                   Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               tia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sa n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A nz
                                                                                       Via Sant
                                                                                                a
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Va
                                                                                                                                                                                                      lle
                                                                                                                                                                                                        jo
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Yn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ez
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          a R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        d     }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ÿ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              79
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rd
                                                                                            Ro sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                               e                                                                      la
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Av                                                    D e Po r to                                                                                                                                                              Pky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ch
                                          a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    an
                                      an c                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Va
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      il R
                                    B arr
                                   V ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     aR
                                                             o Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                           i nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          aL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      m                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Rd
                                                           aq uer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     k P ky                                                                               za
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   aw                                                                                An
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          dh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Rd
                                                         V ia V                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                le y                                                                                 Re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Va l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        olf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Pechanga                                                                         ol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Entertainment                                                                            w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sp                                                                            rH
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ø
                                                                                                                                                                                                           "
                                                                                                                                                                                                           #              an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                nR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               yo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  d                                                              ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    t a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        wC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    bo
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                               in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Û
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  c ha n g a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Pe
 µ
                                                    0                                        5,000                                         10,000
                                                                                                                                               Feet                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pa rk wa y
                                                                                                                                                Miles
                                                    0                                                          1                                                      2
C I T Y                                                                     O F                                                      T E M E C U L A                                                                                                                                                                              G E N E R A L                                                                                                                                                                                                   P L A N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OS-19

                                 transportation or recreation trail use,
                                 as well as other means, can play an
                                 important role in the prevention and
                                 reversal of degenerative illnesses such
                                 as heart diseases, diabetes, and
                                 hypertension. The basic enjoyment
                                 and benefits associated with trail use
                                 are being recognized by more and
                                 more people, as evidenced by
                                 increasing participation in walking, jogging, bicycling, and horseback
                                 riding activities.
                                 Because of the relatively dispersed land use and development patterns
                                 that have shaped Temecula, the trail and bikeway system would
                                 indeed be primarily for recreational use, but it is intended to serve a
                                 commuting purpose as well. People who currently commute by bike
                                 will benefit from future planned system expansions, especially those
                                 that may include more bike-friendly crossings of I-15.
PLANS IN ACTION
Temecula’s Multi-Use Trails      The City has just completed a Multi-Use Trails and Bikeways Master
and Bikeways Master Plan         Plan. In planning for future bike and recreation trail facilities,
provides a blueprint for future  residents have expressed a strong desire for well-defined trails that
trail construction. The City
                                 link with regional routes and connect neighborhoods to parks,
uses the Master Plan to
prioritize, finance and build    schools and commercial uses. Residents place a high priority on the
new trail segments, and          development of trails that provide loops wherever possible and
requires new development         follow creeks and utility easements where feasible.
projects to provide local
connections to master plan       The current and planned system of multi-use trails and bikeways is
trails where feasible.           illustrated in the Circulation Element on Figure C-4. Trail and
                                 Bikeway standards are illustrated in the Multi-Use Trails and
                                 Bikeways Master Plan.
         ASTRONOMIC              The City is within close proximity to the Palomar Observatory which
            RESOURCES            requires unique nighttime lighting restrictions.             Generally,
                                 Observatory sites need to be 30 to 40 miles from large lighted areas
                                 so that the nighttime sky will not be brightened.
                                 The City has adopted an ordinance restricting night-time lighting for
                                 areas within a 15-mile radius and a 45-mile radius of Palomar
                                 Observatory. Southeastern portions of the Planning Area are within
                                 a 15-mile radius of the Observatory and are subject to
 C     I  T Y          O   F    T   E   M   E  C    U  L  A    G   E   N  E  R   A   L     P L   A  N
                                                      OS-20

PLANS IN ACTION                                                        stringent lighting controls and
The City reviews potential                                             some limitation of uses that
development projects to                                                may       generate     significant
ensure compli-ance with the                                            amounts of light and glare.
Light Pollution Ordinance
and CEQA when building                                                 The City will review future
plans are submitted for                                                development proposals to
permits and when projects
                                                                       ensure that the issue of light
are field-inspected
.
                                                                       pollution is addressed to meet
                                                                       CEQA requirements.
                MINERAL         State law requires the General Plan to
            RESOURCES           address the need for conserving
                                mineral resources within the General
                                Plan Planning Area.           The State
                                Division of Mines and Geology has
                                prepared mineral resource reports
                                designating the mineral deposits of
                                Statewide or regional significance that are to be used to address
                                mineral resources within the Planning Area. The report entitled,
                                Mineral Land Classification of the Temescal Valley Area, Riverside County
                                California, Special Report 165, evaluates the mineral deposits of the
                                Temecula Planning Area. This report was prepared in accordance
                                with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act (SMARA) of 1975.
                                The State Geologist has classified areas into Mineral Resource Zones
                                (MRZ) and Scientific Resource Zones (SZ). The zones identify the
PLANS IN ACTION                 Statewide or regional significance of mineral deposits based on the
The        City       reviews   economic value of the deposits and accessibility. Within the
development proposals to        Temecula Planning Area, the zoning classification of MRZ-3a has
ensure      that     mineral    been applied by the State. MRZ-3 areas contain sedimentary
resources are conserved in      deposits that have the potential to supply sand and gravel for
compliance       with     this
                                concrete and crushed stone for aggregate. However, these areas are
Element       and      CEQA
requirements.
                                not considered to contain deposits of significant economic value,
                                based on available data.
  C   I T Y          O F       T  E M E      C U L A          G    E N E R A L             P  L A    N
                                                    OS-21
                   GOALS AND POLICIES
     PARKS AND     A quality parks and recreation system is a high priority for
  RECREATIONAL     Temecula residents. Implementation of a Parks and Recreation
                   Master Plan is critical to achieving this goal. The Master Plan
       FACILITIES  would strive to attain a balance between quantitative and qualitative
                   levels of service. This balance involves providing an acceptable
                   amount of useable parkland, in close proximity to residents, as well
                   as the appropriate type and number of facilities to meet the
                   recreation needs and desires of residents. The City s parks and
                   recreation facilities are supplemented by other local and regional
                   facilities, which may be influenced and fostered through inter-
                   governmental cooperation.
                   Goal 1          A high quality parks and recreation system that
                                   meets the diverse recreation needs of residents.
                   Policy 1.1      Ensure sufficient parkland and recreation facilities to
                                   support new development through acquisition
                                   and/or dedication that meets the requirement for 5
                                   acres of useable park land per 1,000 population.
                   Policy 1.2      Pursue the joint use of public lands available and
                                   suitable for recreation purposes, including lands
                                   under the jurisdiction of the Riverside County Flood
                                   Control District, Southern California Edison, water
                                   districts, school districts, and other public agencies.
                   Policy 1.3      Encourage the enhancement and preservation of
                                   historic structures and landscape, and significant
                                   natural features, such as riparian areas, rock
                                   outcroppings, sensitive habitat areas, and viewpoints
                                   through park design and site development.
                   Policy 1.4      Encourage public safety and compatibility with
                                   adjacent uses in park design and development,
                                   including location of buildings, activity areas,
                                   lighting, and parking.
C I T Y   O F     T   E M E     C U L A           G   E N E R A L            P   L A   N
                                       OS-22
                Policy 1.5      Coordinate long-range park, trail and open space
                                planning with Riverside County and the City of
                                Murrieta.
                Policy 1.6      Encourage the establishment of natural habitat
                                spaces for recreational hiking and nature education.
                Policy 1.7      Consider the establishment of special use parks for
                                seniors, pets, etc.
        WATER   As the Temecula Planning Area approaches build-out, development
     RESOURCES  impacts on water resources and water quality may be significant.
                The waterways within the community, particularly the Temecula,
                Pechanga, Santa Gertrudis and Murrieta Creeks, and the Santa
                Margarita River, provide for recreation and scenic enjoyment and
                serve as habitats for sensitive plant and animal species.
                Protecting these waterways from development impacts is critical to
                conserving these invaluable resources. In addition, given Temecula s
                reliance on groundwater, ensuring that recharge areas are protected
                and water conservation measures implemented are important steps
                to reduce the City s dependence on imported water.
                Goal 2          Conservation and protection of surface water,
                                groundwater and imported water resources.
                Policy 2.1      Coordinate with the Riverside County Flood
                                Control District to design flood control
                                improvements that preserve, to the maximum extent
                                feasible, important natural features and resources of
                                the local creeks and riparian forest of the Santa
                                Margarita River.
                Policy 2.2      Identify and protect groundwater resources from
                                depletion and sources of pollution in cooperation
                                with the Rancho California Water District and the
                                San Diego Water Quality Control Board.
                Policy 2.3      Conserve potable water by requiring water
                                conservation techniques in all new development.
C I T Y   O F  T   E M E     C U L A           G    E N E R A L           P L A   N
                                    OS-23
             Policy 2.4    Use reclaimed water for the irrigation of parks, golf
                           courses, public landscaped areas and other feasible
                           applications as service becomes available from
                           Rancho California Water District and Eastern
                           Municipal Water District.
             Policy 2.5    Require the use of soil management techniques to
                           reduce erosion, eliminate off-site sedimentation, and
                           prevent other soil-related problems that may
                           adversely affect waterways in the community.
             Policy 2.6    Regulate and manage lands adjacent to or affecting
                           watercourses as stipulated by the Regional Water
                           Resources Control Board.
             Policy 2.7    Ensure that approved projects have filed a Notice of
                           Intent and Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan in
                           accordance with the Federal Clean Water Act, prior
                           to issuance of grading permits.
             Policy 2.8    Ensure adequate inspection and enforcement of the
                           requirements of general construction permits,
                           particularly related to erosion control during grading
                           and construction.
             Policy 2.9    Participate in regional planning for the Santa
                           Margarita River Watershed in conjunction with
                           federal, State, regional and local agencies, and non-
                           profit organizations.
             Policy 2.10   Participate in water resource management planning
                           to facilitate the long-term availability of water
                           resources for western Riverside County.
             Policy 2.11   Participate in outreach educational programs to
                           educate the public about water conservation
                           methods, new technologies and drought resistant
                           landscapes.
             Policy 2.12   Work with appropriate agencies to encourage ground
                           water recharge facilities along flood control channels
                           and creeks.
C I T Y O F T  E M E     C U L A         G    E N E R A L           P  L A    N
                               OS-24
     BIOLOGICAL  The interrelationship between the built and natural environments
     RESOURCES   has a strong influence on the character and quality of life in
                 Temecula. Permanent dedication of open spaces in and around the
                 Planning Area should aim to conserve resources of significance,
                 provide recreational opportunities, and safeguard viable ecological
                 connections between significant natural areas. Preserving natural
                 resources helps maintain biological diversity; provide passive
                 recreation and educational opportunities; facilitate the maintenance
                 of natural, life-sustaining systems; and provide residents with the
                 opportunity to observe wildlife in natural environs. Wildlife
                 corridors can exist in conjunction with recreation trails and other
                 open space uses. This multiple function leverages the protection of
                 species of concern by simultaneously providing open space and
                 meeting the recreational needs of residents.
                 Goal 3          Conservation of important biological habitats and
                                 protection of plant and animal species of concern,
                                 wildlife movement corridors, and general
                                 biodiversity.
                 Policy 3.1      Require development proposals to identify
                                 significant biological resources and provide
                                 mitigation, including the use of adequate buffering
                                 and sensitive site planning techniques, selective
                                 preservation, provision of replacement habitats; and
                                 other appropriate measures.
                 Policy 3.2      Work with State, regional and non-profit agencies
                                 and organizations to preserve and enhance
                                 significant biological resources.
                 Policy 3.3      Coordinate with the County of Riverside and other
                                 relevant    agencies     in    the    adoption    and
                                 implementation of the Riverside County Multi-
                                 Species Habitat Conservation Plan.
                 Policy 3.4      Encourage developers to incorporate native drought-
                                 resistant vegetation, mature trees, and other
                                 significant vegetation into site and landscape designs
                                 for proposed projects.
C I T Y   O F   T   E M E    C U L A           G   E N E R A L            P  L A   N
                                     OS-25
                 Policy 3.5      Maintain an inventory of existing natural resources
                                 in the City.
                 Policy 3.6      Limit recreational use of designated open space areas
                                 where there are sensitive biological resources as
                                 needed to protect these resources.
                 Policy 3.7      Maintain and enhance the resources of Temecula
                                 Creek, Pechanga Creek, Murrieta Creek, Santa
                                 Gertrudis Creek, Santa Margarita River, and other
                                 waterways to the ensure the long-term viability of the
                                 habitat, wildlife, and wildlife movement corridors.
        ENERGY   As with many other communities, Temecula has faced increased
     RESOURCES   energy costs from an environmental and economic standpoint. The
                 City will encourage the use of alternative and renewable ( green )
                 energy sources such as solar, wind, and thermal systems as they
                 become more economically feasible. Energy efficiency in the design
                 of buildings and use of materials and fixtures is also important to
                 reduce energy demand in the short term.
                 Goal 4          Conservation of energy resources through the use
                                 of available technology and conservation practices.
                 Policy 4.1      Encourage the use of site planning techniques,
                                 building orientation, building design, and building
                                 materials that reduce energy use.
                 Policy 4.2      Encourage the use of renewable and alternative
                                 energy generation such as fuel cells, solar energy, and
                                 other sources.
                 Policy 4.3      Consider the feasibility of local or City-owned
                                 electrical distribution and/or generation facilities to
                                 ensure reliable and affordable supply.
     OPEN SPACE  The natural features of the Temecula Planning Area provide a scenic
                 setting for the community. Topographical features such as the
                 western escarpment and southern ridgelines, hillsides in the
                 northern area, natural drainage courses, and environmental
                 resources of the Santa Margarita River should be protected from
C I T Y   O F   T   E M E    C U L A            G   E N E R A L           P   L A    N
                                     OS-26
             insensitive development and activities. Public views to these areas
             should be maintained to the extent possible.
             The City's built environment contains parkways and slopes along
             roadways that also function as open space amenities. These
             corridors should be well landscaped and maintained. The network
             of open space corridors to parks and regional recreation
             opportunities ties the community together, encourages bicycling,
             hiking, and equestrian activities, and serve as wildlife corridors.
             Goal 5         Conservation of open space areas for a balance of
                            recreation, scenic enjoyment, and protection of
                            natural resources and features.
             Policy 5.1     Conserve the western escarpment and southern
                            ridgelines, the Santa Margarita River, slopes in the
                            Sphere of Influence, and other important landforms
                            and historic landscape features through the
                            development review process.
             Policy 5.2     Identify significant viewsheds to proposed projects
                            that may be preserved through the dedication of
                            open space or the use of sensitive grading, site
                            design, and building techniques.
             Policy 5.3     Encourage the use of clustered development and
                            other site planning techniques to maximize the
                            preservation of permanent open spaces.
             Policy 5.4     Retain and improve the quality of landscaping in
                            parkways, public slopes, rights-of-way, parks, civic
                            facilities, and other public open areas.
             Policy 5.5     Coordinate with Homeowners Associations to
                            maintain landscaping along slopes adjacent to public
                            right-of-ways.
             Policy 5.6     Require the       dedication   and    improvement      of
                            parkland.
             Policy 5.7     Require adequate open space in new development for
                            both passive and active recreation.
C I T Y O F T  E M E      C U L A          G   E N E R A L             P   L A   N
                                OS-27
                 Policy 5.8       Require re-vegetation of graded slopes concurrent
                                  with project development to minimize erosion and
                                  maintain the scenic character of the community.
                 Policy 5.9       Require connection between open space / recreation
                                  areas and adjacent developments or publicly owned
                                  recreation areas where appropriate.
                 Policy 5.10      Incorporate seismic hazard safety zones into valley-
                                  wide open space and park systems where appropriate.
                 Policy 5.11      Encourage the use of native vegetation where re-
                                  vegetation and landscaping is to occur.
                 Policy 5.12      Identify and develop natural habitat areas for low-
                                  impact hiking and nature education.
                 Policy 5.13      Utilize natural, undeveloped greenbelts as buffers
                                  between developments and on outskirts of the City
                                  to preserve the rural and unique character of
                                  Temecula.
 HISTORICAL AND  Historical and cultural resources include buildings, structures,
      CULTURAL   landscape features, roads, trails, objects and sites that represent
                 significant contributions to local culture, history and public art.
     RESOURCES   Temecula's heritage lies in the abundance of historical and cultural
                 resources still remaining in the Planning Area. The City intends to
                 ensure that these resources are preserved because they provide a link
                 to the community's past, as well as a frame of reference for the
                 future.
                 Historic preservation should be pursued using a comprehensive
                 approach that establishes linkages between historic sites or buildings
                 via other historic features such as roads, trails, ridges, and seasonal
                 waterways.
                 Goal 6           Preservation of significant historical and cultural
                                  resources.
                 Policy 6.1       Maintain       an     inventory    of     areas   with
                                  archaeological/paleontological       sensitivity,  and
                                  historic sites in the Planning Area.
C I T Y    O F  T   E M E     C U L A            G   E N E R A L            P   L A N
                                     OS-28
             Policy 6.2    Work to preserve or salvage potential archeological
                           and paleontological resources on sites proposed for
                           future development through the development review
                           and mitigation monitoring processes.
             Policy 6.3    Preserve and reuse historical buildings in accordance
                           with the Old Town Specific Plan.
             Policy 6.4    Assist property owners in seeking State and/or
                           federal registration and appropriate zoning for
                           historic sites and assets.
             Policy 6.5    Pursue the acquisition and preservation of historical
                           buildings for public facilities in accordance with the
                           Old Town Specific Plan when appropriate.
             Policy 6.6    Ensure compatibility between land uses and building
                           designs in the Old Town Specific Plan Area and
                           areas adjacent to Old Town.
             Policy 6.7    Encourage use of California's Historic Building
                           Code when preserving/rehabilitating historic
                           structures.
             Policy 6.8    Support an integrated approach to historic
                           preservation in coordination with other affected
                           jurisdictions, agencies, and organizations for areas
                           within the Planning Area and surrounding region
                           that seeks to establish linkages between historic sites
                           or buildings with other historic features such as
                           roads, trails, ridges, and seasonal waterways.
             Policy 6.9    Encourage the preservation and re-use of historic
                           structures, landscape features, roads, landmark trees,
                           and trails.
             Policy 6.10   Work with the Pechanga Band of Luiseño Indians to
                           identify and appropriately address cultural resources
                           and tribal sacred sites through the development
                           review process.
             Policy 6.11   Encourage voluntary landowner efforts to protect
                           cultural resource and tribal sacred sites consistent
                           with State requirements.
C I T Y O F T  E M E     C U L A          G   E N E R A L            P  L A  N
                              OS-29

  AGRICULTURAL   Growth pressures are threatening valuable agricultural land, which is
     RESOURCES   an important component of Riverside County's economy and the
                 agricultural lifestyle that many residents desire. The City will take
                 steps to reduce adverse effects of urbanization on areas determined
                 appropriate for long-term agricultural uses.
                 Goal 7           Protection of prime agricultural land from
                                  conversion to urbanized uses.
                 Policy 7.1       Encourage conservation and continued use of prime
                                  agricultural lands in and around the Planning Area.
                 Policy 7.2       Promote and aid in preserving and expanding the
                                  local wine industry.
                 Policy 7.3       Coordinate with Riverside County to address the
                                  preservation of agricultural resources.
                 Policy 7.4       Discourage urban development in agricultural areas
                                  outside built-up areas of the City.
                 Policy 7.5       Evaluate scenic or resource conservation easements as
                                  suitable means for protecting prime farmland
                                  located adjacent to residential areas and where the
                                  property does not quality for inclusion in an
                                  agriculture preserve program.
          TRAIL  Temecula residents walk, hike, jog and bicycle more frequently than
         SYSTEM  participating in other forms of recreation. This level of interest is
                 significant considering that the City does not offer a formal,
                 developed trail system. Many opportunities remain for the City to
                 implement a recreation trail system concurrent with new
                 development, road improvements, and flood control improvements.
                 The future recreation trail system should connect to regional trails
                 and functions as alternative transportation routes, where
                 appropriate. This recreation trail system can also link cultural and
                 historic sites within the area to recreational amenities along local
                 creeks, open spaces, and the Santa Margarita River as well as the
                 Cleveland National Forest and Santa Rosa preserve.
C I T Y   O F   T   E M E     C U L A           G   E N E R A L           P  L A   N
                                     OS-30
                Goal 8          Development of a trail system that serves both
                                recreational and transportation needs.
                Policy 8.1      Provide a citywide recreation system that connects to
                                the County's regional trail system which provides for
                                bicycling, equestrian, hiking and jogging trails with
                                appropriate support facilities.
                Policy 8.2      Negotiate land deeds as necessary to implement the
                                citywide trail system.
                Policy 8.3      Require proposed development to provide trail
                                connections to the citywide trail system through the
                                dedication of land and the provision of easements.
                Policy 8.4      Require development plans to identify locations for
                                an internal trails/sidewalk system that links land uses
                                and provides convenient travel to transit facilities.
                Policy 8.5      Develop trails and sidewalks suitable for multiple
                                uses, including for the physically disabled and for
                                personal transportation alternatives.
    ASTRONOMIC  Palomar Observatory is owned and operated by the California
     RESOURCES  Institute of Technology (Caltech) and is used to support scientific
                research programs. Light pollution is an increasing problem for
                observatories everywhere. One of the reasons Palomar Mountain
                was selected as the site for the 200-inch telescope was dark skies that
                would allow observation of the faintest galaxies without the
                interference of city lights.        Rapid urbanization of southern
                California has resulted in a significant increase in the amount of
                sky glow. If such light pollution continues to increase, it will
                seriously reduce the effectiveness of the Palomar Observatory.
                Goal 9          Protection of dark skies from intrusive light
                                sources which may impact the Palomar
                                Observatory.
C I T Y   O F  T   E M E     C U L A           G   E N E R A L           P  L A     N
                                    OS-31
                  Policy 9.1      Coordinate with the County of Riverside and
                                  California Institute of Technology to ensure
                                  preservation procedures for dark skies are
                                  implemented within the City development review
                                  process.
                  Policy 9.2      Participate in Palomar Observatory's dark sky
                                  conservation requirements.
                  IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
                  The following actions, procedures, strategies and techniques
                  implement the goals and policies of the Open Space/Conservation
                  Element.
            OS-1  Identify potential sites for additional park land, monitor demand for
     PARKS AND    park land and facilities concurrent with development approvals, and
                  prioritize potential parkland acquisitions, expansions, and
    RECREATION    improvements within the five year Capital Improvement Program,
    MASTER PLAN   consistent with the adopted Parks and Recreation Master Plan
                  Agency/Department:           Community Services
                  Related Policies:            1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8
                  Required by General Plan EIR
           OS-2   Continue to implement a local code that incorporates standards for
    LOCAL PARK    parkland dedication and development. Specifically:
          CODE    •   Require the dedication of parkland or the payment of in-lieu fees
                      and the development of recreation facilities for all new
                      development.
                  •   Require developers of residential projects greater than 200 units
                      to dedicate land based on the park acre standard of five (5) acres
                      of usable parkland to 1,000 residents.
                  Agency/Department:           Community Services
                  Related Policy:              1.1
                  Required by General Plan EIR
C I T Y   O  F   T  E   M   E  C   U   L  A      G    E  N    E  R    A   L      P   L A N
                                     OS-32

           OS-3   Review Quimby Act fees on an annual basis to ensure that the in-
 QUIMBY ACT FEES  lieu fees are based on the current assessed valuation of land within
                  the City.
                  Agency/Department:         Community Services
                  Related Policy:            1.1
           OS-4   Work with the water districts to promote water conservation and
         WATER    ultimately reduce the demand for peak-hour water supply and
                  wastewater capacity. Continue current conservation efforts and
  CONSERVATION    actively pursue water storage and source alternatives, including dry
                  year water transfer options and use and production of reclaimed
                  water. Review the City s adopted Uniform Building Code and
                  require the use of water conservation measures to reduce water
                  consumption. Such measures may include, but are not limited to:
                  the use of plumbing fixtures that reduce water use; low-flow toilets;
                  drip irrigation systems and xeriscape landscaping that maximizes
                  use of drought-tolerant plant species.
                  Agency/Department:         Public Works, Planning, Building &
                                             Safety, RCWD, EMWD
                  Related Policies:          2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.7, 2.10
                  Required by General Plan EIR
           OS-5   Require all development projects to implement best management
  WATER QUALITY   practices. Work with the San Diego Regional Water Quality Board
                  and other State and federal agencies to identify other opportunities
    IMPROVEMENT   and techniques for maintaining or improving water quality.
                  Agency/Department:         Public Works, Planning
                  Related Policies:          2.2, 2.5, 2.6, 2.7
           OS-6   Review individual development projects to ensure that adequate
    STORMWATER    stormwater detention or treatment methods are provided to
                  accommodate surface water runoff generated by the project, and
      TREATMENT   where needed, incorporate detention of stormwater run-off at the
                  point of origin.
C  I T Y   O F   T   E M E     C U L A         G   E N E R A L           P  L A N
                                     OS-33
                  Agency/Department:           Public Works, Planning
                  Related Policies:            2.1, 2.7
                  Required by General Plan EIR
            OS-7  Continue to require drought-tolerant landscaping in new
    LANDSCAPING/  development. Where feasible, incorporate reclaimed water systems
                  into landscape irrigation plans. Continue to implement a recycled
      IRRIGATION  water ordinance in accordance with the requirements of Senate Bill
                  2095, Water Recycling in Landscaping Act. Convert existing City of
                  Temecula non-domestic water uses to recycled water use in
                  accordance with Sections 13550-13556 of the State Water Code when
                  feasible.
                  Agency/Department:           Planning
                  Related Policies:            2.4, 3.4
                  Required by General Plan EIR
            OS-8  Implement, where appropriate, Water Resource Management
          WATER   Guidelines drafted by the subcommittees comprised of Eastern
                  Municipal Water District and local jurisdictions.
       RESOURCE
    MANAGEMENT    Agency/Department:           Planning, Public Works, EMWD
      GUIDELINES  Related Policies:            2.9, 2.10
                  Required by General Plan EIR
            OS-9  Require development proposals in all areas inside or adjacent to
      BIOLOGICAL  sensitive habitat areas, designated critical habitat, and MSHCP
                  conservation areas and core linkages as defined by the U.S. Fish and
     ASSESSMENTS  Wildlife Service, the California Department of Fish and Game, and
                  the Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan, to provide detailed
                  biological assessments, assess potential impacts, and mitigate
                  significant impacts to a level below significance.
                  Agency/Department:           Planning
                  Related Policies:            3.1, 3.5
                  Required by General Plan EIR
           OS-10  Require the establishment of open space areas that contain significant
      OPEN SPACE  water courses, wildlife corridors, and habitats for rare or endangered
                  plant and animal species, with first priority given to the core linkage
           AREAS  areas identified in the MSHCP.
C I  T Y   O  F  T  E   M   E  C   U   L   A     G   E   N E   R  A  L     P   L A   N
                                       OS-34
                    Agency/Department:         Planning Division
                    Related Policies:          3.2, 3.6
                    Required by General Plan EIR
             OS-11  Require appropriate resource protection measures to be prepared in
       RESOURCE     conjunction with specific plans and subsequent development
                    proposals. Such requirements may include the preparation of a
     PROTECTION     Vegetation Management Program that addresses landscape
        MEASURES    maintenance, fuel modification zones, management of passive open
                    space areas, provision of corridor connections for wildlife
                    movement, conservation of water courses, and rehabilitation of
                    biological resources displaced in the planning process, and use of
                    project design, engineering, and construction practices that
                    minimize impacts to sensitive species, MSHCP conservation areas,
                    and designated critical habitats.
                    Agency/Department:             Planning
                    Related Policies:          3.1, 3.4, 3.7
                    Required by General Plan EIR
            OS-12   Evaluate and pursue the acquisition of areas with high biological
  ACQUISITION OF    resource significance. Such acquisition mechanisms may include
                    acquiring land by development agreement or gift; dedication of
    BIOLOGICALLY    conservation, open space and scenic easements; joint acquisition
      SIGNIFICANT   with other local agencies; transfer of development rights; lease
           AREAS    purchase agreements; State and federal grants; and impact
                    fees/mitigation banking.
                    Agency/Department:         Planning
                    Related Policies:          1.1, 1.2, 3.2, 3.7
                    Required by General Plan EIR
            OS-13   Use the resources of national, regional, and local conservation
    PARTNERSHIPS    organizations, corporations, associations, and benevolent entities to
                    identify and acquire environmentally sensitive lands, and to protect
             WITH
                    water courses and wildlife corridors.
  CONSERVATION
  ORGANIZATIONS     Agency/Department:         Planning
                    Related Policies:          1.1, 3.2
                    Required by General Plan EIR
C  I T Y     O F   T  E M E     C U L A          G    E N E R A L         P  L A N
                                      OS-35
             OS-14  Continue to participate in multi-species habitat conservation
 PARTICIPATION IN   planning, watershed management planning, and water resource
                    management planning efforts
        RESOURCE
         PLANNING   Agency/Department:         Planning
                    Related Policies:          2.9, 2.10, 3.2, 3.3, 3.5
                    Required by General Plan EIR
             OS-15  Participate in the formation of regional siting plans and policies for
ENERGY FACILITIES   energy facilities.
                    Agency/Department:         Planning
                    Related Policy:            4.3
                    Required by General Plan EIR
             OS-16  Coordinate with Southern California Edison and the Southern
  COORDINATION      California Gas Company to jointly determine what new energy
                    options are appropriate as development proceeds.
      WITH ENERGY
        PROVIDERS   Agency/Department:         Planning, Building & Safety
                    Related Policy:            4.2
             OS-17  Implement land use and building controls that require new
     STATE ENERGY   development to comply with the California State Energy Regulation
                    requirements.
      REGULATION
                    Agency/Department:         Planning, Building & Safety
                    Related Policy:            4.1
                    Required by General Plan EIR
             OS-18  Promote energy conservation by:
           ENERGY
                    •   Enforcing all current residential and commercial California
  CONSERVATION          Energy Commission energy conservation standards.
                    •   Encouraging public institutions to use high-efficiency heating and
                        cooling systems, advanced lighting systems, and passive solar
                        systems to reduce energy use.
                    •   Adopting project-related energy conservation guidelines that
                        would be incorporated into the development approval process to
                        promote and require conservation strategies as development
                        occurs.
C  I  T Y    O F   T  E  M   E   C    U L   A    G   E   N   E   R   A  L   P   L  A  N
                                        OS-36

                   Agency/Department:          Planning, Building & Safety, Temecula
                                               Valley Unified School District
                   Related Policies:           4.1, 4.2
                   Required by General Plan EIR
           OS-19   Where feasible, secure permanent open space through dedication,
  ACQUISITION OF   easements, or other acquisition mechanisms.
      OPEN SPACE   Agency/Department:          Planning, Community Services
                   Related Policies:           1.1, 5.2, 5.4, 5.5, 5.6, 5.9
           OS-20   As part of the site planning process,
   SITE PLANNING
                   •    Impose conditions on new development within scenic corridors
                        or viewsheds to preserve unique visual features.
                   •    Require that natural landforms be respected or preserved to the
                        extent possible.
                   Agency/Department:          Planning
                   Related Policies:           5.2, 5.3
            OS-21  Implement a Hillside Grading Ordinance to preserve sensitive
         HILLSIDE  hillside and canyon areas, and require the use of proper soil
                   management techniques to reduce erosion, sedimentation, and other
        GRADING    soil-related problems.
     ORDINANCE
                   Agency/Department:          Public Works
                   Related Policies:           5.1, 5.7
                   Required by General Plan EIR
           OS-22   Preserve the natural open space character through the development
           LAND    of effective land development regulations. These regulations may
                   include limiting grading of natural land forms, regulating setbacks,
   DEVELOPMENT     requiring vegetation, conserving mature trees, and limiting the
    REGULATIONS    intensity of development in certain areas.
                   Agency/Department:          Planning
                   Related Policies:           5.7, 5.8, 5.10, 5.11
C I T Y     O F   T  E M E      C U L A          G   E N E R A L            P L A N
                                       OS-37

          OS-23  Develop standards to implement mixed strategies to focus
      MIXED USE  development in urban centers, reduce sprawl into agricultural areas,
                 and revitalize older commercial areas.
   DEVELOPMENT
                 Agency/Department:         Planning
                 Related Policies:          7.3, 7.4
          OS-24  Provide for a planned residential development process in the
        PLANNED  Development Code to allow clustering of development and the
                 dedication of open space for conserving natural resources, views,
    RESIDENTIAL  and providing additional recreational opportunities.
   DEVELOPMENT
                 Agency/Department:             Planning
                 Related Policies:          5.3, 5.6
          OS-25  Establish priorities and take steps to permanently protect critical
     OPEN SPACE  open spaces.
    PROTECTION   Agency/Department:         Planning
                 Related Policies:          5.1, 5.2, 5.12, 5.13
          OS-26  Use the development and environmental review processes to:
   DEVELOPMENT
                 •   Ensure that appropriate archaeological and paleontological
 REVIEW PROCESS
                     surveying and documentation of findings is provided prior to
                     project approval.
                 •   Require effective mitigation where development may affect
                     archaeological or paleontological resources.
                 •   Require that an archaeologist or paleontologist be retained to
                     observe grading activities in areas where the probable presence
                     of archaeological or paleontological resources is identified.
                 •   Enforce CEQA provisions regarding preservation or salvage of
                     significant archaeological and paleontological sites discovered
                     during construction activities.
                 •   Require monitoring of new developments and reporting to the
                     City on completion of mitigation and resource protection
                     measures.
                 Agency/Department:         Planning
                 Related Policies:          6.1, 6.2
                 Required by General Plan EIR
C I T Y    O F  T  E M E      C U L A         G   E N E R A L            P   L A N
                                    OS-38

           OS-27  Continue to implement a historic preservation ordinance in the
        HISTORIC  Old Town area to protect historically significant buildings, sites,
                  road/trails, and other landscape elements, and to encourage their re-
   PRESERVATION   use, where appropriate. Consider adopting an ordinance to address
       PROGRAM    preservation of other historic resources. Encourage owners of local
                  sites to apply for recognition in the State Historic Resources
                  Inventory, as Riverside County Landmarks, as State Points of
                  Historic Interest, as State Landmarks, and as sites on the National
                  Register of Historic Places, as deemed necessary
                  Agency/Department:          Planning
                  Related Policies:           6.1, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5, 6.6, 6.7, 6.8
                  Required by General Plan EIR
           OS-28  Preserve agricultural lands by:
PRESERVATION OF
                  •    Developing effective zoning regulations or other land use
  AGRICULTURAL
                       mechanisms that control the expansion of intensive non-
          LANDS        agricultural development onto productive or potentially
                       productive agricultural lands.
                  •    Recognizing existing agriculture preserve contracts and promote
                       additional preservation contracts for prime agriculture land.
                  Agency/Department:          Planning
                  Related Policies:           7.1, 7.2, 7.3
                  Required by General Plan EIR
           OS-29  Implement policies and standards of the Parks and Recreation and
     PARKS AND    Multi-Use Trails and Bikeways Master Plans, including trail
                  classifications, design standards, implementation mechanisms, and
RECREATION AND    capital improvement programming. Ensure that bike routes are
MULTI-USE TRAILS  provided or reserved concurrent with new development.
   AND BIKEWAYS
   MASTER PLANS   Agency/Department:          Community Services
                  Related Policies:           8.1, 8.3
                  Required by General Plan EIR
C I T Y    O F   T   E M E      C U L A         G   E N E R A L                P L A N
                                      OS-39

           OS-30  Negotiate land deeds as necessary to implement the City trail system.
     LAND DEEDS   These negotiations may include:
                  •    Obtaining leases, securing easements from public utilities for use
                       as trails.
                  •    Obtaining right-of-way for trail improvements.
                  •    Obtaining land from new development for trail improvements
                       and connections.
                  •    Obtaining land to develop trails along designated roadways.
                  Agency/Department:            Community Services
                  Related Policies:             8.2, 8.4
           OS-31  Ensure that new development projects comply with the City’s Light
 LIGHT POLLUTION  Pollution Control Ordinance when building plans are submitted for
                  permits and when projects are field-inspected.
        CONTROL
      ORDINANCE   Agency/Department:            Planning, Building & Safety
                  Related Policy:               9.1
                  Required by General Plan EIR
           OS-32  Require project developers to retain coast live oak woodland,
       OAK TREE   including oaks within new development areas, and require surveys of
                  all coast live oak trees prior to construction to determine if any raptor
     PROTECTION   nests are present and active. If active nests are observed,
                  postponement of construction activities until the end of the fledgling
                  season is required. The City shall apply the following guidelines
                  adapted from the Riverside County Oak Tree Management
                  Guidelines:
                  •    Construction and development activities will be avoided within
                       the root zone (e.g., encompassing an area one-third larger than
                       the drip line of an oak tree)
                  •    Landscaping, trenching, or irrigation systems will be avoided
                       within the root zone
                  •    Land uses that will cause excessive soil compaction within the
                       root zone will be avoided
                  •    Manufactured slopes will not be located within the root zone
                  •    Redirection of surface moisture which alters the soil moisture
                       within the root zone for an extended period of time will be
                       avoided
                  •    Filling around the bases of oak trees will be avoided through
                       sedimentation and siltation control
C  I T Y   O  F  T   E  M    E    C U   L  A      G   E  N  E  R   A   L    P   L  A   N
                                       OS-40

                   •   Dying oak trees will be retained in place unless determined to
                       pose a health or safety hazard
                   •   Relocation of trees will not constitute mitigation
                   •   Oak protection will be oriented toward protection of the life cycle
                       of oak trees and woodland
                   Agency/Department:          Planning
                   Related Policy:             3.1
                   Required by General Plan EIR
           OS-33   Require project proponents to minimize impacts to Coastal sage
   NATIVE SPECIES  scrub, Riversidean alluvial fan sage scrub, chaparral, and non-native
                   grassland consistent with the MSCHP. Such mitigation measures will
  CONSERVATION     include, but are not limited to: on-site preservation, off-site
                   acquisition of mitigation land located within the City and inside
                   MSHCP conservation areas, and habitat restoration of degraded sage
                   scrub vegetation that increases habitat quality and the biological
                   function of the site.
                   Agency/Department:          Planning
                   Related Policies:           3.1, 3.3
                   Required by General Plan EIR
           OS-34   Require project proponents to avoid adverse impacts to Riparian
                   Scrub, Woodland, and Forest and Water vegetations communities to
  RIPARIAN AREAS   the maximum extent possible. Mitigation consistent with the
  CONSERVATION     MSHCP, and future mitigation ratios established by the City will be
                   required, including, but not limited to: wetland creation in upland
                   areas, wetland restoration that re-establishes the habitat functions of a
                   former wetland, and wetland enhancement that improves the self-
                   sustaining habitat functions of an existing wetland. Mitigation
                   measures will be required to achieve “no net loss” of wetland
                   functions and values.
                   Agency/Department:          Planning
                   Related Policies:           3.1, 3.3, 3.7
                   Required by General Plan EIR
C  I T Y   O  F   T  E  M    E  C  U    L  A     G   E   N   E  R   A  L     P   L  A  N
                                       OS-41

          OS-35   Review development-associated impacts to MSHCP conservation
   MULTI-SPECIES  areas for consistency with the MSHCP reserve and buffer
                  development requirements, and require compliance with the
        HABITAT   following MSHCP Urban/Wildlife Interface Guidelines:
  CONSERVATION
           PLAN   •   Drainage: Proposed developments in proximity to MSHCP
    CONSISTENCY       conservation areas shall incorporate measures, including
                      measures required through the National Pollutant Discharge
                      Elimination System (NPDES) requirements, to ensure that the
                      quantity and quality of runoff discharged to the MSHCP
                      conservation areas is not altered in an adverse way when
                      compared to existing conditions. Measures shall be put in place
                      to avoid discharge of untreated surface runoff from developed
                      and paved areas into the MSHCP conservation areas.
                      Stormwater systems shall be designed to prevent the release of
                      toxins, chemicals, petroleum products, exotic plant materials, or
                      other elements that might degrade or harm biological resources
                      or ecosystem processes within the MSHCP conservation areas.
                      This can be accomplished using a variety of methods including
                      natural detention basins, grass swales, or mechanical trapping
                      devices. Regular maintenance shall occur to ensure effective
                      operations of runoff control systems.
                  •   Toxics: Land uses proposed in proximity to the MSHCP
                      conservation area that use chemicals or generate byproducts
                      (such as manure) that are potentially toxic or may adversely
                      affect wildlife species, habitat, or water quality shall incorporate
                      measures to ensure that application of such chemicals does not
                      result in discharge to the MSHCP conservation area. Measures
                      such as those employed to address drainage issues shall be
                      implemented.
                  •   Lighting: Night lighting shall be directed away from the
                      MSHCP conservation area to protect species within the MSHCP
                      conservation area from direct night lighting. Shielding shall be
                      incorporated in project designs to ensure ambient light levels
                      within the MSHCP conservation area do not increase.
                  •   Noise: Proposed noise generating land uses affecting the
                      MSHCP conservation area shall incorporate setbacks, berms, or
                      walls to minimize the effects of noise on MSHCP conservation
                      area resources pursuant to applicable rules, regulations, and
                      guidelines related to land use noise standards. For planning
                      purposes, wildlife within the MSHCP conservation area should
                      not be subject to noise that would exceed residential noise
                      standards.
C I T Y    O F   T  E M E      C U L A          G   E N E R A L             P   L A N
                                      OS-42

                 •    Invasives: When approving landscape plans for proposed
                      development adjacent to the MSHCP conservation area, the City
                      shall require revisions to landscape plans to avoid the use of
                      invasive species defined within the MSHCP for the portions of
                      development adjacent to the conservation area.
                 •    Barriers:     Proposed land uses adjacent to the MSHCP
                      conservation area shall incorporate barriers, where appropriate in
                      individual project designs to minimize unauthorized public
                      access, domestic animal predation, illegal trespass, or dumping in
                      the conservation area.       Such barriers may include native
                      landscaping, rocks/boulders, fencing, walls, signage and/or other
                      appropriate mechanisms.
                 •    Grading/Land Development: Manufactured slopes associated
                      with proposed site development shall not extend into the
                      MSHCP conservation area
                 Agency/Department:          Planning
                 Related Policies:           3.1, 3.3, 3.4, 3.7
                 Required by General Plan EIR
         OS-36   Require work corridor surveys to identify active nests for projects
MIGRATORY BIRD   with the potential to adversely impact nesting migratory birds, as
                 defined under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act (MBTA). Development
     TREATY ACT  projects shall avoid active nests and, if necessary, require seasonal
    COMPLIANCE   timing constraints for riparian habitat clearing and an MBTA Special
                 Purpose permit prior to the removal of active nests of MBTA
                 covered species.
                 Agency/Department:          Planning
                 Related Policy:             3.1
                 Required by General Plan EIR
          OS-37  Enter into a Memorandum of Agreement with the Eastern
 ARCHEOLOGICAL   Information Center of the University of California, Riverside to
                 establish procedures for reviewing the archaeological sensitivity of
        REVIEWS  sites proposed for development.
                 Agency/Department:          Planning
                 Related Policy:             6.2
                 Required by General Plan EIR
C I T Y   O  F  T   E   M   E  C  U   L  A     G   E   N    E  R A   L     P   L A  N
                                     OS-43

           OS-38  Ensure that discretionary projects implementing the General Plan
   WATER SUPPLY   (Specific Plans, land divisions, development plans and conditional use
                  permits) comply with California Water Code Section 10910, requiring
     ASSESSMENTS  the preparation of a water supply assessment indicating that a long-
                  term water supply for a 20-year time frame is available. Written
                  acknowledgement that water will be provided by a community or
                  public water system with an adopted urban water management plan
                  that includes consideration of the project’s water consumption and
                  supply shall constitute compliance with this requirement.
                  Agency/Department:           Planning
                  Related Policy:              2.2
                  Required by General Plan EIR
           OS-39  Development projects proposed on previously undeveloped property
TRIBAL CULTURAL   which involve earth-disturbing activities or which are located in areas
                  with previously identified cultural resources need to comply with the
      RESOURCES   following requirements to appropriately address tribal cultural
                  resources:
                  •   All projects shall be evaluated by a qualified archeologist by
                      conducting a site records search, and if feasible, a Phase I walk-
                      over survey, and if necessary, a Phase II survey prior to project
                      approval to identify the potential for the presence of significant
                      cultural resources.
                  •   If significant resources are located on the project site, or a high
                      probability for cultural resources exists, the Pechanga Band of
                      Luiseño Indians shall be consulted in the identification of
                      mitigation measures to address impacts consistent with State
                      requirements, including provisions to address inadvertent
                      discoveries.
                  •   During on-site grading activities in areas with cultural resources,
                      or with a high potential for cultural resources, a qualified
                      archeologist and tribal monitors shall be on-site to monitor
                      grading operations.
                  •   In the event of the discovery of a burial site, human bone or
                      suspected human bone, grading in the immediate area shall be
                      immediately halted, the site protected, and the County Coroner
                      and representatives from Pechanga Band of Luiseño Indians
                      notified.
                  Agency/Department: Planning, Public Works
                  Related Policy:          6.10
C I T Y    O  F  T  E   M   E   C  U   L  A      G   E  N  E  R  A   L     P  L   A  N
                                      OS-44

                                                       PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                                    ELEMENT
                   INTRODUCTION
                     Q
                                uality of life in Temecula is influenced in part by the
                                sense of security that exists among City residents and
                                businesses. The community must be prepared to address
                                issues such as uncontrollable natural hazards, crime and
                   violence, and other human caused hazards. The Public Safety
                   Element establishes goals, policies, and a plan to identify potential
                   hazards and to ensure adequate, coordinated, and timely response to
                   public safety concerns. The provision of public services which
                   would respond to these hazards are addressed in the Growth
                   Management/Public Facilities Element.
  PURPOSE OF THE   The purpose of the Public Safety Element is to identify and address
    PUBLIC SAFETY  features or characteristics in or near Temecula that represent a
                   potential hazard to community residents, structures, public
         ELEMENT   facilities, and infrastructure. The Public Safety Element establishes
                   policies to minimize potential danger to residents, workers, and
                   visitors, and identifies actions needed to manage crisis situations,
                   such as earthquakes, fires, and floods. The Element also focuses on
                   preventing criminal activity before it occurs. In addition specific
                   policies and programs are provided to regulate development in
                   hazard-prone areas. Continuing education for City officials and
                   residents about emergency preparedness is also addressed.
      SCOPE AND    The Public Safety Element satisfies the requirements of State
 CONTENT OF THE    planning law and is a mandated component of the City s General
                   Plan. Government Code section 65302(g) sets forth a list of hazards
    PUBLIC SAFETY  that the Element must cover, if they pertain to conditions in the
         ELEMENT   City. These hazards include:
                        •   Seismically induced conditions including ground shaking,
                            surface rupture, ground failure, tsunami, seiche, and dam
                            failure
                        •   Slope instability leading to mudslides and landslides
                        •   Subsidence, liquefaction, and other geologic hazards
C  I T Y    O F   T  E M E       C U L A          G   E N E R A L          P   L A N
                                        PS-1

                     •    Flooding
                     •    Wild land and urban fires
                     •    Evacuation routes
                 State law also allows communities to address additional safety issues.
                 The following additional issues are addressed in the Element:
                     •    Criminal activities
                     •    Hazardous materials
                     •    Nuclear hazards from the San Onofre Nuclear Generating
                          Station
                 The Public Safety Element must be consistent with the other
                 General Plan elements, and most closely relates to the Land Use and
                 Circulation Elements. Potential hazards are identified and action
                 programs established in the Public Safety Element to avoid or
                 mitigate public safety hazards associated with planned development.
                 The Land Use Element contains policies to ensure that
                 environmental conditions, including hazards, are considered in all
                 land use decisions. The distribution of residential and other
                 sensitive land uses on the Land Use Policy Map is designed to avoid
                 areas where hazardous conditions have been identified.
                 Evacuation routes utilizing the City circulation system are also
                 described in the Public Safety Element. The provision of viable
                 evacuation routes within the City is inextricably linked to the
                 planned circulation system described in the Circulation Element.
  RELATED PLANS  There is a complex body of State and federal legislation relating to
  AND PROGRAMS   the protection of public health and safety and environmental
                 resources.     The following section briefly summarizes related
                 legislation that guides City decision-making with regard to land use
                 and physical development.
                 CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT (CEQA) GUIDELINES
                 The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) was adopted by
                 the State legislature in response to a public mandate for a thorough
                 environmental analysis of projects that might adversely affect the
                 environment. Provisions of the law, required procedures, and any
                 subsequent analysis are described in the CEQA Statutes and
                 Guidelines. Safety hazards are recognized as environmental impacts
                 under CEQA.
C  I T Y  O F   T  E M E       C U L A         G   E N E R A L          P   L A N
                                      PS-2

             Continued implementation of CEQA will ensure that City officials
             and the general public have information describing assessment and
             mitigation of potentially significant safety impacts associated with
             private and public development projects.
             ALQUIST-PRIOLO EARTHQUAKE FAULT ZONING ACT
             The Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act requires the State
             Geologist to identify earthquake fault zones along traces of both
             recently and potentially active major faults. Cities and counties that
             contain such zones must inform the public regarding the location
             of these zones, which are usually one-quarter mile or less in width.
             Proposed development plans within these earthquake fault zones
             must be accompanied by a geotechnical report prepared by a
             qualified geologist describing the likelihood of surface rupture.
             SEISMIC HAZARDS MAPPING ACT
             The purpose of the Seismic Hazards Mapping Act (Public Resources
             Code Section 2690, et. seq.) is to reduce the threat to public safety
             and minimize the loss of life and property by identifying and
             mitigating seismic hazards. The Act directs the State Geologist to
             identify and map areas prone to earthquake hazards of liquefaction,
             earthquake-induced landslides and amplified ground shaking, and
             requires site-specific geotechnical investigations to be conducted
             identifying the hazard and formulating mitigation measures prior to
             permitting most developments designed for human occupancy
             within Zones of Required Investigation.
             COBEY-ALQUIST FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ACT
             The Cobey-Alquist Floodplain Management Act encourages local
             governments to plan, adopt, and enforce land use regulations for
             floodplain management, in order to protect people and property
             from flooding hazards. The Act also identifies requirements which
             jurisdictions must meet in order to receive State financial assistance
             for flood control.
             NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP)
             Temecula participates in the National Flood Insurance Program
             (NFIP), which is administered by the Federal Emergency
             Management Agency (FEMA).              NFIP provides federal flood
             insurance and federally financed loans for property owners in flood
             prone areas. To qualify for federal flood insurance, the City must
C I T Y O F T  E M E      C U L A         G   E N E R A L             P  L A N
                                 PS-3
             identify flood hazard areas and implement a system of protective
             controls.
             RIVERSIDE COUNTY HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN
             Developed pursuant to the Tanner Act (AB 2948), the Riverside
             County Hazardous Waste Management Plan (HWMP) identifies
             current and projected future hazardous waste generation and
             management needs throughout the County. The HWMP provides a
             framework for the development of facilities to manage hazardous
             wastes, i.e. facility siting criteria. The HWMP also includes a
             Households Hazardous Waste Element that is designed to divert
             household hazardous wastes from the County s landfills.
             The County HWMP addresses only those hazardous waste issues
             with which local governments have responsibilities, namely land use
             decisions. The County and cities are required to implement facility
             siting policies and criteria within local planning and permitting
             processes. The City is required to take one of three actions:
                  •  Adopt a City hazardous waste management plan
                  •  Incorporate by reference all applicable portions of the
                     County Plan into its General Plan
                  •  Enact an ordinance requiring all applicable land use
                     permitting and decisions to be consistent with the siting
                     criteria set forth in the County HWMP
             The City has adopted by reference the applicable portions of the
             County HWMP.
             SAN ONOFRE NUCLEAR GENERATING STATION (SONGS)
             The San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station (SONGS) is located
             near the southern boundary of Orange County, approximately 25
             miles west of Temecula. SONGS is a jointly owned enterprise
             among Southern California Edison, San Diego Gas and Electric,
             and the cities of Riverside and Anaheim. For hazard mitigation
             purposes, the federal and State governments have created three levels
             of emergency zones surrounding nuclear facilities:
                  •  Emergency Planning Zone (EPZ): The federal government
                     requires that communities within approximately 10 miles of
                     a nuclear power plant be included in an EPZ. Within this
                     zone, specific emergency protective plans have been
                     developed.
C I T Y O F T   E M E     C U L A           G   E N E R A L          P  L A N
                                   PS-4

                  •   Public Education Zone (PEZ): The State of California has
                      defined a broader area between 10 to 20 miles from a plant
                      as a PEZ. Within this zone, the public is informed on
                      preparedness plans. The distance from the plant, however,
                      would make evacuation highly unlikely.
                  •   Ingestion Pathway Zone (IPZ): Temecula is located within
                      this zone which covers the areas within 50 miles of SONGS.
                      The purpose of this zone is to prevent the accidental
                      ingestion of deposited radioactive materials by humans and
                      livestock.    Southern California Edison, who operates
                      SONGS, will provide notification to all affected
                      jurisdictions within 15 minutes of declaration of any
                      emergency.
             MULTI-HAZARD FUNCTIONAL PLAN
             The City adopted a Multi-Hazard Functional Plan in 1996 pursuant
             to the California Emergency Services Act. The primary objective of
             the plan is to ensure the effective management of City personnel
             and resources in responding to emergency situations stemming
             from natural disasters, technological incidents, and nuclear defense
             emergencies. The adoption and implementation of the Multi-
             Hazard Functional Plan also lends protection to the City from
             liability claims.
             CITY OF TEMECULA CODES
             The City has adopted the California Building Code, California
             Mechanical Code, Uniform Fire Code, the National Electrical Code
             and other related codes that contain structural requirements for
             existing and new buildings. The codes are designed to insure
             structure integrity during seismic and other hazardous events and to
             prevent personal injury, loss of life and substantial property
             damage. To protect the public, planned development in Temecula
             is subject to these structural codes.
C I T Y O F T   E M E      C U L A          G  E N E R A L           P  L A N
                                  PS-5

                PUBLIC SAFETY PLAN
                As in all communities, human activities and natural conditions
                occurring in Temecula have an effect on residents quality of life.
                Providing an environment where businesses and residents can
                prosper and feel safe, and being prepared for emergency situations
                are essential. The City can minimize hazards and protect public
                health and private property through emergency preparedness
                planning.
       NATURAL  Natural hazards addressed in the Public Safety Element include
       HAZARDS  seismic, geologic, flood, dam failure and wild land fire hazards.
                SEISMIC HAZARDS
                The Elsinore fault traverses the City, which has historically
                experienced earthquakes of moderate magnitude (See Figure PS-1).
                The Elsinore fault zone is one of the largest in southern California,
                and in historical times, has been one of the quietest. The
                southeastern extension of the Elsinore fault zone, the Laguna Salada
                fault, ruptured in 1892 in a magnitude 7.0 earthquake, but the main
                trace of the Elsinore fault zone has only seen one historical event
                greater than magnitude 5.2--the magnitude 6.0 earthquake of 1910
                near Temescal Valley, which produced no known surface rupture
                and did little damage. Other faults surrounding Temecula include
                the San Andreas, San Jacinto, San Gabriel, Newport-Inglewood,
                Sierra Madre-Santa Susana-Cucamonga, Rose Canyon, Coronado
                Banks, San Diego Trough and San Clemente Island faults.
C I T Y   O F  T  E M E      C U L A         G   E N E R A L            P  L A N
                                     PS-6
     Figure PS-1
     Seismic Hazards                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Keller Rd
     CITY OF TEMECULA GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mc Colery Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Pat Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Specili Rd
     Legend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Briggs Rd                                                                Elliot Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                       Judith St
                                                  Liquefaction Hazard Zones Baxter Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jean N icholas Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                City of Murrieta                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           County of
                                                  Estimated Fault Locations                                                                                                                                                                                                                         he
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      s te
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                           Lee Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sphere of Influence                                                                         rR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             d
                                                  Temecula City Boundary                                                                                                                                                                                                                       in
                                                                                                                                                         Menifee Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  c
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Liberty Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Briggs Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Pourroy Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Leon Rd
                                                  Sphere of Influence Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Thompson Rd
                                                  Planning Area Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Benton Rd
 Source: Temecula GIS and Cotton/Bridges/Associates
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ÿ                                           Auld Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Skinner
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Maddalena Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Pourroy Rd
                                                                                                                                                          Calle D e Amor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Leon Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Allen Rd
                                                                                                              Wh
                                                                                                                   it
                                                                                                                   ew
                                                                                                                           d Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                          Rd
                                                                                                                        oo                                                                                                                                                                                                          oy
                                                                                                                                                                           Hunter Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Borel Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ur
                                             Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Po
                                                                                                                  Dr                                                                                                                                                                   Pr om o
                                            os
EL
      Ø
      "
      #                   Lo
                               s A
                                   la   m
                                                                        Ø
                                                                        "
                                                                        #              aM
                                                                                               u rr
                                                                                                         ie ta                                                                                                      on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      to    ry             Pky
  NO
                                                                                  t
                                                                                Al
                                                                                                                                                                                                              a ny
SI                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sk y
                                                                                                                                                                                                               C
                                                                                 Mu r r ie ta
      RE                                                                                                  Ho t
                                                                                                                        Springs R
                                                                                                                                 d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Murrieta Hot Springs Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Buck Rd
                       U
                    FA    City of
                         Murrieta
                          LT                                                     Ja                                                                                                            W
                                                                                                                                                                                                   y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      d
                                                                                  ck
                                                                                                                                                                                         ire                                                    ve                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        R
                                 S                                                    so n
                                                                                                                                                                                    na                                                     sA                                                                              sR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  l ow                                                                                  ola                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Butterfield Stage Rd
                                                                                                                                                                               Bo                                          W il                                                                            N ic
                                                                                             Av    e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      V in                                                                                  r e nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 oW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      a
                                                           M
                                                                 is o                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  y
                                                               ad
                                                                        n                                                                                                                                                                               d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   as R                                                                                                                                                                                                            C
               St                                                                                                                                                                                                                      N ic ol
                                                                             e
                                                                           Av
          va                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           a l le
     ua
 G                               W                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Vista D el        Rd
                                   as                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mo nte                                                                                       Co n
                                     hing                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    te n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Via N ort e
                                            ton
                                                 Av                                                                                                                                                                        rte                                                                                                                                     L a Se r e n a W y
                    D                                                                                                                                                                                               No
                                                  e                                                                                                                            M
                    ou
                                                                                                                                                                                   a ri                  Via
                                                                                                                                                                               arg
                        gla
                         ss                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                 r ni a
                                                                                                                                                                                   t a Rd
                                e
                              Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Re y                                                                                                                                                                                             a     l if o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       oC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 nch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    l                          y
                                                                                                                                           Yn                                                                                                                     De
                                                                                                                                               ez                                                                                                                                          W                                                                                                                                                               Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           a               M
                                                                                                                                                    Rd                                                                                                                                en
                                                                           St                                                                                                                                                                                               Ser
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       La                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Dr
                                                                    rr
                                                                       y                                                            ffe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        do                                                                                                                                                       Pla ya
                                                               he                                                                 Je                                                                                                                                                                                     w                                                                                                                                                 ra De
                                                           C                                                                         rs                                                                                                                                                                                    sP                                                                                                                                Ma d e
                                                                                 LS                                                   on                                                                                                                                                                                      ky
                                                                                E                                                         Av
                                                                                                                                           e                                                                                      d
                                                                                                              d                                                                                                           ta R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Rd
                                                                                       IN                rR                                                                                                        ar i                                                                                                       Rd                                                                                                                                                ba
                                                                                                  st e                                                                                                                                                                                                                    a                                                                                                                                            P au
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     rn i
                                                                                                                                                                                                         a rg
                                                                                         c   he
                                                                                                  O                                                                                                     M                                                                                                li     fo
                                                                                      in                 R                                                                                                                                                                                            Ca
                                                                                  W                           E                    Di
                                                                                                                                     az                                                                                                                                                         ho
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           nc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ra
                                                                                                                          U           Rd
                                                                                                                        FA
                                             Ra                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        L in da R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                o
                                                   ho
                                                 nc                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        se   a Rd
                                                      Ca
                                                        lif
                                                                                                                                  LT                                                  Yn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                o                                                                                                                    Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ll e
                                                                                                                                          S                                                 ez           Ra n ch V ista R d                                                                                                     ba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          B u tt e r
                                                         or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pa u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        C on t en to
                                                            ni                                                                                                                                   Rd
                                  ida D el O ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          M e ad o ws Pk y
                              ve n
                                                               a                                                                                                  d
                          A                                      Rd                                                                                         aR
                                                                                                                             R a nc ho C a
                                                                                                                                               l ifo rn i
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ELS                                                                                     M                                                                                                                               fie l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ga                                                                                                                                     Sta                                                                          De Portola Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                        IN                                                                                      ar                                                                                                                                           ge
                                                                                                                                                                                                             O                                                                                        rita
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     R                    R    d                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       go                                                                  Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E     tia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sa n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Yn                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A nz
                                                                                         Via Sant
                                                                                                  a
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Va
                                                                                                                                                                                                        lle
                                                                                                                                                                                                          jo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ez
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     a R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         d       }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ÿ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 79
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rd
                                                                                              Ro sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e                                                                    la
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Av                                                   De Po r to                                                                                                                                                                Pk y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n     ch
                                            a
                                        an c                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            il R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Va
                                     B arr
                                    V ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    a      Rd
                                                                o Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                           in d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          aL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      m                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Rd
                                                              a q uer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          k   Pk y                                                                          za
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       aw                                                                              An
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     dh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rd
                                                           V ia V                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ll e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    y                                                                              Re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Va
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Pechanga                                                                      ollo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Entertainment                                                                        w
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ø                                                                                 Sp                                                                         rH
                                                                                                                                                                                                             "
                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  nR                                                                ar Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Dee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 yo                                                                        Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          wC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      bo
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Û
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Pe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pa rk wa y
 µ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ch an g a
                                                   0                                           5,000                                           10,000
                                                                                                                                                   Feet
                                                                                                                                                    Miles
                                                   0                                                              1                                                        2
C I T Y                                                                     O F                                                       T E M E C U L A                                                                                                                                                                              G E N E R A L                                                                                                                                                                                                     P L A N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PS-7

PLANS IN ACTION                 Fault Rupture. The Elsinore fault
Proposed         development    zone is an Alquist-Priolo Earthquake
projects in the Elsinore        Fault Zone, governed by specific State
fault       zone      require   development criteria designed to
evaluation and a writ-ten       prevent damage associated with ground
report specific to the site,    surface rupture. Structures intended for human occupancy are not
prepared by a licensed          permitted on an active fault. Before a project can be permitted, the
geologist.    Structures for
                                City requires a geologic investigation to demonstrate that proposed
human occupancy cannot
be placed over the fault
                                buildings will not be constructed across the fault.
and must be set back from
the fault (generally 50 feet).  Ground Shaking. Severe ground shaking is possible in Temecula
                                due to the presence of loosely consolidated alluvial soils. Ground
                                shaking causes structural damage, and is the major cause of soil
                                instability hazards, such as liquefaction, subsidence, or slope failure.
                                Riverside County has established Ground Shaking Zones indicating
                                the relative level of risk based on distance from faults and geologic
                                characteristics of an area. Development proposals are evaluated
                                using guidelines, which indicate the suitability of locating land uses
                                in various ground shaking zones. The Temecula Planning Area is
                                located in Ground Shaking Zone II, where shaking is expected to
                                vary from moderate to intense levels in the event of an earthquake,
                                depending on the composition of underlying geologic formations,
                                the earthquake s epicenter, and the order of magnitude of the
                                seismic event.
PLANS IN ACTION                 Unreinforced masonry (URM) structures and adobe block
The only remaining URM          construction are particularly susceptible to failure and/or collapse
structure in Old Town, the      during an earthquake. New structures conforming to California
Temecula          Merchantile   Building Code standards can withstand ground shaking with little
Building (1902), has been       or no structural damage. Older buildings can also be retrofitted to
retrofitted to meet current     improve structural integrity. To identify structures most prone to
seismic safety standards.       failure, the City conducted a seismic inventory of structures in Old
                                Town, where buildings are least likely to be able to withstand
                                moderate ground shaking.
                                GEOLOGIC HAZARDS
                                Ground shaking following an earthquake leads to other potential
                                geologic hazards such as liquefaction, landslides, and subsidence.
                                The potential for these hazards depends upon the severity of
 C    I T Y          O F       T  E M E      C U L A          G   E N E R A L            P   L A N
                                                     PS-8
                             ground shaking and underlying geologic conditions. Temecula is
                             subject to the following potential geologic hazards.
                             Liquefaction. The potential for liquefaction in an area is a
                             function of soil type and depth of groundwater.                  Poorly
                             consolidated soils combine with groundwater during an earthquake,
                             losing their shear strength and taking on the properties of a heavy
                             liquid. This process, termed liquefaction, can result in the loss of
                             foundation support, ground failure due to lateral spreading, and
                             settlement of affected soils. Three general conditions must be met
                             for liquefaction to occur: (1) strong ground shaking of relatively
                             long duration; (2) loose, or unconsolidated, recently deposited
                             sediments consisting primarily of silty sand and sand; and (3) water
                             saturated sediments within about 50 feet of the surface.
                             As shown in Figure PS-1, there is a possibility that liquefaction
                             could occur in the Temecula area, particularly along Santa Gertrudis
                             and Temecula Creeks. California law requires identification of
                             Liquefaction Zones where the stability of foundation soils must be
PLANS IN ACTION              investigated, and countermeasures undertaken in the design and
 California law requires     construction of buildings for human occupancy.
disclosure of Liquefaction,
Landslide, and Alquist-      Landslides. Slope stability is related to a variety of factors
Priolo Earthquake Fault
                             including steepness; strength of geologic materials to resist the
zones as a part of all real
estate transactions within   downward pull of gravity; characteristics of bedding planes, joints
identified areas.            and faults; surface and ground water conditions; and other factors.
                             Landslides are most likely to occur on hillside locations where rock
                             strata parallels surface slopes, high clay content absorbs excess water,
                             displacement has fractured a fault zone, or the base of a slope has
                             been removed.
                             Although no recent landslides have occurred in the area, potential
                             landslide conditions exist in hillside areas in southwest Temecula
                             where existing slopes are greater than 15 percent (see Figure PS-1).
                             California law requires identification of Landslide Zones where the
                             stability of hill slopes must be evaluated, and countermeasures
                             undertaken in the design and construction of buildings for human
                             occupancy.
                             Subsidence. Subsidence occurs when earth material shrinks due to
                             natural or artificial removal of underlying support. This process
                             occurs     in      poor,     unconsolidated     soils    and     poorly
 C    I T Y        O F      T   E M E     C U L A           G   E N E R A L           P   L A N
                                                  PS-9
                               compacted fill areas. The potential for subsidence exists along Santa
                               Gertrudis and Temecula Creeks.
                               Erosion.      The underlying surficial geology in Temecula is
                               predominantly composed of well-drained fine sandy loams, sandy
                               loams and gravelly silt loams.          Soils characterized by low
                               permeability or high runoff are susceptible to erosion.
                               Additionally, the well-drained alluvium surfaces are susceptible to
                               wind erosion.
PLANS IN ACTION                The City will enact programs to reduce geologic hazards and protect
The City enforces State        public safety. To minimize hazards resulting from earthquakes, the
seismic design guidelines      most recent State seismic guidelines will be implemented for
and building codes, works      structural design. During the review of development proposals
with property owners to        involving steep slopes, grading, unstable soils and other hazardous
rehabilitate      hazardous    conditions, surveys of soil and geologic conditions by a state-
buildings, and will prepare    licensed engineering geologist will be required. Based on the results
new hillside development
                               of the survey, mitigation measures will be incorporated into projects
standards.
                               to minimize geologic hazards. The City will take actions to make
                               seismic and geologic hazard mitigation a part of land use planning
                               efforts, such as working with property owners to remediate
                               hazardous buildings, requiring disclosure of hazard zone status as
                               part of real estate transactions, working with County and State
                               agencies to monitor and compile information on seismic hazards,
                               and adopting hillside development standards.
                               FLOOD HAZARDS
PLANS IN ACTION                Flood hazards in Temecula can be divided into three categories:
Specific building standards,   natural flooding, dam failure, and mud debris flows.
described in the flood
damage prevention and          Natural Flooding. Figure PS-2 identifies
floodplain      management     areas of potential flood hazards within
regulations within the City
                               the Planning Area. Temecula contains
Development Code, apply
to flood prone areas,
                               several FEMA Special Flood Hazard
including anchoring, use of    Areas     (SFHAs).         These     areas,
flood resistant building       corresponding to the 100-year floodplain,
materials, use of adequate     have the potential to become flooded
drainage      paths,     and   when major rainstorms cause stream
elevating the structure to or  overflows. Murrieta Creek is the most
above the base flood           flood-prone of the Temecula creeks.
elevation.                     However, Temecula Creek, Pechanga
                               Creek,
 C    I T Y          O F      T   E M E     C U L A        G    E N E R A L           P   L A N
                                                  PS-10
      Figure PS-2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Keller Rd
      Flood Hazards
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mc Colery Rd
      and Dam Inundation Areas                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Pat Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Specili Rd
      CITY OF TEMECULA GENERAL PLAN                                                                                                                                                                                                 Briggs Rd                                                                       Elliot Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                    Judith St
                                                                                                                                                                      Baxter Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Jean Nicholas Rd
      Legend
                                                                                                                                                                                                               City of Murrieta                                                                            es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 County of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              te
                                                 100 Year Flood Zone                                                                                                  Lee Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sphere of Influence                                                                                rR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  d                                                                                                                                                                              Riverside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ch
                                                                                                                                                    Menifee Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       in
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Liberty Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Briggs Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Pourroy Rd
                                                 Dam Inundation Areas                                                                                                                                                                                                               Leon Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Thompson Rd
                                                 Temecula City Boundary
                                                 Sphere of Influence Boundary                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Benton Rd
                                                 Planning Area Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ÿ                                                  Auld Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Skinner
      Sources: City of Temecula, FEMA Q3 Flood Data.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Maddalena Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pourroy Rd
                                                                                                                                                     Calle D e Amor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Leon Rd           Allen Rd
                                                                                                            Wh
                                                                                                              it
                                                                                                                       d Rd
                                                                                                                    oo                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Rd
                                                                                                                 ew
                                                                                                                                                                      Hunter Rd                                                                                                                                                                y                                                                                                                                                                                                   Borel Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ur
                                           Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Po
                                                                                                                Dr                                                                                                                                                                             Pr omo
                                          os
      Ø
      "
      #                  Lo
                            s   Ala
                                      m
                                                                        Ø
                                                                        "
                                                                        #    Al
                                                                                t    a
                                                                                          Mu
                                                                                            r rie
                                                                                                  ta
                                                                                                                                                                                                              an y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               to   ry             P ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sk y
                                                                                                                                                                                                             C
                                                                               M u rr ie ta
                                                                                                        Ho
                                                                                                                t Springs Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Murrieta Hot Sp rings Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Buck Rd
                         City of
                        Murrieta                                               Ja                                                                                                            W
                                                                                                                                                                                                 y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          d
                                                                                ck
                                                                                                                                                                                    i   re                                                           ve                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     R
                                                                                    so n
                                                                                                                                                                                 na                                                             sA                                                                                 sR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   l ow
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     da
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            o la
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Butterfield Stage Rd
                                                                                            Av                                                                            Bo                                                W il                                                                                   N ic                                                                                                                                       V in                                                                                 Be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ren
                                                                                                e
                                                         M                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           oW
                                                               i so                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         y
                                                             ad
                                                                        n                                                                                                                                                                                         d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     as R                                                                                                                                                                                                               C
               St                                                                                                                                                                                                                       N icol
                                                                           e
                                                                         Av
          va                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                a l le
     ua
 G                              W                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Vista D el        Rd
                                 as                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mo nte                                                                                  Co n
                                    hing                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             te n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Via N ort e
                                           ton
                                               Av                                                                                                                                                                          rt e                                                                                                                                              L a Se r en a W y
                    D                                                                                                                                                                                              No
                                                 e                                                                                                                        M
                    ou
                                                                                                                                                                              a rit a Rd
                        gl                                                                                                                                                                             Via
                                                                                                                                                                          arg
                        as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Rd
                         sA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Rd                                                                                                                                                                                              r n ia
                              ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Rey                                                                                                                                                                                             a      lif o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            oC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     nc h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          l                            y
                                                                                                                                          Yn                                                                                                                             De
                                                                                                                                              z
                                                                                                                                              e                                                                                                                                                   W                                                                                                                                                            Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   a               M
                                                                                                                                               Rd                                                                                                                                             en
                                                                        St                                                                                                                                                                                                       Se r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              La                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Dr
                                                                  rr
                                                                    y                                                           ffe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            do                                                                                                                                                Pla ya
                                                             he                                                               Je                                                                                                                                                                                                w                                                                                                                                       ra De
                                                         C                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sP                                                                                                                            M a de
                                                                                                                                 r so                                                                                                                                                                                                 ky
                                                                                                                                      n
                                                                                                                                      Av  e                                                                                        d                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Rd
                                                                                                            d                                                                                                             ta R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ba
                                                                                                       rR                                                                                                          ar i                                                                                                         R     d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Pau
                                                                                                st e                                                                                                   ar                                                                                                                  n ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        or
                                                                                                                                                                                                         g
                                                                                       c   he                                                                                                          M                                                                                                        l if
                                                                                    in                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ca
                                                                                W
                                                                                                                               Di
                                                                                                                                 az                                                                                                                                                                     ho
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   nc
                                                                                                                                  Rd                                                                                                                                                          Ra
                                           Ra                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L in da R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             o
                                                 ho
                                               nc                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             se   a Rd
                                                    Ca                                                                                                                              Yn                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ll e
                                                      lif
                                                                                                                                                                                       e                       o                                                                                                                               Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                             z          R a nch Vi sta R d                                                                                                           ba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Bu t t e r
                                                       or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                P au
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             C on te n to
                                                          ni                                                                                                                                     Rd
                                     De l O ro
                             ven ida
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    M e ad o ws Pk y
                                                             a                                                                                              d
                         A                                     Rd                                                                                               R
                                                                                                                                         li fo r   n ia
                                                                                                                          R an c h o C a                                                                                                                                                               M                                                                                                                             f ie l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ar g                                                                                                                                  Sta                                                                           De Portola Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    a Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              a ri t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           R     d                                                                                                                                                                                                       Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        go
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  tia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sa n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Yn                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     A nz
                                                                                         Vi a Sant                                                                                                    Va
                                                                                                                                                                                                       le
                                                                                                                                                                                                         l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ez
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              d      }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ÿ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     79
                                                                                            a Ro sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                         jo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e                                                                                 Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Av                                                                             la                                                                                                                                                 P ky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          D e Po rt o                                                                                                                                                       ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      n
                                       nc a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   il R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   a
                                      arr a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Va
                                   Via
                                       B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              aR
                                                              o Rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     i nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  aL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              m                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Rd
                                                             q uer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            k    Pk y                                                                            za
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         aw                                                                                 An
                                                         Via V                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  dh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Re
                                                               a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ll e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Va
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                olf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pechanga                                                                         ol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Entertainment                                                                        lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ø                                                                                           Sp                                                                                H
                                                                                                                                                                                                           "
                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   nR                                                                    ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Center                                                             ee r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  yo                                                                              Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          wC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      bo
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Û
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        c ha n g a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Pe
                                                 0                                            5,000                                           10,000
 µ                                               0                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                  Feet
                                                                                                                                                   Miles
                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Pa rk wa y
C I T Y                                                                  O F                                                      T E M E C U L A                                                                                                                                                                                         G E N E R A L                                                                                                                                                                                                  P L A N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PS-11

             Tucalota Creek, Long Valley Wash, and Santa Gertrudis Creek could
             also be subjected to flooding.
             Dam Failure. Flooding from dam failure can result from natural
             and human causes including earthquakes, erosion, improper siting
             and/or design and rapidly rising floodwater during heavy storms.
             The type of failure, ranging from instantaneous to gradual, is
             dependent on the building material of the dam. Dam failure can
             potentially cause loss of life and property damage. Other effects
             include displacement of persons residing in the inundation path
             and damage to infrastructure.
             Three dams are located in areas surrounding Temecula:
                 •   Lake Skinner is a 43,800-acre feet earthen dam located
                     northeast of Temecula. Failure of the Lake Skinner Dam
                     would result in flooding along Tucalota Creek and Benton
                     Road.
                 •   Vail Lake is located to the east of Temecula. Dam failure of
                     this 51,000-acre foot facility would cause flooding in the
                     Pauba and Temecula Valleys. Interstate 15 and an adjacent
                     3-mile area would also flood.
                 •   Diamond Valley Lake, impounded by two earthen dams, is
                     the largest reservoir in Southern California and is located
                     north of Temecula. Failure of the western dam would result
                     in flooding in the northern parts of the Planning Area.
             The failure of Lake Skinner or Diamond Valley Lake could also
             result in substantial flooding along parts of Santa Gertrudis and
             Warm Springs Creeks. Areas along I-15 and Murrieta Creek could
             also be substantially affected.
             Mud and Debris Flows. Mud and debris flows originate in hillside
             areas characterized by deep topsoil and/or poor drainage. The
             potential for mud and debris flows exists in the hilly southern and
             western portions of Temecula.
             The City will continue to participate in the National Flood
             Insurance Program (NFIP), which makes flood insurance available
             to affected property owners within the 100-year floodplain. The
             City      will     also     review     development      plans    for
C I T Y O F T  E M E      C U L A          G   E N E R A L          P  L A N
                                 PS-12

PLANS IN ACTION              projects within the floodplain, to ensure compliance with City and
Temecula participates in     FEMA floodplain development requirements. No development of
the      NFIP,     enforces  any kind will be allowed in the floodway portion of the 100-year
Development          Code    floodplain. The City will maintain a Dam Inundation Evacuation
regulations      regarding   Plan, will update the Multi-Hazard Functional Plan as needed to
development     in      the  address flood hazards, and will coordinate with the State Office of
floodplain and floodway,     Emergency Services to ensure that dam safety plans reflect the level
and maintains a dam
                             of development within the community.
inundation     evacuation
plan.
                             FIRE HAZARDS
                             Temecula is subject to both natural and urban fires. The Planning
                             Area is surrounded by rolling foothills and mountains subject to
                             potential natural wild land fires.
                                                                   Wild Land Fires. Fire in
                                                                   undeveloped areas results from
                                                                   the ignition of accumulated
                                                                   brush and vegetation.       The
                                                                   most critical times of year for
                                                                   wildland fires are late summer
                                                                   and fall when Santa Ana winds
                                                                   bring hot, dry desert air into
                             the region. The air temperature quickly dries vegetation, thereby
                             increasing the amount of natural fuel. Development pressures
                             increase the threat of wildland fire on human populations and
                             property as development pushes to the fringes of major forests and
                             brush areas. Increased human presence in wildland areas likewise
                             increases the potential for human-induced wildland fires.
                             Urban Fires. The predominant land use in the Temecula area is
                             low density residential development. The area has experienced rapid
                             development in past decades, and this trend is expected to continue.
                             As the number of structures increases, so does the incidence of fire.
                             Building conditions that affect fire control include: type and use of
                             structure; area of building; number of stories; roof covering
                             materials; and adjacent uses.
                             Certain development patterns pose more difficult fire problems.
                             These include: multi-story, wood frame, high density apartment
                             development; large continuous developed areas with combustible
 C    I T Y       O F       T  E M E      C U L A          G   E N E R A L           P  L A N
                                                PS-13
                                roofing materials; and facilities that use and/or store hazardous
                                materials. Several older residential tracts in the City feature wood
                                shake roofs, which increase the potential for both ignition and
                                spread of fire.
PLANS IN ACTION
The Fire Department             Areas posing a significant risk to the City are subject to the
reviews development plans       California Public Resources Code, Sections 4291-4299, which
to be sure new structures       require property owners to conduct periodic maintenance to reduce
are safe, and conducts          the fire danger. The Riverside County Fire Department (RCFD),
public education and            through a cooperative agreement, provides fire protection, fire
outreach activities.     The    prevention, and emergency medical rescue services in the City of
City also works closely
                                Temecula. The City will continue to reduce the potential for
with local water districts to
ensure water pressure is        dangerous fires by coordinating with the RCFD to conduct fire
adequate for fire fighting      hazard education, and administer fire protection and fuel
purposes.                       modification programs. The current Uniform Fire Code will be
                                used to prevent structural fire hazards.
   HUMAN ACTIVITY               Human activity hazards addressed in the Safety Plan include
               HAZARDS          hazardous materials and nuclear power production.
                                HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
PLANS IN ACTION                 Hazardous materials are used in Temecula for a variety of purposes,
The City participates in the    including service industries, small businesses, schools and
Riverside            County     households.     Many chemicals used in household cleaning,
Household         Hazardous     construction, dry cleaning, film processing, landscaping, and
Waste (HHW) collection          automotive maintenance and repair are considered hazardous.
program in accordance           Accidents can also occur in the production, use, transport and
with       the    California    disposal of hazardous waste.
Integrated Solid Waste
Management Act of 1989.
County        Environmental     In order to effectively manage hazardous materials and wastes, the
Health (EH) personnel, in       City implements applicable portions of the Riverside County
conjunction with the Fire       Hazardous Waste Management Plan (HWMP). Both the federal and
Department, respond to          State governments require all businesses that handle more than a
hazardous          materials    specified amount of hazardous materials to submit an annual
incidents,     and      assist  business plan to the local Certified Unified Program Agency
County District Attorney        (CUPA). The CUPA with responsibility for the City of Temecula is
to                investigate   the Riverside County Environmental Health Department.
environmental crimes and
respond        to     illegal   The City will work to minimize accidents and health risks from
hazardous waste disposal
                                hazardous materials using the following approaches:
complaints.
 C   I T Y          O F        T  E M E      C U L A          G  E N E R A L           P   L A N
                                                   PS-14
                 •   Cooperate with federal, State, and County agencies to
                     effectively regulate the management of hazardous materials
                     and waste.
                 •   Amend project applications to include requirements for
                     submittal of hazardous waste information.
                 •   Establish roadway transportation routes for conveyance of
                     hazardous materials.
                 •   Cooperate with the Certified United Program Agency
                     (CUPA) for Temecula (the Riverside County Environmental
                     Health Department) and the Riverside County Fire
                     Department to administer risk management plans for
                     businesses within the City.
                 •   Implement the Multi-Hazard Functional Plan for accidents
                     involving hazardous materials.
             NUCLEAR POWER PRODUCTION
             The San Onofre Nuclear Generating System (SONGS) is located on
             the Camp Pendleton U.S. Marine Corps Base in San Diego County,
             approximately 25 miles west of Temecula. SONGS operations are
             regulated by FEMA and the California Office of Emergency Services
             (OES).      An Interjurisdictional Planning Committee (IPC),
             comprised of several local jurisdictions, was established to
             coordinate emergency response plans.
             SONGS byproducts are radioactive,
             with the exception of small
             quantities of radioactive gas
             released into the air and liquids
             into the Pacific Ocean.          The
             releases are monitored by SONGS
             personnel. According to SONGS,
             radiation exposure due to material
             releases is less than the typical
             exposure from natural background radiation. The two most likely
             sources of radiation contamination are incidents involving
             transport of radioactive materials, and uncontrolled releases at the
             plant site.
C I T Y O F T  E M E      C U L A          G  E N E R A L         P   L A N
                                 PS-15

                              The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission has identified the area
                              surrounding every nuclear generating station as an Emergency
                              Planning Zone (EPZ). The State of California has defined the area
                              outside, and adjacent to the EPZ as a Public Education Zone (PEZ).
PLANS IN ACTION               The federal government establishes the area with a 50-mile radius
Temecula s Multi-Hazard       around every nuclear generating station as an Ingestion Pathway
Functional Plan provides      Zone (IPZ).
strategies to deal with
potential        emergencies  The Temecula planning area is located within the IPZ of the San
related to SONGS.             Onofre Station. Education programs coordinated by the State and
                              Southern California Edison are administered in this zone to ensure
                              that residents are prepared for any potential problems associated
                              with the facility.
           SAFETY AND         Criminal activity in Temecula
             SECURITY         is lower than in some other
                              parts of Riverside County.
                              Protecting       residents     and
                              businesses      from       criminal
PLANS IN ACTION               activity is a priority in
When property owners
                              Temecula. Police protection is
present         development   provided by the Riverside
proposals,     the     City   County Sheriff s Department (RCSD). Temecula has three store-
encourages the use of crime   front office locations (Old Town Temecula, Promenade Mall, and
preventive defensible space   Temecula Town Center). The City will ensure that contracted
and lighting concepts to      staffing levels are compatible with the City population and needs.
deter crime.                  Crime prevention programs include police services for residents and
                              businesses, and citizen-based volunteer programs and patrols.
           EMERGENCY          Local Emergency Preparedness Plans serve as extensions of the
       PREPAREDNESS           California Emergency Plan and the Emergency Resource
                              Management Plan.            The City has adopted a Multi-Hazard
                              Functional Plan to ensure the effective management of City
                              personnel and resources in responding to emergency situations
                              stemming from natural disasters, technological incidents, and
                              nuclear defense emergencies.
                              The plan includes a responsibility matrix that delineates specific
                              responsibilities to City departments or personnel in the event of an
                              emergency. The plan also includes a comprehensive hazard analysis
                              that addresses the following potential hazards: earthquake,
                              hazardous material incident, flooding, dam failure, major
                              fire/wildfire, nuclear incident, and transportation incident.
 C    I T Y        O F       T   E M E     C U L A           G    E N E R A L         P  L A N
                                                   PS-16
                              The Multi-Hazard Functional Plan provides general guidelines for
                              evacuation routes in the event of a natural or human-caused
                              disaster. Due to the unpredictability of the impact of a disaster on
                              streets and highways, appropriate evacuation routes cannot be pre-
                              determined. In general, all traffic will be channeled to the nearby
PLANS IN ACTION               freeways, state highways, and other major arterials. I-15 will serve as
The Fire and Police           the primary north-south evacuation channel. Winchester and
Departments          educate  Rancho California Roads will be used for east-west evacuation.
residents and businesses      Once the decision to evacuate is made, the public will be alerted and
about appropriate act-ions    given evacuation instructions by various means, including school
to safeguard life and         alert/monitor receivers, radio and television announcements, sirens,
property during and after     mobile loud speakers, and personal contact.
emergencies         through
distribution of brochures,
presentations    to    civic
                              Educating residents and businesses about potential disasters and the
groups, and instruction in    Multi-Hazard Functional Plan can increase the effectiveness of
local schools.                response efforts. An educated public will know how to prevent
                              injury and property damage during and after emergencies and also
                              know how to find help.
                              One important way that residents participate in the City s
                              emergency preparedness program is through the Temecula Citizen s
                              Corps. Created in 2002, the Corps is a community-based volunteer
                              organization whose goal is to prepare for natural disasters or
                              terrorist activity through coordinated response at the neighborhood
                              level. In the event of an emergency, the Corps will assist the City
                              government by providing assistance in cases where the scale of the
                              incident has overwhelmed conventional emergency services.
           TERRORISM          In the aftermath of the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, the
     READINESS AND            City of Temecula s emergency preparedness and response services
                              have become an even more critical function to address terrorism
               RESPONSE       issues that confront the nation and local communities. Since the
                              events of 9/11, a considerable amount of information has been
                              generated on potential vulnerabilities, protective measures, and anti-
                              terrorism/security technologies. The Riverside County Sheriff s and
                              Fire Departments, which currently provide police and fire services
                              to Temecula, recognizes the need not only to learn from the lessons
                              from 9/11, but also to collectively address the terrorism planning
                              and policy issues that most affect Temecula residents. The goals,
                              policies and implementation programs associated with emergency
                              preparedness also apply to terrorism readiness and response.
 C    I T Y         O F      T   E M E      C U L A        G   E N E R A L            P  L A N
                                                   PS-17
                GOALS AND POLICIES
                Certain natural conditions and human activities in Temecula create
                risks to individuals and properties within the community. Excessive
                risk from such hazards can be reduced or avoided through
                implementation of policies in the Public Safety Element.
                The Public Safety Element addresses four major issues, including: 1)
                reducing risk from natural hazardous conditions; 2) reducing risks
                from hazards associated with human activities; 3) community safety
                and security; and 4) preparing for emergency situations.
       NATURAL  Due to location within a seismically active region and the presence
       HAZARDS  of floodplains and hillsides, Temecula is potentially subject to
                several types of natural hazards, including earthquakes, liquefaction,
                flooding, wild land fires, landslides, and erosion. Potential damage
                can be reduced through appropriate land use planning,
                development engineering, and building construction practices.
                The Planning Area contains Alquist-Priolo fault zones and County
                Fault Hazard Zones.         These zones identify areas potentially
                impacted by groundshaking and surface-rupture. Seismic events
                occurring within and outside of the Planning Area also have the
                potential to trigger such secondary impacts as liquefaction and
                subsidence. Other natural hazards impacting the Planning Area
                include flooding and dam inundation.
                Goal 1          Protection from natural hazards associated with
                                geologic instability, seismic events, wild land fires,
                                flooding, and dam failures.
                Policy 1.1      Identify and mitigate potential adverse impacts of
                                ground surface rupture, liquefaction, and landslides
                                at the project level.
                Policy 1.2      Apply and enforce seismic design standards and
                                building construction codes for new development.
                Policy 1.3      Work with property owners to remediate hazardous
                                buildings throughout the City.
                Policy 1.4      Monitor the potential for seismic events and other
                                geologic activity with the County of Riverside and
                                California Geological Survey.
C I T Y   O F  T   E M E     C U L A          G   E N E R A L          P   L A N
                                    PS-18
                Policy 1.5     Establish development management techniques to
                               lessen the potential for erosion and landslides.
                Policy 1.6     Provide and maintain adequate flood control
                               facilities and limit development within the 100-year
                               floodplain and potential dam inundation areas.
                Policy 1.7     Prohibit development of any kind within the
                               floodway portion of the 100-year floodplain.
                Policy 1.8     Reduce the risk of wild land fire through imposition
                               of site-specific development standards during project
                               review and coordination with the City Fire
                               Department and other organizations.
        HUMAN-  The transport, storage, and disposal of hazardous materials and the
        CAUSED  education and planning regarding nuclear power production are
                important environmental planning issues in Temecula. Modern
       HAZARDS  technology and society's high standard of living has led to
                dependence on these products and necessitates adequate
                management of materials and waste and education regarding
                hazards within the City. The intent is to avoid damage to people,
                property and environmental resources.
                Goal 2         Protection of the public and environmental
                               resources from hazards related to hazardous
                               materials and waste, and nuclear power
                               production.
                Policy 2.1     Minimize the risks associated with hazardous
                               materials through careful land use planning and
                               coordination with responsible federal, State, and
                               County agencies.
                Policy 2.2     Participate in local and regional programs that
                               facilitate the proper disposal of household hazardous
                               waste.
                Policy 2.3     The policies and programs of the current Riverside
                               County Hazardous Waste Management Plan
                               (HWMP) are hereby adopted by reference.
                Policy 2.4     Coordinate with local, State and federal agencies to
                               reduce the risks related to nuclear power production.
C I T Y   O F  T  E M E    C U L A            G   E N E R A L          P   L A N
                                   PS-19
                  Policy 2.5      Reduce potential hazards associated with airplane
                                  accidents by ensuring compliance of proposed
                                  development projects with the risk contours
                                  contained in the Airport Land Use Compatibility
                                  Plan (ALUCP) for French Valley Airport.
     SAFETY AND   The perception of personal safety and the security of property are
        SECURITY  central to the quality of life in a community. Realizing these
                  objectives requires both proactive and reactive involvement by
                  citizens, as well as fire and law enforcement personnel. The risk of
                  exposure to criminal activity or fire can be reduced through
                  planning, education and regulation of human activity, and by
                  providing paved road access throughout the City. In addition, the
                  design and effective use of the built environment can lead to a
                  reduction in fear and the incidence of both crime and fire,
                  improving the quality of life, and helping create a secure sense of
                  community.
                  Goal 3          A safe and secure community free from the threat
                                  of personal injury and loss of property.
                  Policy 3.1      Ensure adequate facilities and police and fire service
                                  personnel are provided in the City.
                  Policy 3.2      Continue to work with the community in operating
                                  citizen involved programs and patrols that promote
                                  mutual assistance and crime prevention activities
                                  among residents.
                  Policy 3.3      Incorporate crime prevention and defensible space
                                  into site plans and building designs for new
                                  development.
                  Policy 3.4      Ensure that all-weather and appropriate secondary
                                  access is provided to ensure timely emergency
                                  response. Require all residential development with
                                  35 or more dwelling units to provide all-weather
                                  secondary access that meets City standards.
     EMERGENCY    Major emergencies occur periodically in all communities. Timely
   PREPAREDNESS   and coordinated action by agencies charged with responsibilities in
                  the event of a disaster is necessary to mitigate the effect of a disaster
                  on the human population and environment. Preventive measures
                  and preparatory responses before an emergency occurs will hasten
                  recovery.
C I T Y    O F   T  E M E      C U L A          G   E N E R A L             P  L A N
                                      PS-20
                 Goal 4          An effective response of emergency services
                                 following a disaster.
                 Policy 4.1      Provide for and maintain a coordinated emergency
                                 services response to reduce community risks and
                                 property damage in the event of a disaster.
                 Policy 4.2      Support the development and implementation of
                                 local preparedness plans and multi-jurisdictional
                                 cooperation for emergency situations consistent with
                                 the Standardized Emergency Management System
                                 (SEMS).
                 Policy 4.3      Coordinate emergency response planning with
                                 Riverside County and the Federal Emergency
                                 Management Agency (FEMA).
                 Policy 4.4      Encourage community-wide emergency preparedness
                                 among City residents and the business community.
                 Policy 4.5      Regulate the location of critical facilities to ensure
                                 they continue to function after a disaster.
                 Policy 4.6      Discourage the closure of streets that limit or delay
                                 access for emergency services.
                 IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
                 The following Implementation Programs provide actions to
                 implement Public Safety Element goals and policies.
           PS-1  Reduce the risk to the community from hazards related to geologic
       NATURAL   conditions, seismic activity, wild land fires, and flooding by
                 requiring feasible mitigation of such impacts on existing
  HAZARDS RISK   development, new development, and reuse projects.               Assess
     REDUCTION   development proposals for potential hazards pursuant to the
                 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). Require measures
                 to mitigate all identified significant public safety hazards. Address
                 the following issues in the assessment:
                     •   Steep slopes, unstable geologic materials and faulting;
                     •   Flooding;
                     •   Wild land and structural fires and adequacy of water
                         pressure for fire fighting; and
C I T Y   O F   T  E M E     C U L A           G   E N E R A L           P   L A N
                                     PS-21

                       •   Hazardous materials use, transport, storage or disposal.
                   Agency/Department:          Planning, Building & Safety, Public
                                               Works
                   Related Policies:           1.1, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8
             PS-2  To minimize damage from earthquakes and other geologic activity,
    STRUCTURAL     implement most recent and most stringent California and Uniform
                   Building Code seismic requirements for structural design for new
          DESIGN   development and reuse projects.
                   Agency/Department:          Planning, Building & Safety
                   Related Policy:             1.2
             PS-3  During review of development and reuse proposals, require surveys
        SOIL AND   of soil and geologic conditions by State licensed Engineering
                   Geologists and Civil Engineers where appropriate. Examples of
      GEOLOGIC     when these surveys are required are:
         SURVEYS
                       •   Prior to the development of any area with slopes more than
                           10 feet high at a gradient equal to or steeper than 2:1;
                       •   Projects located within a State-delineated Seismic Hazard
                           Zone for liquefaction or seismically-induced landsliding, in
                           accordance with the California Geological Survey; or,
                       •   Projects located within an Earthquake Fault Zone or within
                           150 feet of an active or potentially active fault.
                   If potential for fault displacement or liquefaction exists on the site,
                   structures for human occupancy may not be placed there unless the
                   seismic hazard is mitigated to an acceptable level.
                   Agency/Department:          Public Works, Planning, Building &
                                               Safety
                   Related Policy:             1.1
C I T Y    O F    T  E M E      C U L A          G   E N E R A L              P L A N
                                       PS-22

             PS-4  Implement the following actions to ensure that the land use
       LAND USE    planning and real estate processes fully account for the presence of
                   seismic hazards in Temecula.
  PLANNING AND
   NOTIFICATION        •   Require that any person selling property within a delineated
                           Earthquake Fault Zone, Liquefaction Zone, or Landslide
                           Zone disclose this fact to any prospective purchaser.
                       •   Work with the County of Riverside and California
                           Geological Survey to monitor and compile information on
                           faults within the Temecula Planning Area.
                       •   Update the City s listing of hazardous unreinforced masonry
                           buildings periodically. Provide technical assistance and
                           funding to remediate these structures, as available.
                       •   Develop a Land Use Suitability Matrix for Special Studies
                           and County Fault Hazards Zones.             The Matrix will
                           categorize land uses according to risk and develop
                           restrictions for these uses in zones.
                   Agency/Department:           Planning, Building & Safety, Public
                                                Works
                   Related Policies:            1.1, 1.3, 1.4
                   Required by General Plan EIR
             PS-5  Prepare and adopt hillside development standards for site
         HILLSIDE  development and drainage that work to control runoff for erosion
                   control and water quality purposes.            Require geotechnical
   DEVELOPMENT     investigations for areas of known or suspected geologic hazards.
     STANDARDS
                   Agency/Department:           Planning, Public Works
                   Related Policy:              1.5
                   Required by General Plan EIR
             PS-6  Continue to participate in the National Flood Insurance Program
          FLOOD    (NFIP) administered through the Federal Emergency Management
                   Agency (FEMA). The NFIP program provides federal flood
      INSURANCE    insurance subsidies and federally financed loans for property owners
                   in flood-prone areas.
                   Agency/Department:           Public Works, Planning, Building &
                                                Safety
                   Related Policies:            1.6, 1.7
C I T Y    O F    T  E M E      C U L A           G   E N E R A L          P    L A N
                                       PS-23

            PS-7  Mitigate flood hazards in Temecula by:
 MITIGATE FLOOD
                      •  Reviewing development proposals for projects within FEMA
       HAZARDS
                         Special Flood Hazard Areas for consistency with City flood
                         damage prevention and floodplain management regulations
                         and FEMA requirements.
                      •  Prohibiting development of any kind within the floodway
                         portion of the 100-year floodplain.
                      •  Maintaining a Dam Inundation Evacuation Plan as part of
                         the Multi-Hazard Functional Plan.
                      •  Coordinating planning projections with the Office of
                         Emergency Services to ensure that dam safety plans reflect
                         development in the community.
                  Agency/Department:        Public Works, Planning, Building &
                                            Safety
                  Related Policies:         1.6, 1.7
            PS-8  Promote fire prevention in Temecula in the following ways:
   PROMOTE FIRE
                      •  Work closely with the Fire Department to implement fire
     PREVENTION
                         hazard education and fire prevention programs.
                      •  Work with the Fire Department to establish fire prevention
                         and mitigation measures in wild land fire hazard areas.
                      •  Expand and improve vegetation management efforts in wild
                         land fire hazard areas.
                      •  Coordinate with the local water districts and Fire
                         Department to ensure that water pressure for urban areas
                         and sites to be developed is adequate for fire fighting
                         purposes.
                      •  Adopt and implement California Fire Code provisions and
                         appropriate amendments to reflect Temecula s topography,
                         vegetation, and urban form.
                      •  Support public education, information, fire prevention and
                         fire law enforcement programs conducted by the Fire
                         Department.
                  Agency/Department:        Fire, Planning
                  Related Policy:           1.8
C I T Y    O F   T  E M E     C U L A         G   E N E R A L          P   L A N
                                     PS-24

           PS-9   Minimize public health and environmental risks from the use,
  REDUCE RISKS    transport, storage and disposal of hazardous materials through the
                  following actions:
          FROM
    HAZARDOUS         •  Cooperate with federal, State, and local agencies to
      MATERIALS          effectively regulate the management of hazardous materials
                         and waste.
                      •  Amend project applications to include requirements for
                         submittal of information involving the proposed use,
                         storage, handling, transport and/or disposal of hazardous
                         materials/wastes and any previous use, storage, handling
                         and/or disposal of such materials/wastes.
                      •  Cooperate with the County of Riverside to implement
                         applicable portions of the County Hazardous Waste
                         Management Plan (HWMP) and the Hazardous Materials
                         Area Plan (HMAP), as well as to maintain an inventory of
                         facilities that store, handle, or transport hazardous materials.
                      •  Establish transportation routes for the conveyance of
                         hazardous materials. Transportation of hazardous materials
                         shall be restricted through residential areas and arterials
                         during peak hours.
                      •  Implement the Multi-Hazard Functional Plan for accidents
                         involving hazardous materials.
                  Agency/Department:           Planning, Public Works, Building &
                                               Safety, Fire
                  Related Policies:            2.1, 2.3
           PS-10  Support efforts by the County Household Hazardous Waste
     HOUSEHOLD    Program to protect residents from dangers resulting from the use,
                  transport and disposal of hazardous materials used in the home.
    HAZARDOUS
                  The program includes public education about health and
WASTE PROGRAM     environmental hazards of household hazardous materials and
                  periodic collection campaigns at established sites.
                  Agency/Department:           Community Services, County
                                               Environmental Health Department
                  Related Policy:              2.2
C I T Y   O F    T  E M E      C U L A           G   E N E R A L           P  L A N
                                      PS-25

            PS-11  Reduce nuclear power production risks in the following ways.
NUCLEAR POWER
                       •   Participate in programs and emergency response exercises
    PRODUCTION
                           with federal and State agencies and Southern California
          RISKS            Edison to minimize the risks related to nuclear power
     REDUCTION             production.
                       •   Implement measures related to the San Onofre Nuclear
                           Generating Station (SONGS) in the City s Multi-Hazard
                           Functional Plan to ensure that residents are prepared for any
                           problems associated with the facility.
                   Agency/Department:          Planning, Public Works, Building &
                                               Safety
                   Related Policy:             2.6
           PS-12   Protect residents and businesses from criminal activity by providing
        MINIMIZE   substantive levels of police protection and educating the public
                   about methods to reduce criminal activity. The specific actions to
       CRIMINAL    implement these goals are identified below:
        ACTIVITY
                       •   When renewing the service contracts with the Riverside
                           County Sheriff s Department, ensure that contracted staffing
                           levels are consistent with the population and geography of
                           Temecula, and that sufficient emphasis is placed on staff
                           and programs for crime prevention.
                       •   Ensure the mutual aid agreements between the City and
                           surrounding jurisdictions are in place for emergency
                           situations.
                       •   Use defensible space and lighting concepts in development
                           projects designed to enhance public safety.
                       •   Increase public awareness about criminal activity and crime
                           prevention activities. Maximize the use of after school
                           programs, volunteer and citizen programs, and other
                           community oriented policing programs with the Police
                           Department.
                   Agency/Department:          City Manager s Office, Police, Planning
                   Related Policies:           3.1, 3.2, 3.3
C I T Y    O F    T  E M E      C U L A          G   E N E R A L           P   L A N
                                       PS-26

           PS-13  Require all residential development with 35 or more dwelling units
  SECONDARY       to provide secondary access that meets full City standards to ensure
                  timely emergency service response.
        ACCESS
                  Agency/Department:         Planning, Fire
                  Related Policy:            3.4
           PS-14  Maintain the Multi-Hazard Functional Plan under provisions of the
  MULTI-HAZARD    State Emergency Management System format to maximize the
                  efforts of emergency service providers (e.g. fire, medical and law
FUNCTIONAL PLAN   enforcement) and minimize human suffering and property damage
                  associated with disasters. The Plan should identify resources
                  available for emergency response and establish coordinated action
                  plans for specific emergency situations and disasters including
                  earthquakes, hazardous materials incidents, flooding, dam failure,
                  wild land fire, incidents at the San Onofre Nuclear Generating
                  Station, transportation incidents, and national security emergencies.
                  Agency/Department:         City Manager s Office, Public Works,
                                             Police, Fire, Planning
                  Related Policies:          4.1, 4.2, 4.3
           PS-15  Encourage resident participation in citizen-based programs and
     EMERGENCY    educate residents to take appropriate actions to safeguard life and
                  property during and immediately after emergencies. Education
   PREPAREDNESS   about emergency preparedness can occur through the distribution
     EDUCATION    of brochures, presentations to civic groups and homeowners
                  associations and instruction to local schools.
                  Agency/Department:         Planning, Police, Fire
                  Related Policy:            4.1
           PS-16  Prepare, adopt and implement a grading ordinance to ensure that
       GRADING    grading associated with new development projects is conducted in
                  accordance with appropriate geotechnical engineering standards
     ORDINANCE
                  Agency/Department:         Planning, Public Works
                  Related Policy:            1.5
                  Required by General Plan EIR
C I T Y   O F    T  E M E      C U L A         G   E N E R A L            P  L A N
                                     PS-27
               This page left intentionally blank.
C I T Y O F T E M E    C U L A          G   E N E R A L P L A N
                              PS-28
