  CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
                                                                                               1.0 Introductiou
',-     INTRODUCTION
        1.1        City of Colfax Background
        1.1.1      Regional Setting
                   The City of Colfax is located in Placer County, California which is on the western
        slope of the Sierra Nevada foothills bounded by the Bear River to the northwest and the North
        Fork ofthe American River on the southeast. The City of Colfax lies at the extreme
        northeastern edge of the Sacramento metropolitan area some 50 miles from the City of
        Sacramento. Today Colfax is still a small railroad community. The general elevation of
        Colfax is 2400 feet (See Figure I-I).
                   The City is bisected by the Union Pacific Railroad and Interstate 80, both major
        transportation routes from California to the Rocky Mountains, Mid-west and Eastern portions
        of the United States.
                   The City is located on a steep-sided ridge and offers few relatively level locations for
        urban development. Future development is closely tied to its location on the rail line and
        interstate highway. These transportation routes encourage commuting into the Sacramento
        Metropolitan area. Colfax is located just outside the heavy-snow line, which led to its
        selection as a major rail switching point and maintenance station.
                   Colfax in the heart of the mother lode, just a short distance from the gold mining areas
        along the American River, Bear River and Auburn Ravine.
        1.1.2      Climate
                   The climate is quite mild in the Colfax area. Temperatures range from lows in the
        twenties in Mid-winter to highs in the 80's and 90's in mid-summer, with an occasional cold
        snap in December and January and occasional temperatures exceeding 100 degrees in Iuly and
        August. Precipitation is approximately 40 inches per year, mostly in the form of rain, with
        occasional snow in the winter months. With the exception of a rare summer shower, most of
        the precipitation occurs between October and April. Chain control on 1-80 is usually
        at the 4000 to 5000 foot elevation level. However, chain requirements occasionally occur
        near Colfax.
                   Colfax is normally out of the winter fog and above valley smog. The air is clear and
        clean and is inviting to persons suffering from respiratory problems. A number of tubercular
    City (If C(llfax                                      1-\                              General Plan 2020
                     Figure 1-1
        City of Colfax and Placer County
      North
1 Inch = 100 Miles
                        1-2
                                                                                            1.0 Introduction
         clinics were established here and to the southwest near Weimar, Air Pollution levels are
',-/     increasing in the Sacramento Valley which have an increasing adverse impact on the foothills,
         Air quality regulations established by the State Air Resources Board and programs carried out
         at both state and local levels have been designed to reduce this threat over the next decade,
         1.1.3    History
                  The town of IIlinoistown was established in 1849 in a valley called Alder Grove, It
         was a supply terminal and transportation hub located on the ridge trail with wagon roads
         servicing the mining operations to the east and west. There were conflicts with native Indiallll
         and a local militia was formed to drive them off the ridge and across the Bear River, The
         town took on the name of Illinois town prior to the advent of the transcontinental railroad,
                  The route taken by railroad surveyors by-passed Illinoistown due to the need for an
         approach to the summit at a much-higher elevation, Several railroad executives and investors
         noting the topographic advantages, established a townsite on the railroad by-pass at Colfax,
         naming it after U.S, Grant's vice-presidential running mate Schayler Colfax, The original
         town lots sold out in a short time for a total figure of roughly $7000,
                  In 1865 the Central Pacific Railroad arrived and built a route east over the summit to
         Promontory Point, Utah thereby completing the transcontinental railroad, The history and
         economy of Colfax has been tied closely to the railroad since that time, In 1876 a narrow
         gage railroad was established between Colfux and Grass Valley, It operated until 1942, The
         city population in 1875 was estimated at 1,000 persons, The City of Colfax was incorporated
         as a general law city in 191 0,
          1.2     Purpose of the General Plan
                  California Government Code requires each city and county to prepare a general plan,
         A general plan is defmed as "a comprehensive, long-term general plan for the physical
         development of the county or city, and any land outside its boundaries which in the planning
         agency's judgement bears relation to its planning," (Government Code Section 65300), The
         State requires general plans "comprise an integrated, internaUy consistent and compatible
         statement of policies for the adopting agency: (Government Code Section 65302),
                  The general plan has evolved into a clear guide for rational decision making regarding
         a city or county's long-term physical development, The California Government Code
         establishes both'the content of general plans and rules for their adoption an subsequent
         amendment. Together, state law and judicial decisions establish three overaJl guidelines for
         general plans,
     City of Colfax                                       1-3                            General Plan 2020
                                                                                         1.0 Introduction
                    The General Plan Must Be Comprehensive. First, the general plan must be
                    geographically comprehensive. It must apply through out the entire
                    incorporated area and it should include other areas that the City determines
                    relevant to its planning, Second, the general plan must address the full range
                    of issues that affects the city's physical development.
             •      The General Plan Must Be Internally Consistent. The general plan must
                    fully integrate its separate Elements and relate them to each other without
                    conflict
             •      The General Plan Must Be Long-Range. The general plan shall be a long-
                    term perspective, The general plan is a dynamic document because it is based
                    on needs, all of which continually change, An on-going review and evaluation
                    process enables the Plans' time-horizon to be extended regularly. However,
                    any adjustments to the General Plan require and amendment. Local
                    governments may not amend anyone of the mandatory elements of the general
                    plan more than four times in one calendar year (Government Code Section
                    65358[b]).
             The major purpose of the general plan is to serve as the Constitution of the City. As
    such all ordinances, resolutions and development approvals must be consistent with the goals,
    policies and objectives of the plan. It is also used as a starting point for City plans and
    procedures such as capital improvement planning, building code enforcement, subdivision map
    review, zoning changes, environmental reviews of projects, and specific plan development.
             The Colfax General Plan 1980-2000 was adopted in February 1981. Prior to that the
    Colfax General Plan for 1990 was adopted by the City in 1967, An update was prepared in
    1978. The city adopted revised "City Policies for Growth and Development' in 1980. The
    General plan conta.ined herein reflects the previous General Plan and subsequent updates.
    This General Plan update contains all mandatory Elements along with recommendations for
    augmenting those Elements and adding optional elements as circumstances dictate,
             The City of Colfax General Plan sets forth the goals and policies that will guide future
    growth in the Colfax Area, The Plan will be used by City staff a.nd City decision makers to
    review new development to ensure future development will contribute to retaining and
    improving the character of Colfax as a unique and readily identifiable foothill community,
             The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) requires the identification and
    mitigation of environmental impacts resulting from the general plan update. CEQA
    requirements here have been satisfied by incorporating the environmental impact analysis into
    the plan text. A CEQA format Initial Study (Appendix G) to this plan keys required CEQA
    findings to appropriate sections of the Plan,
City of Colfax                                        1-4                             General Plan 2020

                                                                                                   1.0 Introduction
                A Negative Declaration has been prepared and is included with the Initial Study
       (Appendix G). This document will meet the CEQA guidelines for the Colfax General Plan.
                Adopting the General Plan includes the responsibility to implement it, to report on its
       continuing status, and to communicate with citizens and other agencies regarding the Plan's
       policies as they affect local decision making.
       1.3      Organization of the General Plan
                This Plan is organized into a combination of text, maps, tables, and figures. The plan
       is presented in eight components referred to as Elements. Each Element is presented as a
       Chapter. The eight Elements are:
                Land Use (LU)
                Circulation (CIR)
                Housing (II)  * This is an existing certified element that is already in affect.
                Natural Environment (NE)
                Noise(N)
                Safety (5)
                Community Design (CD)
                Economic (E)
                This Plan consists of an officially adopted map (Fig. 2-2) and accompanying text. This
,j     text is organized for ease of use and in response to major issues that may confront City
       decision makers in the near future. Each Element follows a similar format, (except Housing
       Element) with existing conditions presented first, future conditions and needs presented next,
       and goals, policies and implementation measures presented last. The goals and policies are
       presented by topic, not in order of priority. The goals, policies, and implementation measures
       are the heart of the plan. In following these directives, the City will chart the course of
       growth and development and will determine the nature of the environment and future
       character of Colfax.
                A Goal is:        A general, overall, and ultimate purpose, aim or end toward which the
                                  City will direct its efforts.
                A Policy is:      A specific statement of principle or of guiding actions which implies
                                  clear commitment but is not mandatory. It is a general direction that
                                  the City will follow in order to meet its goals and objectives by
                                  undertaking specific action programs. The word ·shall" makes
                                  mandatory those policies in which it appears.
                An Implementation Measure is : An action, activity, or strategy carried out in
                                  response to an adopted policy to achieve a specific objective.
   City of Colfax                                              1-5                               General Plan 2020

                                                                                       1.0 Introduction
                                Policies and implementation measures establishes the "who", "how",
                               and "when" for carrying out the "what" and "where" of goals to
                               which the City aspires.
    1.4      Legal Authorization For The Plan
             This plan addresses the legal requirements under Govermnent Code Section 65302 et.
    al. Table 1-1 identifies the legal requirements and where they can be found in this document.
             The Land Use Element (LU) designates the general distribution, location and extent
    ofland uses, including housing, business, industry, open space, agriculture, natural resources,
    recreation, scenic areas, public grounds, waste disposal facilities and other uses. It also
    includes standards of population density and building intensity for the area covered by the
    plan. It also identifies areas subject to flooding. (Government Code Section 65302[a1). This
    element also addresses current economic programs that work to maintain and enhance
    economic development opportunities within the City.
              The Economic Element (E) allows decision makers to maintain resources to retain
    and assist local businesses and attract new industry that will increase the City's tax base and
    support efforts to strengthen and diversify the local economy.
              The Circulation Element (eIR) consists of the general location and extent of existing
    and proposed major thoroughfares, transportation routes, terminals and other local public
    facilities and utilities. (Government Code Section 65302[b]).
              The Housing Element (H) consists of identification, analysis of existing and projected
    housing needs, statement of goals, pOlicies, quantified objectives, scheduled programs for the
    preservation, improvement, and development of housing. The Housing Element is also
    required to identify sites for housing, including rental housing, factory built housing, mobile
    homes, and should provide for existing and projected needs of all economic segments of the
    community. (Government Code Section 65583).
              The Noise Element (N) quantifies the community noise environment for short and
    long term growth and traffic activities, and guides the land use element in achieving noise
    compatible land uses. State noise standards are followed in identifying noise sources and
    plotting noise levels. (Government Code Section 65302[f]).
City of Colfax                                         1-6                            General Plan 2020
                                                                                                              1.0 Introduction
                                                                      Tah]e 1-1
                                                                    aty (If Colfax
                                                              ('.,eneral Plan Settion  ,.
                Lll:GAL REQUIREMENTS                       LU        elR           Ii     NE N         S         CD      E
       63S02(a) Land Use Element                            X
                                                                                                                              I
       6S302(a) Circulation Element                                    X
       65583 Housing Element                                                        X
     : 65583 (0) Hmwing N"ds                                                        X
       85583 (b)lmpl_n1Ation HoU5ingDe1/,                                           X
       Goats, Policies & 01:tiectJ.ves
       665583 (c) Public: Participation                                             X
       65583 (0)(4) and (5)   eon.".ints                                            X
     : 65583 (a) Energy Cooservation                                                X
       65584 New constrUctiOtL Needs                                                X
       65588 (0) and (b) HCDOuidolin",                                              X
       6S30:2 (d) Conservation Element                                                     X
    !' 65302 (e) Open SpaceEloment                                                         X
       65560 (b) Local Op," Space Plan                                                     X
       65302 (I) Noise Element                                                               X
    , 65302 (g) Safety Element                                                                         X
    : 65303 El,ctJv. EI....enls                                                                                   X      X
    • LU; l.And Use                     OIR ~ Oirculillion               H "" Housing          NE = Na1raa1 Environment
        N = Noise                       S   • Safety                     E "'" Econ.omic       CD = Community. Design
                 The Natural Environment Element (NE) is a collaborative element that fulfills the
    statutoI)' requirements ofbotb the Open Space and Conservation Elements. The Open Space
     Element plans for the comprehensive and long range preservation and conservation of open
     space lands. Open space lands include unimproved land or water, which is for the
    preservation of natural resources for the managed production of resources for outdoor
     recreation, or public health and safety. (Article ]0,5, Government Code Section 65302[e},
     65560, 65563), The Conservation Element addresses the conservation, development and
    utilization of natural resources including water, forests, soils, rivers and other waters,
    fisheries, wildlife, minerals and other natural resources, (Government Code Section
     65302[d]).
                 The Safety Element (S) recommends measures to protect the community from fifes,
     earthquakes, geologic hazards, including evacuation routes, water supply requirements,
    minimum road widths, and clearances around structures, (Government Code Section
     65302[g})
City of Colfax                                                            1-7                               General Plan 2020

                                                                                              1.0 Introduction
. ',-/              The Community Design Element (CD) is intended to influence the physical form of
          the community by enhancing and preserving the unique characteristics of the community. This
           element proposes specific design criteria be incorporated into development projects. (i.e.
          historic preservation of the downtown and general guidelines for new development).
           1.5      Implementation of the General Plan
                    This document supercedes the 1980 Colfax General Plan. The plan covers the area
           within the city limits of Colfax and within its Sphere ofInfluence and Planning Area. It is the
           product of community scoping sessions held by the City Planning Commission, input from city
           staff, and local input provided through public meetings and workshops. The process for
           adoption of this plan is review of the Draft General Plan by the Planning Commission, City
           Staff and adopted by the City Council.
                    The Colfax General Plan should be consulted in making all major decisions affecting
           the community. It should be updated when decisions makers wish to alter the rate or direction
           of ongoing changes in the community. State Law permits up to four General Plan
           Amendments per year (Government Code 65358[bD. Most amendments propose a change in
           the land use designation of a particular property. As time goes on , the City may decide it is
           necessary to revise portions of the text to reflect changing circumstances or philosophy.
           State law provides direction to the Planning Department to report armually to the City Council
           on "the status of the plan and progress in its implementation" (Government Code 65400[b D.
                    The General Plan may assist in many areas of decision making including the
           preparation of precise plans for city services and infrastructure, the development of capital
           improvement programs, administration of the zoning ordinance, inlplementation of subdivision
           standards and other development regulations, enforcing building codes and municipal code
           ordinances that affect land use, conducting enviromnental impact review of proposed projects,
           and determining interagency perspectives on matters affecting the future of Colfax.
                    The General Plan can also act as a foundation for adoption of specifiC plans for
           selected areas of the City in order to promote economic development, adequate housing or
           other desired objectives.
                    State Law addresses procedures for amending the General Plan.
                    1. Prior to filling an official application for a General Plan Amendment, the
                        prospective applicant or his or her agent should discuss it with the City's Planning
                        Officer. This gives the applicant a first hand opportunity to find out the details of
                        the amendment process, as well as any concerns the City may have about the
                        proposed changes.
       City of Colfax                                         1-8                           General Plan 2020
                                                                                        1.0 Introduction
            2. The next step is to file an official application with the Planning Department and
                pay the required processing fees. All applications for changes in land use
                designation should be accompanied by a development plan or sufficient detail
                to ascertain the potentiai impacts of the project on the site and surrounding area.
            3. Environmental review in accordance with the California Environmental Quality
                Act (CEQA) will be conducted for every General Plan Amendment. CEQA action
                may be approval of a Negative Declaration or of an Environmental Impact Report.
             4. The proposal for a General Plan amendment is placed on the agenda oftbe
                City Planning Commission for a public hearing. Applications may be processed
                 concurrently.
             5. The City Planning Official will provide to the Commission and the applicant a
                 staff report which recommends approval or denial of the Amendment. State law
                 requires that any decision concerning the General Plan Amendment must be
                 supported by finding offact. While specific findings may be applied on a project-
                 by-project basis, at least the following standard findings should be made for each
                 General Plan Amendment:
                     A. The proposed amendment is deemed to be in the public interest.
                     B. The proposed amendment is consistent and compatible with all other
                           elements of the General Plan and the implementation measures.
                     C. The potential impacts of the proposed amendment have been assessed and
                          have been determined not to be detrimental to the public health, safety
                          and welfare.
                     D. The proposed amendment has been processed in accordance with
                          applicable provisions of the California Government Code and the
                          California Environmental Quality Act.
             City initiated amendments, as well as amendments requested by other agencies, are
    subject to the same basic process and requirements described above in order to insure
    consistency and compatibility with the pIan.
             Although local governments may not amend any of the mandatory elements of the
    general plan more than for times in one calendar year, this limitation does not apply to the
    following:
             1. Optional elements;
City of Colfax                                        1-9                             General Plan 2020
                                                                                          1.0 IDtrodnction
                 2. Amendments requested and necessary for affordable housing (Government
                    Code Section 65358[c]);
                 3. Any amendment necessary to comply with a court decision in a case involving
                    the legal adequacy ofthe general plan (Government Code Section 65358 [d][l]);
                 4. Amendments after January 1, 1984, to bring a general plan into compliance with
                     an airport land use plan (Government code Section 65302.3);
                 5. Amendments required in connection with adoption ofa comprehensive
                     development plan under the Urban Development Incentive Act (Health and
                     Safety Code Section 56302[d)); or
                 6. Government Code Section 653 58(b) provides that each amendment may include
                     more than one change to the general plan. Case law established that each
                    of the permitted amendments within a calendar year may encompass several
                     different changes (Karlson v. City of Camarillo (1980) 100 Cal. App. 3d 789.
                     See also, 66 Ops. Cal. Atty. Gen 258 (1983).
        1.6      OveraB Goals and Objectives
                 The major all inclusive goals of this plan are presented here. These goals guide
"'~     Colfax's development for the next twenty years ..
                 •       Maintain and improve the quality ofHfe in Colfax by creating a better physical
                         living environment (CD)
                 •       Maintain and attract employment for Colfax residents. (E)
                 •       Ensure that new development is self supporting, high quality and compatible
                         with the City. (CD)
                 •       Provide a safe and efficient circulation system and maintain acceptable traffic
                         service levels. (eIR)
    City of Colfax                                       1-10                           General Plan 2020

