      Chapter 2
Land Use Elem ent

                                                             2.0
                                                         LAND USE ELEMENT
2.1            Introduction
               The Land Use Element of the General Plan functions as a guide to policy
               makers, decision makers, the general public, and planners in La Cañada
               Flintridge regarding the desired pattern of development through the 2030
               planning period. It has the broadest scope of the General Plan elements, as it
               plays a central role in correlating all land use issues into a set of coherent
               development policies that relate directly to the other elements. In practice,
               the Land Use Element is the most visible and usually the most referenced
               element in the General Plan. Although all elements carry equal weight, the
               Land Use Element is often perceived as being the most representative of the
               General Plan.
               The primary function of
               the Land Use Element is
               to describe the Land
               Use Plan for La Cañada
               Flintridge (Plan), which
               includes the Land Use
               Policy Map; associated
               land use designations;
               and goals, objectives,
               and policies. The Plan
               establishes the policy foundation for land use decision making through the
               planning period to achieve the community’s Vision 2030. The Land Use Element
               provides an overview of key planning terms and how they relate to the Plan;
               summarizes opportunities and issues for the planning period that influenced
               preparation of the Plan; and discusses implications of implementation of the
               Plan, including changes from the 1993 Land Use Element.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                     2-1

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 2. Land Use Element
2.2              Setting
                 The City’s setting and history have influenced its development pattern over the
                 years and continue to contribute to its desirability as a place to live. La Cañada
                 Flintridge is located in the Crescenta Valley along the Interstate (I) 210 corridor,
                 between the foothills of the San Gabriel Mountains and the Angeles National
                 Forest to the north and the San Rafael Hills to the south. As a hillside
                 community, it offers picturesque views of the surrounding mountains, valley,
                 and city lights. Its location, approximately 13 miles northeast of downtown
                 Los Angeles and 6 miles northeast of Burbank, provides easy accessibility to
                 major employment centers of the Los Angeles area.
                 Prior to its incorporation, the City was already fully developed and well
                 established as two unincorporated communities: La Cañada to the north and
                 Flintridge to the south. During the regional building boom years of the 1940s
                 and early 1950s, limited growth in the local area was the result of insufficient
                 water supply and water rights issues. By the time the Foothill Municipal Water
                 District was annexed to the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California in
                 1953, development patterns in the community were already established. The
                 lack of access to major freeways
                 restrained growth in the area in
                 the 1950s and 1960s, as the I-210
                 and State Route (SR) 2 freeways
                 were not completed until the
                 early 1970s. When the segment of
                 I-210 through the community was
                 constructed in the 1970s, it
                 divided existing residential
                 neighborhoods. The impact on
                 the community was the impetus
                 for the City’s incorporation in
                 1976, when the unincorporated
                 communities of La Cañada and Flintridge voted to merge to form the City of La
                 Cañada Flintridge. The City expanded in 1978 when the western boundaries
                 were extended as a result of an annexation of land south of Foothill Boulevard.
                 No Sphere of Influence has been adopted by the Local Agency Formation
                 Commission to extend future boundaries of the City due to its proximity to built-
                 out areas and federally designated open space.
                 Land uses within La Cañada Flintridge are predominantly single-family
                 residential, and range from neighborhoods on large lots (generally 0.25 acre or
                 more) to estates on winding, tree-lined streets. The neighborhoods are very well
                 maintained and heavily landscaped. Another distinctive feature of the City is its
                 animal-keeping tradition, which allows residents to have horses and other
                 animals on their residential properties. Local-serving commercial development
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            2-2

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                  Chapter 2. Land Use Element
                 is located primarily along Foothill Boulevard, which retains a village character.
                 The City’s commitment to preservation and protection of open space, its
                 undeveloped hillsides, and its trail system has resulted in nearly 20 percent of its
                 land being devoted to public and private open space uses. The City does not
                 have manufacturing or industrial development. NASA’s Jet Propulsion
                 Laboratory (JPL) is located within the City limit.
                 Future development will be constrained by environmental and safety constraints,
                 such as topography, resource protection, and wildfire hazards on its
                 undeveloped steep slopes. In order to define and preserve the City’s hillsides
                 and ensure public safety, the City established a hillside management line, known
                 as the A/B Line, which is applicable to residential property on the northern
                 hillside. The A/B Line separates the “A,” more urban development, from the
                 “B,” more rural development on very steeply sloping hillsides, with the purpose
                 of minimizing negative impacts of
                 hillside development and preserving
                 the City’s viewscapes, open space,
                 and environmental and recreational
                 resources. The A/B Line is
                 identified on the Land Use Policy
                 Map on a parcel-specific basis (see
                 Figure LUE-1).
                 Although the City is relatively
                 young as an incorporated
                 municipality, it is a well-established, predominantly low-density single-family
                 residential community that is stable, affluent, and nearly fully developed. In the
                 midst of the urbanized Southern California region, La Cañada Flintridge retains
                 a small-town feel and a semi-rural and natural character that are highly valued
                 by its residents. Their desire to retain these special qualities and existing
                 distinctive community character drives the Land Use Policy Map and the goals,
                 objectives, and policies of this element.
2.3              Land Use Plan
                 A wide range of natural and human-made factors are considered in formulating
                 land use policy. The community’s long-range vision, its setting within the larger
                 region, areas of special environmental and/or topographic significance, potential
                 safety issues, limitations of infrastructure, and the nature and character of
                 existing development all influence land use policy. By identifying the general
                 distribution, location, and extent of all uses of land, the Plan establishes clear and
                 logical patterns of land use as well as standards for future development. The
                 Plan includes a discussion of the Land Use Policy Map; land use density and
General Plan—January 2013                                                                             2-3

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                Chapter 2. Land Use Element
                 intensity; land use designations; the relationship between land use and zoning;
                 implications of the Plan; and goals, objectives, and policies.
2.3.1            Land Use Policy Map
                 The Land Use Policy Map, Figure LUE-1, illustrates the types and distribution of
                 land use for La Cañada Flintridge. The land use designations depicted on Figure
                 LUE-1 identify the type and nature of development allowed in a particular
                 location. Each land use designation is described in greater detail in Section 2.3.3
                 of this chapter.
2.3.2            Development Density/Intensity
2.3.2.1          Overview
                 The Plan uses urban planning terminology to define the land use designations, as
                 well as to satisfy the requirements of the State of California’s General Plan
                 Guidelines (last updated in 2003). This section provides definitions for the terms
                 used and portrays them for each land use designation in Table LUE-1.
2.3.2.2          Definitions
                 Density: The term “density” is used for residential uses and refers to the
                 development capacity of residential land. Density is described in terms of
                 dwelling units per acre of land (du/ac). For example, 50 dwelling units
                 occupying 10 acres of land is 5 du/ac. The density standard that is applied to the
                 various land use designations controls the maximum number of dwelling units
                 that can be constructed on a parcel.
                 Population Density: Population density is described in the State of California
                 General Plan Guidelines as the relationship between the number of dwellings per
                 acre (density) and the number of residents per acre. The source most often used
                 for average number of persons per acre is the California State Department of
                 Finance’s Demographic Research and Census Data Center.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                           2-4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  STATE HWY 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GOULD AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 VD                   VERDUGO BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VERDUGO BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  OT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    HIL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        L   BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              VD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CHEVY CHASE DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OAK GROVE DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     IR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          E         BERK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AV               S   HIRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AND D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HIGHL
K: \ IRVINE \ GIS \ PROJECTS \ CITY_OF_LA_CANADA_FLINTRDIGE \ 00096_07 \ MAPDOC \ GENERAL_PLAN \ FIGLUE_1_LAND_USE.MXD 19542 (10-16-12)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             City of La Cañada Flintridge Land Use Designation                                                                                Medium Density Residential (up to 8.7 du/ac)
                                                                                                                                                                                 ±
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AB Development Line               Commercial/Office (max of 0.5 FAR)                                                             High Density Residential (up to 30 du/ac)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             State Highway 2                   Downtown Village Specific Plan                                                                 Institutional
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Streets                           Hillside Residential (max of 1 du/10 ac)                                                       Public
                                                                                                                                                           0                   0.25                   0.5                                                                      Estate Residential (max of 1 du/ac)                                                            Open Space
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Miles                                                                  Very Low Density Residential (up to 2 du/ac)                                                   Parks and Recreation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Low Density Residential (up to 4 du/ac)                                                        Mixed Use (up to 30 du/ac)
                                                                                                                                          Source : City of La Cañada Flintridge, May 10, 2003; Revised June 26, 2007, March 25, 2008, July 25, 2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure LUE-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Land Use Policy Map
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     City of La Cañada Flintridge


City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                    Chapter 2. Land Use Element
                 Building Intensity: The term “building intensity” refers to the extent of
                 development on a lot, and is often expressed as floor area ratio (FAR). FAR
                 represents the ratio of total gross floor area of all buildings on a lot and the total
                 area of the lot; it is determined by dividing the gross floor area of all buildings on
                 a lot by the area of the lot. Just as the density standard controls the maximum
                 number of
                 allowable dwelling
                 units on a lot, FAR
                 controls the
                 maximum
                 allowable intensity,
                 or square footage,
                 on a lot. For
                 example, on a
                 10,000 square foot
                 lot, a FAR of 0.25:1
                 will allow 2,500
                 square feet of
                 building floor area.
                 On the same lot, a
                 FAR of 0.5:1 will
                 allow up to 5,000
                 square feet of floor
                 area. The FAR
                 standard controls
                 the maximum floor                        Illustration of Floor Area Ratios
                 area allowed,
                 regardless of the number of stories in the building. For example, with a FAR
                 standard of 0.5:1, the building could be 5,000 on one floor, 2,500 square feet per
                 floor on two floors, or 1,250 square feet per floor on four floors. Other
                 development standards in the zoning code, such as maximum lot coverage,
                 minimum setbacks, and maximum building height, will dictate how the
                 allowable FAR is translated into the building’s form.
                 State law mandates that general plans include standards of population density
                 and building intensity for all of the territory covered by the Plan. To satisfy these
                 requirements, Table LUE-1 lists the standards for each land use designation
                 shown on the Land Use Policy Map and provides a corresponding indication of
                 maximum allowable density (expressed as the number of dwelling units per
                 acre) and maximum allowable intensity (expressed by FAR); indicates the
                 number of acres devoted to each land use and the percentage of total land area of
                 the City; and provides an estimate of population based on implementation of the
                 Land Use Policy Map, subject to certain assumptions described below and noted
                 in the table.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                               2-5

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                                  Chapter 2. Land Use Element
Table LUE-1. General Plan Density and Intensity Standards and Population Projections per the Land
Use Policy Map
                                                                                                                Percentage of
                                                             Maximum           Acres1 of                            Total
General Plan Land Use                       Maximum          Intensity        Designated2      Estimated3        Designated2
Designation                                   Density         (FAR)               Land         Population         Land Area
Hillside Residential                        1 du/10 ac           –              535.02              135               11.1
Estate Residential                            1 du/ac            –              636.00            1,614               13.3
Very Low Density Residential                  2 du/ac            –              877.25            4,454               18.3
Low Density Residential                       4 du/ac            –            1,095.22           11,127               22.9
Medium Density Residential                   8.7 du/ac           –              240.26            2,090                5.0
High Density Residential                     30 du/ac            –               14.51            1,103                0.3
Commercial/Office                                –             0.5:1             18.00               –                 0.4
Parks and Recreation                             –            0.35:1             55.04               –                 1.2
Open Space                                       –               –              929.81               –                19.4
Institutional                                    –            0.35:1            192.55               –                 4.0
Public                                           –             0.35:1            76.44               –                 1.6
Mixed Use                                    30 du/ac4         1.3:14            18.48               7035              0.4
Downtown Village Specific Plan                   –6              –6             103.00              1,1227             2.1
Total                                            –               –            4,790.16            22,348            100.00
1
  Acreage calculations are based on GIS data prepared for General Plan update.
2“
   Designated” land means land designated on the Land Use Policy Map.
3
  Estimated population calculations are based on average household size estimate of 2.60 persons per household and vacancy
  rate of 2.36% (California Department of Finance 2008).
4
  Development that does not meet the requirements of the Mixed Use land use designation and corresponding zone will comply
  with the Commercial/Office land use designation and applicable zoning classification.
5
  Estimated population calculations assume 50% of the property designated Mixed Use is developed as to the maximum density
  of 30 du/ac. Actual development at build-out may vary due to zoning standards and/or constraints resulting from
  environmental or other factors.
6
  See Table LUE-2 for Designation Standards for Downtown Village Specific Plan.
7
  Estimated population calculations assume 50% of the 58.44 acres of land designated Mixed Use 1, Mixed Use 2, and
  Residential is developed to the maximum density of 15 du/ac by 2030. Actual development at build-out may vary due to
  constraints resulting from zoning standards and/or environmental or other factors.
                     Maximum development capacity and estimated population assume the total
                     development of the Plan on all parcels of land at the highest permitted
                     densities/intensities. However, a multitude of factors, such as existing land
                     uses, zoning standards, environmental constraints, infrastructure capacity, and
                     public input regarding proposed development, have an impact on the actual
                     density or intensity of development within a particular land use designation.
                     Since the City is nearly built out and the Land Use Element proposes only minor
                     changes to the land use designations and Land Use Policy Map, total build out at
                     the maximum permitted density or intensity standard for any given land use
                     designation is not expected to occur during the 2030 planning period.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                                                  2-6

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 2. Land Use Element
2.3.3            Land Use Designations
                 Land in the City is assigned one of the land use designations described below,
                 which reflect the goals, objectives, and policies of the Plan and provide guidance
                 for determining allowable land uses. These designations also note associated
                 zoning classifications that implement the various land use designations. As a
                 part of implementation process of the General Plan, zoning classifications may be
                 added and/or revised to more accurately reflect the land use designations.
2.3.3.1          Single-Family Residential
                 Hillside Residential: The Hillside Residential land use designation applies to
                 steeply sloping hillsides in the northern portions of the City, corresponding with
                 the “B” side of the A/B Hillside Development Line. The zoning ordinance
                 classification implementing this land use will specify a minimum lot size of not
                 less than 10 acres. Areas zoned with this designation (1 du/10 ac) should reflect
                 the zoning classification R-1-10-Acres.
                 Estate Residential: The Estate Residential land use category includes
                 extremely low density, single-family residential use. It permits a maximum of
                 one dwelling unit per acre. The zoning ordinance classifications implementing
                 this land use will specify a minimum lot size of not less than 40,000 square feet.
                 Areas zoned with this designation (1 du/ac) should reflect the zoning
                 classification R-1-40,000.
                 Very Low Density Residential: The Very Low Density Residential land use
                 designation includes very low density, single-family residential use and permits
                 densities up to two dwelling units per acre. Zoning ordinance classifications
                 implementing this land use will specify a minimum lot size of not less than
                 20,000 square feet and 30,000 square feet. Areas zoned with this designation
                 (2 du/ac) should reflect zoning classifications R-1-20,000 and R-1-30,000.
                 Low Density Residential: The Low Density Residential land use designation
                 includes low-density, single-family residential development and permits
                 densities up to four dwelling units per acre. Zoning ordinance classifications
                 implementing this land use will specify a minimum lot size of not less than
                 10,000 and 15,000 square feet. Areas zoned with this designation (4 du/ac)
                 should reflect the zoning classification R-1-10,000 and R-1-15,000.
                 Medium Density Residential: The Medium Density Residential land use
                 designation includes medium-density, single-family residential development
                 and permits densities up to 8.7 dwelling units per acre. Zoning ordinance
                 classifications implementing this land use will specify a minimum lot size of not
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            2-7

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                   Chapter 2. Land Use Element
                 less than 5,000 and 7,500 square feet. Areas zoned with this designation
                 (8 du/ac) should reflect the zoning classifications R-1-5,000 and R-1-7,500.
2.3.3.2          Multi-Family Residential
                 High Density Residential: The High Density Residential land use designation
                 includes high-density, multi-family development at densities up to 30 dwelling
                 units per acre. Other uses include transitional housing and supportive housing,
                 as defined in the Housing Element. Areas zoned with this designation (30
                 du/ac) should reflect the zoning classification R-3 Multi-Family.
2.3.3.3          Commercial
                 Commercial/Office: The Commercial/Office land use designation includes
                 community-oriented commercial uses similar to and including those presently
                 found in the City. It also applies to emergency shelters and single-room
                 occupancy uses. This designation is currently implemented by the Community
                 Planned Development zoning classification, which emphasizes community-
                 oriented retail commercial sales and services, as well as office facilities. A
                 maximum 0.5:1 FAR is permitted.
2.3.3.4          Institutional, Public, Open Space, and Parks and
                 Recreation
                 Institutional: The Institutional land use designation applies to private school
                 campuses and sites, not including leases on public school property; churches;
                 hospital facilities; NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory; residential retirement
                 facilities that provide onsite medical support and care; and childcare facilities. It
                 is implemented by the Public and Semi-Public zoning classification. A maximum
                 0.35:1 FAR is permitted. Because institutional uses often extend over multiple
                 properties, the FAR may be applied campus-wide rather than to individual
                 parcels.
                 Public: The Public land use designation applies to all developed facilities that
                 are intended for public use and subject to public oversight and control. This
                 includes City Hall, public schools (all properties owned by public school
                 districts, including La Cañada Unified School District and Glendale Unified
                 School District), fire stations, library, post office, the Lanterman House and
                 museums, the Community Center of La Cañada Flintridge, and water and utility
                 facilities. Private water and utility facilities are included in this category because
                 they function in a public capacity. It is implemented by the Public and Semi-
                 Public zoning classification. A maximum 0.35:1 FAR is permitted. Because
General Plan—January 2013                                                                              2-8

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                  Chapter 2. Land Use Element
                 public uses are often spread over multiple properties, the FAR may be applied
                 campus-wide rather than to individual parcels.
                 Open Space: The Open Space designation applies to public and private
                 properties in permanent open space that contribute to the preservation of natural
                 resources, habitat (e.g., wildlife and vegetation) protection, protection and
                 management of natural resources (e.g., debris basins, watersheds and
                 groundwater recharge areas, drainage channels), protection from and
                 management of natural hazards, and hillside protection.
                 Land uses within this designation include:
                        Descanso Gardens,
                        Los Angeles County land in the San Rafael Hills
                        Cherry Canyon,
                        Southern California Edison easement,
                        debris basins,
                        drainage channels,
                        certain hillside properties that are deed-restricted for open space
                         (e.g., properties owned by homeowners’ associations),
                        La Cañada Flintridge Country Club Golf Course, and
                        government- and utility-owned land north of the A/B Development Line.
                 This designation allows for and encourages low-intensity public recreation uses,
                 such as equestrian, hiking, and biking trails, with associated staging and parking
                 areas. It is implemented by the Open Space zoning classification, as designated
                 on the City’s zoning map. There is no intensity standard for this use as the
                 development potential is minimal.
                 Parks and Recreation: The Parks and Recreation designation applies to public
                 parks, public and private active recreational facilities (including the La Cañada
                 Flintridge Country Club clubhouse, parking lot, tennis courts, and swimming
                 pool); the Crescenta-Cañada YMCA, Flint Canyon Tennis Club, and the
                 Flintridge Riding Club, and ancillary uses, such as community gardens, farmers’
                 markets, renewable energy projects, and Low Impact Development (LID)
                 demonstration projects. It is implemented by the Public and Semi-Public zoning
                 classification. A maximum 0.35:1 FAR is permitted.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                             2-9

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                  Chapter 2. Land Use Element
2.3.3.5          Mixed Use
                 Mixed Use: The Mixed Use land use designation provides for a mix of
                 residential and non-residential uses within a single development. A variety of
                 housing types will be encouraged. The uses may be horizontally or vertically
                 mixed and may share either the structure or parcel. The development should
                 be designed as an integrated project to facilitate internal pedestrian circulation
                 that accommodates persons with mobility challenges and provides direct
                 pedestrian connections to the public streets to access transit and to walk to
                 local-serving uses in the vicinity. Residential density for mixed-use
                 development under this designation is a maximum of 30 dwelling units per
                 acre. The maximum FAR is 1.3:1. Development that does not meet the
                 requirements of the Mixed Use land use designation and corresponding zone
                 will comply with uses and intensity standards that are consistent with the
                 Commercial/Office land use designation.
                 The Mixed Use designation will be implemented by one or more new zoning
                 classifications, which will be created to allow flexibility in site design and
                 development standards to accomplish the City’s goals.
2.3.3.6          Specific Plan
                 The specific plan is an important planning tool that provides for the “…specific
                 implementation of the general plan for all or part of the area covered by the
                 general plan” (Section 65450 of the Government Code). A specific plan defines
                 types, intensities, and densities of allowable land uses; identifies public and
                 private infrastructure; provides specific standards and design criteria by which
                 development will proceed; and includes an implementation and financing plan.
                 Its contents are specified by Sections 65450–65457 of the Government Code. The
                 City has adopted one specific plan, the Downtown Village Specific Plan (DVSP),
                 which is depicted on Figure LUE-2 and is discussed below.
                 Downtown Village Specific Plan (DVSP): The DVSP, which was adopted in
                 2000, combines the goals of the General Plan and the 1991 Foothill Boulevard
                 Master Plan to create a vision and development framework to strengthen the
                 “downtown” area of La Cañada Flintridge as the heart of the community. Since
                 Foothill Boulevard is too long to become a pedestrian corridor along its entire
                 length, this area was viewed as being the most appropriate to include the City’s
                 “village center.” The DVSP includes two mixed-use land use districts that allow
                 various combinations of retail, office, and multi-family residential and senior
                 housing uses. It also allows stand-alone single-family and multi-family
                 residential development, park use, and institutional and public uses.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            2-10

                                                                                                                                                            ST
                                                                                                                                                              AT
                                                                                                                                                                EH
                                                                                                                                                                     WY
                                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                                    D
                                                                                                                                                                 BLV
                                                                                                                                                            GO
                                                                                                                                                       DU
                                                                                                                                                   VER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                State Hwy 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Commonwealth Ave
K: \ IRVINE \ GIS \ PROJECTS \ CITY_OF_LA_CANADA_FLINTRDIGE \ 00096_07 \ MAPDOC \ GENERAL_PLAN \ 2009OCT \ FIGLUE_2_DVSP.MXD AWC & SM (11-10-09)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           FO         Oakwood Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              O   TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ILL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Crown Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         B   LV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               D
                                                                                                                                                                                               CHEVY CHASE DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Gould Ave
                                                                                                                                                                    Local Highways
                                                                                                                                                                    Institutional
                                                                                                                                                                    Mixed Use 1
                                                                                                                                                                    Mixed Use 2
                                                                                                                                                                    Park
                                                                                                                                                                    Public
                                                                                                                                                                    Residential      0   270
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ±     540                    1,080
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Feet
                                                                                                                              Source : ESRI USA Imagery (05/2006; 0.5m)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure LUE-2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Downtown Village Specific Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   City of La Cañada Flintridge


City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 2. Land Use Element
                 The DVSP area includes approximately 102 acres. It is bounded by the I-210
                 Freeway to the north, Foothill Boulevard to the south, La Cañada Boulevard to
                 the northwest, and the Crown Avenue/freeway off-ramp intersection at Foothill
                 Boulevard to the southeast.
2.3.3.7          Other
                 In 1991, the City completed the Foothill Boulevard Master Plan (FBMP) to guide
                 future development of Foothill Boulevard and to provide recommendations for
                 identified issues that were considered impediments to revitalization. The vision
                 described in the FBMP was to preserve and enhance a small-scale pedestrian-
                 oriented atmosphere with a village character. The FBMP identified five districts
                 along the entire length of Foothill Boulevard within the City, each with its own
                 mix of uses and unique characteristics, and provided policy direction for future
                 development and redevelopment within those districts. Figure LUE-3, Foothill
                 Districts, displays the boundaries of the five districts on Foothill Boulevard that
                 were originally identified in the 1991 FBMP. Four of the five original districts
                 include West Gateway, The Link, Old Town, and Michigan Hill Districts. The
                 adopted DVSP, described above, implements the fifth district, called the
                 Downtown District. While not technically a type of land use designation, the
                 districts are shown in the Land Use Element because they continue to be
                 referenced in the element and within certain zoning classifications to improve
                 and enhance the identity of Foothill Boulevard.
2.3.4            Land Use Plan/Zoning Relationship
                 The land use designations are implemented by the City’s zoning map and zoning
                 code. This relationship is illustrated in Table LUE-2. Please note that existing
                 zoning classifications may change and/or new zones may be created as a part of
                 the General Plan implementation process.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                           2-11

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                                    Chapter 2. Land Use Element
Table LUE-2. Relationship between Land Use Designations and Zoning Classifications
 Land Use Designation                                   Zoning Classification2
 Hillside Residential (1 du/10 ac)                      R-1—10 Acres
 Estate Residential (1 du/ac)                           R-1—40,000
 Very Low Density Residential (2 du/ac)                 R-1—30,000
                                                        R-1—20,000
 Low Density Residential (4 du/ac)                      R-1—15,000
                                                        R-1—10,000
 Medium Density Residential (8.7 du/ac)                 R-1—7,500
                                                        R-1—5,000
 High Density Residential (30 du/ac)                    R-3
 Commercial/Office (0.5:1 FAR)                          Community Planned Development (CPD)
 Parks and Recreation (0.35:1 FAR)                      Public and Semi-Public
 Open Space (FAR not applicable)                        Open Space (O-S)
                                                        RPD-40,000 as per the existing zoning map
 Institutional (0.35:1 FAR)                             Public and Semi-Public
 Public (0.35:1 FAR)                                    Public and Semi-Public
 Mixed Use (30 du/ac; 1.3:1 FAR) 1                      New zone required
 Downtown Village Specific Plan                         Downtown Village Specific Plan (DVSP):
                                                         1. Mixed Use 1:
                                                              Retail
                                                              Office—upper level only, with Conditional Use Permit
                                                                (CUP)
                                                              Residential—upper level only, with CUP
                                                         2. Mixed Use 2:
                                                              Retail
                                                              Office—ground or upper level, with CUP
                                                              Multi Family Residential—ground or upper level, with
                                                                CUP
                                                         3. Institutional
                                                         4. Public (to be added)
                                                         5. Park
                                                         6. Residential:
                                                              Single Family
                                                              Multi Family (15 du/ac)
 1
   Development that does not meet the requirements of the Mixed Use land use designation and corresponding zone will
   comply with the Commercial/Office land use designation and applicable zoning classification.
 2
   The zoning classifications are from the existing zoning code, with the exception of new zone(s) that will be necessary to
   implement the new Mixed Use land use designation. Other changes may be made to the zoning classifications as a part of
   the General Plan implementation process.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                                                    2-12

                                                                                                                                                                                         We
                                                                                                                                                                                           st
                                                                                                                                                                                                Ga
K: \ IRVINE \ GIS \ PROJECTS \ CITY_OF_LA_CANADA_FLINTRDIGE \ 00096_07 \ MAPDOC \ CIRCULATION_ELEMENT\ FIGCE_6_FOOTHILL_DISTRICTS.MXD 19542 (01-03-13)
                                                                                                                                                                                                     tew
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Dis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      tric
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Th
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e   Lin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           kD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ist
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ric
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Old
                                                                                                                                                                City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                                                  Dis Tow
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tric n
                                                                                                                                                         Land Use Designation                                                                                                        t
                                                                                                                                                                Commercial/Office (max of 0.5 FAR)
                                                                                                                                                                Downtown Village Specific Plan
                                                                                                                                                                Hillside Residential (max of 1 du/10 ac)
                                                                                                                                                                Estate Residential (max of 1 du/ac)                                                                                       Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            wn
                                                                                                                                                                Very Low Density Residential (up to 2 du/ac)                                                                                     tow
                                                                                                                                                                Low Density Residential (up to 4 du/ac)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       nD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ist
                                                                                                                                                                Medium Density Residential (up to 8.7 du/ac)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ric
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      t
                                                                                                                                                                High Density Residential (up to 30 du/ac)
                                                                                                                                                                Institutional
                                                                                                                                                                Public
                                                                                                                                                                Open Space
                                                                                                                                                                Parks and Recreation
                                                                                                                                                                Mixed Use (up to 30 du/ac)
                                                                                                                                                         Districts                                                                                                                                                        Mi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ig
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ±
                                                                                                                                                                Michigan Hill District
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Dis an H
                                                                                                                                                                Old Town District                                                                                                                                               tric ill
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    t
                                                                                                                                                                The Downtown District
                                                                                                                                                                The Link District
                                                                                                                                                                West Gateway District                                            0   1,000   2,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Feet
                                                                                                                                                    Source : City of La Canada Flintridge, May 10, 2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure LUE-3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Foothill Districts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           City of La Cañada Flintridge


City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                            Chapter 2. Land Use Element
2.4              Implications of the Land Use Plan
                 This section describes the implications and desired outcomes of implementation
                 of the Plan during the 2030 planning period. It summarizes the key land use
                 opportunities and issues that were identified by the General Plan Advisory
                 Committee (GPAC) and public.
                 La Cañada Flintridge has many unique characteristics and special qualities for a
                 city located in an
                 urbanized area. When             Vision 2030
                 the GPAC developed the
                                                 La Cañada Flintridge is a desirable community that has retained
                 vision statement for the        its quiet, safe, small-town feeling, and semi-rural, predominantly
                 2030 update of the              single-family character amid the beauty of its natural open
                 General Plan, they based        spaces, trails, trees, parks, wildlife, and stunning mountain
                 their future vision for         views. Neighborhoods and homes are well maintained, with
                 their City on the               landscaping and diverse housing styles that are in scale with
                                                 their surroundings. La Cañada Flintridge remains an equestrian-
                 community as it already         friendly community. The downtown is vibrant, attractive, and
                 exists.                         modern, and caters to the City’s residents with quality shopping
                                                 and dining establishments and local-serving businesses within a
                 The Plan is intended to         walkable, pedestrian-scale village atmosphere. New housing
                 retain La Cañada                opportunities for senior citizens and families are provided within
                                                 mixed-use developments that are close to businesses, health
                 Flintridge’s desirable
                                                 care services, community and recreational facilities, and transit.
                 characteristics and             Friendly, caring, and involved citizens of all ages share a
                 qualities as expressed in       commitment to their community and to each other. Premier
                 the Vision 2030. As a           schools continue to achieve the highest academic standards in
                 result, the overall type,       up-to-date facilities, and opportunities exist for teens and pre-
                                                 teens to be active and involved. The City is run efficiently and
                 density, intensity, and
                                                 maintains positive, effective relationships with neighboring cities
                 distribution of land uses       and regional and state agencies to address and resolve regional
                 in the Plan have not            issues cooperatively, such as air quality, traffic, and noise.
                 changed significantly in
                 the update. Minor changes include making several properties’ land use
                 designations consistent with existing uses and consolidating five former land use
                 designations (Public Facilities, Public Schools, Recreational, Open Space–Public,
                 and Open Space–Private) into three new designations (Public, Parks and
                 Recreation, and Open Space).
                 Through the public input process and the data gathered for the Background
                 Report, key issues and opportunities were identified that will be addressed
                 during the planning period. This effort is reflected in changes to the Land Use
                 Policy Map and land use designations; in the goals, objectives, and policies in
                 this element; and in the implementation of strategies in other elements that
                 support, or are supported by, implementation of the Land Use Element. The key
                 opportunities and issues are summarized below; each is followed by a brief
                 description of the action taken and how implementation of the Plan will address
                 them. Section 2.5, Goals, Objectives, and Policies, provides additional detail.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                                          2-13

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 2. Land Use Element
                 Please note that other elements also may address the opportunities and/or issues
                 in greater detail.
                 Opportunity/Issue 1: Provide additional housing opportunities for senior
                 citizens who want to continue to live in the City but no longer choose to stay in
                 their single-family homes, and for seniors and families who may desire other
                 housing options that are smaller, closer to transit and local-serving uses within
                 walking distance, and/or may be more affordable than the typical house in La
                 Cañada Flintridge.
                 Action:
                         A new Mixed Use land use designation has been added to the Plan,
                          which applies to certain Commercial/Office and Medium Density
                          Residential properties on Foothill Boulevard near the west end of the City
                          and to property on Verdugo Boulevard located southeast of the I-210 and
                          SR-2 interchange. If developed to their full potential, these parcels, which
                          total 18.48 acres, could allow a maximum of 554 residential units. The
                          Mixed Use land use designation provides new residential opportunities
                          that would be appropriate for senior citizens. Providing the opportunity
                          for new residential units in proximity to transit and local and community-
                          serving uses provides convenience and accessibility for seniors.
                         Approximately 2.4 acres of Commercial/Office and Medium Density
                          Residential properties have been redesignated to High Density
                          Residential to implement the Housing Element in the area of Foothill
                          Boulevard, Curran Street, and Union Street. Within this area, the City
                          will consider incentives for lot consolidation by vacating the existing
                          public streets to allow for an integrated development.
                 Opportunity/Issue 2: Preserve the remaining undeveloped hillsides to the extent
                 possible, for their value as open space, to retain the scenic beauty they provide,
                 and to protect the safety of persons and property as a result of potential future
                 development.
                 Action:
                         The Land Use Policy Map has been revised to redesignate a total of
                          70.25 acres of land from various residential land use designations to Open
                          Space. The major changes are described below.
                             A total of 26.26 acres of City-owned land has been redesignated to the
                              Open Space land use designation to reflect the City’s recent purchases
                              of property to preserve open space. This includes 10.5 acres of
                              Hillside Residential property (north of the A/B Line); 10.38 acres of
                              Very Low Density Residential property (Cherry Canyon); 0.16 acre of
                              Medium Density Residential property (Rockridge conservation area);
General Plan—January 2013                                                                           2-14

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 2. Land Use Element
                              and 5.22 acres of Medium-High Density Residential property
                              (Rockridge conservation area).
                             A total of 33.6 acres of Los Angeles County, Los Angeles County
                              Flood Control District, and federally owned land north of the A/B
                              Line has been redesignated from Hillside Residential to the Open
                              Space land use designation to reflect public ownership of the
                              properties. This action will ensure discretionary review by the City if
                              any public agency decides to sell its property to a private entity for a
                              purpose other than open space use.
                             10.39 acres of Low Density Residential property has been
                              redesignated to Open Space to reflect the restrictive covenant that was
                              approved as a condition of the subdivision map (adjacent to the
                              residences on Arroyo Summit Drive).
                         Goals, objectives, and/or policies have been included in the Land Use
                          Element to ensure that potential development is designed and
                          constructed to minimize visual and safety impacts and to preserve
                          natural resources to the extent possible.
                         See the Open Space and Recreation, Conservation, and Safety elements
                          for additional strategies and detailed actions regarding hillside
                          preservation and safety issues.
                 Opportunity/Issue 3: Protect existing single-family residential neighborhoods
                 from intrusion of noise, traffic, and other impacts.
                 Action:
                         Goals, objectives, and/or policies have been included in the Land Use
                          Element to ensure that development is designed, constructed, and
                          maintained to preserve the integrity of residential neighborhoods and
                          protect them from potential negative impacts of non-residential
                          development.
                         See the Noise, Conservation, Circulation, and Safety elements for
                          additional strategies and detailed actions to protect single-family
                          residential neighborhoods from intrusive impacts.
                 Opportunity/Issue 4: Preserve the City’s animal keeping tradition and the
                 ability of residents to own certain domestic and farm animals and fowl on their
                 residentially used property, subject to specific conditions.
                 Action:
                         The equestrian-friendly character of the community has been
                          acknowledged in Vision 2030.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                           2-15

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                  Chapter 2. Land Use Element
                         A policy is included in the Land Use Element that supports the City’s
                          tradition of keeping horses and other animals on residentially zoned
                          property.
                 Opportunity/Issue 5: Continue to enhance and improve Foothill Boulevard.
                 Action:
                         The DVSP is incorporated by reference into the Land Use Element.
                         The policy direction, recommendations, and identified Districts from the
                          FBMP, which was completed in 1991, have been incorporated into the
                          Land Use Element. Figure LUE-3 shows the various Districts, which
                          include West Gateway, The Link, Old Town, and Michigan Hill. The
                          DVSP implements the original Downtown District in the FBMP. The
                          Districts provide direction to enhance Foothill Boulevard by encouraging
                          a variety of interesting places that are linked by a village character,
                          emphasizing pedestrian and human scale, and multi-modal
                          opportunities.
                         The Land Use Policy Map expands the DVSP boundary in two places to
                          reflect existing parking uses that are associated with development within
                          the existing DVSP.
                         The Land Use Policy Map redesignates certain property from the Park to
                          the Mixed Use 1 designation to allow additional parking in the DVSP area.
                         Goals, objectives, and/or policies have been included in the Land Use
                          Element to promote and encourage pedestrian, transit, and bike-friendly
                          development.
                         Policies have been included to implement the distinctive District
                          characteristics and enhance their identities.
                         The recommendations in the Link and West Gateway Corridor Improvement
                          Recommendations (2004) have been incorporated into the Land Use
                          Element. They include a linear park, a multi-use pedestrian/bike
                          parkway, a trail, and wayfinding and other signage.
                 Opportunity/Issue 6: Incorporate the principles and practices of sustainability
                 into land use decisions and actions to: conserve energy, water, and other natural
                 resources; manage the use of renewable and non-renewable resources in an
                 efficient and responsible manner; preserve and improve the environment from
                 the local to the global level; reduce pollution and greenhouse gas (GHG)
                 emissions; reduce vehicle miles travelled; improve human health and safety; and
                 strengthen the economy.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            2-16

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 2. Land Use Element
                 Action:
                         The Plan incorporates the DVSP; various Mixed Use land use
                          designations; and supportive goals, objectives, and policies to promote
                          walkable neighborhoods near local-serving commercial businesses,
                          transit routes, parklands, and trails.
                         The goals, objectives, and/or policies in the Land Use Element include a
                          variety of building and site design policies and principles, design
                          guidelines, development standards, and/or City-sponsored
                          demonstration projects to promote sustainable land use, design, and
                          decision making.
                         Certain properties have been redesignated to the Open Space land use
                          designation to preserve and protect them.
                         See the Conservation, Noise, and Air Quality elements for additional
                          strategies and detailed actions regarding “green” and sustainable
                          building and development practices and techniques, and policies to
                          reduce GHG emissions pursuant to AB 32 and in keeping with the spirit
                          of SB 375.
                 Opportunity/Issue 7: Preserve, improve, and expand the trail system to support
                 recreational purposes and encourage non-vehicular circulation.
                 Action:
                         The City of La Cañada Flintridge Trails Master Plan, as may be amended
                          from time to time, is incorporated by reference in the General Plan.
                         Goals, objectives, and/or policies have been included in the Land Use
                          Element to ensure that the importance of trails is considered when new
                          development is proposed.
                 The Land Use, Open Space and Recreation, and Circulation elements recognize
                 the Trails Master Plan as the implementing document for trails within the City.
                 See the Open Space and Recreation, Conservation, and Circulation elements for
                 additional strategies and detailed actions regarding preservation and
                 enhancement of the trail system.
                 Opportunity/Issue 8: Foster the preservation of landmark and historic
                 properties in the City.
                 Action:
                         In February of 2012, the City Council adopted an ordinance that
                          authorizes the use of Mill Act contracts in the City of La Cañada
                          Flintridge.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                           2-17

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 2. Land Use Element
                         A policy has been included in the Land Use Element to promote the
                          preservation, rehabilitation, and maintenance of landmark and historic
                          properties in the City in accordance with the Mills Act ordinance.
                         See the Conservation Element for additional discussion, goals, objectives,
                          and/or policies related to historic preservation.
2.5              Goals, Objectives, and Policies
                 The following goals, objectives, and policies are intended to ensure that the
                 City’s distinctive character is preserved, its resources are protected, the Vision
                 2030 is achieved, and the key implementing strategies of other elements are
                 integrated into planning decisions.
                 LUE Goal 1: Provide an appropriate mix and balance of land uses that
                 retain and enhance the community’s distinctive character and preserve
                 its valuable resources.
                 LUE Objective 1.1: Preserve and enhance the City's character as a low-
                 density, wooded, hillside, predominately single-family residential
                 community.
                      LUE Policy 1.1.1: Preserve and protect existing low-density, single-family
                      neighborhoods in La Cañada Flintridge.
                      LUE Policy 1.1.2: Continue to allow Accessory Living Quarters (second
                      units) where such units are deemed consistent with neighborhood character,
                      both as accessory uses to residential uses and as a response to regional
                      housing needs.
                      LUE Policy 1.1.3: Allow for multi-family and mixed-use development in
                      designated areas to meet community housing needs and meet the goals of
                      the City’s Housing Element.
                      LUE Policy 1.1.4: Encourage mixed-use residential/commercial
                      development on Foothill Boulevard and other designated areas by creating
                      and implementing zoning, design guidelines, and development standards,
                      and incentives.
                      LUE Policy 1.1.5: Encourage new residential and mixed use projects to mix
                      affordable housing units with market rate units as opposed to building
                      stand-alone affordable housing development.
                      LUE Policy 1.1.6: Continue to support the City’s tradition of keeping horses
                      and other animals on residentially zoned property in a manner that balances
                      the rights of the owner and neighboring property owner.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                           2-18

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 2. Land Use Element
                      LUE Policy 1.1.7: Foster the preservation, rehabilitation, and maintenance of
                      landmark and historic properties in the City, such as through
                      implementation of the Mills Act.
                      LUE Policy 1.1.8: Preserve and protect individual homeowners from
                      invasion of privacy resulting from building design and/or electronic
                      surveillance equipment from neighboring properties.
                      LUE Policy 1.1.9: Rezone certain property north of Foothill Boulevard in and
                      adjacent to the Michigan Hill District to R-1-10,000 to be consistent with the
                      existing Low Density Residential land use designation.
                      LUE Policy 1.1.10: Pursue joint action through the Local Agency Formation
                      Commission for the County of Los Angeles with adjacent cities to resolve
                      the issue of existing lots that cross the City’s boundaries.
                 LUE Objective 1.2: Encourage the development of an attractive and
                 balanced commercial base for the community that meets the needs of the
                 residents without negatively impacting the circulation network,
                 infrastructure capacity, or existing residential neighborhoods.
                      LUE Policy 1.2.1: Through cooperation between City government, the La
                      Cañada Flintridge Chamber of Commerce, and the commercial sector,
                      encourage a thriving, well-designed, aesthetically pleasing commercial area
                      that preserves a strong tax base and is compatible with the residential nature
                      of the surrounding community.
                      LUE Policy 1.2.2: Retain a mix of land uses that provides employment
                      opportunities for City residents that are compatible with the community’s
                      character.
                      LUE Policy 1.2.3: Encourage a mix of commercial land uses that serves the
                      needs of the local community.
                      LUE Policy 1.2.4: Maintain sufficient flexibility in the types of uses allowed
                      in commercially designated areas to address changes in market conditions
                      and encourage competition.
                      LUE Policy 1.2.5: Provide standards and guidance for the design and
                      development of commercial facilities in the community that enhance the
                      City’s appearance, aesthetic qualities, and business potential.
                      LUE Policy 1.2.6: Encourage the development of childcare facilities,
                      including infant and toddler care and pre- and after-school care, in the
                      Commercial, Public, and Institutional use categories to serve the needs of La
                      Cañada Flintridge families and workers. In accordance with the strategic
                      plan adopted by the Los Angeles County Childcare Planning Committee,
                      reduce barriers to childcare service due to zoning regulations and expensive
                      permit requirements.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                           2-19

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 2. Land Use Element
                 LUE Objective 1.3: Preserve and protect the areas designated for open
                 space, recreation, and trails.
                      LUE Policy 1.3.1: Endeavor to increase the amount and network of public
                      and private open space, recreational facilities, and trails for active and/or
                      passive recreation activities.
                      LUE Policy 1.3.2: Facilitate the access to public and private open space,
                      recreational facilities, and trails.
                      LUE Policy 1.3.3: Land use proposals involving trails will comply with the
                      Trails Master Plan.
                      LUE Policy 1.3.4: Support the goals, objectives, and policies in the Open
                      Space and Recreation and Conservation elements when evaluating
                      development proposals and making land use decisions.
                      LUE Policy 1.3.5: Encourage opportunities for additional joint-use facilities
                      for future parks and schools, when feasible.
                      LUE Policy 1.3.6: Ensure long-term preservation of deed-restricted private
                      open space areas.
                 LUE Objective 1.4: Preserve and protect the areas designated for public and
                 institutional uses.
                      LUE Policy 1.4.1: Provide opportunities for development of high quality
                      educational facilities in the community.
                      LUE Policy 1.4.2: Provide information to local school districts when
                      considering any land use policy decisions that could affect local school
                      populations, thereby allowing those school districts to assess whether the
                      land use decision would have an impact on the adequacy of school facilities.
                 LUE Objective 1.5: Ensure that new and rehabilitated development is
                 compatible with the residential character of the City, the project’s
                 surrounding land uses, the circulation network, availability of public
                 facilities, and existing development constraints.
                      LUE Policy 1.5.1: Require all new development to be designed to minimize
                      impacts on adjoining residential neighborhoods by providing adequate and
                      appropriate buffers and protections to assure compliance with the City’s
                      goals and policies for compatible and complementary development.
                      LUE Policy 1.5.2: Ensure the character of existing neighborhoods is not
                      detrimentally altered as a result of land divisions and/or new development.
                      LUE Policy 1.5.3: Ensure the character of existing residential neighborhoods
                      is not detrimentally altered as a result of home occupations or by other
                      related non-residential uses.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                           2-20

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                  Chapter 2. Land Use Element
                      LUE Policy 1.5.4: Encourage non-conforming uses and buildings to be
                      brought into compliance with City codes.
                      LUE Policy 1.5.5: Mitigate unacceptable levels of noise, odors, pollution,
                      dust, light, and glare that affect residential areas and other sensitive
                      receptors.
                      LUE Policy 1.5.6: Ensure a sensitive transition between commercial and
                      residential land uses and other sensitive receptors by employing techniques
                      such as buffering, landscaping, and setbacks.
                      LUE Policy 1.5.7: Encourage and/or create incentives to improve existing
                      undesirable edge conditions and buffer areas between residential
                      neighborhoods and other sensitive receptors and adjacent commercial uses
                      and highways.
                 LUE Objective 1.6: Establish and implement land division practices and
                 standards of residential character relating to residential subdivisions that
                 preserve the City’s predominantly single-family residential character.
                      LUE Policy 1.6.1: Continue to prohibit flag-lots in new subdivisions and lot
                      line adjustments.
                      LUE Policy 1.6.2: New cul-de-sacs will not generally be considered
                      compatible with the existing residential character of the City if they: 1) serve
                      less than 6 residential lots; and 2) have a length of less than 200 feet as
                      measured from the center of the cul-de-sac bulb to the closest edge of the
                      right-of-way of the intersecting street.
                      LUE Policy 1.6.3: Consider allowing clustering and flexibility in site design
                      through the Planned Development Permit process to preserve desirable site
                      characteristics (such as open space and views) and mitigate site challenges
                      (such as steep slopes).
                 LUE Objective 1.7: Coordinate public infrastructure, utilities, and services
                 with new development.
                      LUE Policy 1.7.1: Continue to make incremental improvements to the flood
                      control and drainage system.
                      LUE Policy 1.7.2: Define public infrastructure needs and deficiencies that are
                      within the City and include priority projects into the City’s budgetary
                      process and/or require mitigation through development, if appropriate.
                      LUE Policy 1.7.3: Continue to promote the opportunity for the construction
                      of public sewers to enhance the quality of life in the City and reduce the risk
                      of infiltration of pollution into the watershed and water basin.
                      LUE Policy 1.7.4: Ensure that private development provides its fair share of
                      the cost of public improvements.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            2-21

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                  Chapter 2. Land Use Element
                 LUE Objective 1.8: Coordinate with residents, other agencies, and
                 community-oriented organizations regarding important land use issues
                 and policies.
                      LUE Policy 1.8.1: Participate with local, State, and federal planning agencies
                      to maximize the effectiveness of interagency land use planning and policies
                      and resolution of issues.
                      LUE Policy 1.8.2: Work to align appropriate City plans with regional plans
                      that have been developed consistent with State guidance to achieve
                      reductions in GHG emissions.
                      LUE Policy 1.8.3: Participate in the Sustainable Communities
                      Strategy/Regional Blueprint Planning effort and consider in the adoption of
                      local plans.
                      LUE Policy 1.8.4: Promote public interest in, and understanding of, the
                      General Plan and regulations pertaining to it.
                      LUE Policy 1.8.5: Encourage citizen participation in planning and
                      development of land use policies and programs.
                      LUE Policy 1.8.6: Review land use studies and decisions proposed to be
                      made in adjoining jurisdictions that may affect the City of La Cañada
                      Flintridge.
                 LUE GOAL 2: Enhance the visual image and economic vitality of Foothill
                 Boulevard as the City’s main commercial corridor.
                 LUE Objective 2.1: Enhance the appearance and use of Foothill Boulevard
                 through a series of distinctive Districts (including West Gateway, The
                 Link, Old Town, the Downtown District through implementation of the
                 Downtown Village Specific Plan, and Michigan Hill), that offer a variety of
                 interesting places and are linked by a village character emphasizing
                 pedestrian and human scale and active transportation (multi-modal)
                 opportunities.
                      LUE Policy 2.1.1: Support sub-regional and local-serving commercial
                      activities and mixed-use development in the West Gateway District (from
                      Briggs Avenue to Leata Lane). Encourage future development to
                      consolidate lots; locate buildings closer to the street; provide attractive
                      landscaping; improve the appearance of parking areas; and encourage active
                      transportation options by promoting a pedestrian-, bicycle-, and transit-
                      oriented environment.
                      LUE Policy 2.1.2: Maintain single-family residential uses in the Link District
                      (from Leata Lane to Alta Canyada Road). Coordinate public and
                      recreational uses and professional offices with these residential uses. Ensure
                      that conversion of single-family dwellings fronting Foothill Boulevard to
                      commercial office is orderly and does not negatively impact existing
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            2-22

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 2. Land Use Element
                      residences. Reinforce the District’s residential identity through
                      improvements to the public right-of-way.
                      LUE Policy 2.1.3: Preserve the historic character and identity of the Old
                      Town District (from Alta Canyada Road to La Cañada Boulevard) as a local-
                      serving commercial area of smaller shops and offices. Provide for increased
                      parking facilities and encourage pedestrian- and transit-oriented design.
                      LUE Policy 2.1.4: Support the mixed-use village character of the Downtown
                      District (from La Cañada Boulevard to the I-210 Freeway overpass at Crown
                      Avenue) through continued implementation of the DVSP.
                      LUE Policy 2.1.5: Preserve the low-density, single-family character of the
                      Michigan Hill District (from the I-210 Freeway overpass to Oak Grove
                      Drive) and ensure that all public and institutional uses and public
                      improvements retain the area’s semi-rural character.
                 LUE Objective 2.2: Create an environment that supports local-serving retail
                 and service enterprises, provides adequate parking, and offers a dynamic
                 residential environment.
                      LUE Policy 2.2.1: Encourage the integration of mixed-use retail/office and
                      multi-family residential/retail projects through implementation of the new
                      Mixed Use land use designation.
                      LUE Policy 2.2.2: Encourage high quality multi-family residential and
                      mixed-use development on Foothill Boulevard as a means of promoting
                      pedestrian activity and reducing dependence on automobiles, addressing
                      the housing needs of seniors and families, and improving the physical
                      appearance of the Boulevard.
                      LUE Policy 2.2.3: Facilitate the revitalization of under-utilized commercial
                      parcels where appropriate and compatible with surrounding uses to
                      capitalize on their access and visibility.
                      LUE Policy 2.2.4: Encourage consolidation of parking and reciprocal-access
                      agreements among adjacent businesses.
                      LUE Policy 2.2.5: Implement the short-term, long-term, and regulatory
                      parking strategies in the Comprehensive Parking Strategy (2008) as
                      appropriate.
                 LUE Objective 2.3: Implement the District identities and sustainable
                 principles through public improvements, implementation of design
                 review, application of existing or new design guidelines and development
                 standards, incentives, and grant opportunities.
                      LUE Policy 2.3.1: Continue to implement the City’s design review process
                      for public and private buildings within the commercial zones and DVSP on
                      Foothill Boulevard. Require design review as a part of the new zone(s) to
                      implement the Mixed Use designations.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                           2-23

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                Chapter 2. Land Use Element
                      LUE Policy 2.3.2: Consider options to support private efforts to consolidate
                      smaller properties into larger sites where beneficial to overcome constraints
                      of existing development and site design. Options may include density and
                      other zoning incentives, such as waiver of fees or expedited permit
                      processing, economic development strategies, improvement bonding, grant
                      funding, and mediation.
                      LUE Policy 2.3.3: Encourage buildings and signs to be designed to
                      complement the identity of the Districts and employ the elements of a
                      village setting.
                      LUE Policy 2.3.4: Create attractive and identifiable public and private spaces
                      along Foothill Boulevard that define and enhance the Districts through the
                      use of street furnishings, landscaping, and public improvements.
                      LUE Policy 2.3.5: Improve the appearance of existing commercial buildings
                      and sites along Foothill Boulevard through encouragement of property
                      upgrades, including increased use of the City’s Commercial Property
                      Improvement Program, other incentives, and/or enhanced code
                      enforcement activity.
                      LUE Policy 2.3.6: Implement the linear park identified in the Link and West
                      Gateway Corridor Improvement Recommendations (2004) from the Crescenta-
                      Cañada YMCA west to the commercial area, using excess right-of-way on
                      the south side of Foothill Boulevard and screening the high retaining wall.
                      LUE Policy 2.3.7: Create a multi-use pedestrian/bike parkway along the
                      south side of Foothill Boulevard between Mayors’ Discovery Park and the
                      YMCA, with possible further extension to the west.
                      LUE Policy 2.3.8: Assemble the right-of-way and create improvements for a
                      circular trail to connect the Mayors’ Discovery Park, the Rockridge
                      conservation area, the Link Linear Park on Foothill Boulevard, and the
                      YMCA.
                      LUE Policy 2.3.9: Provide wayfinding signage to direct visitors coming from
                      the east and west via the I-210 Freeway or from the south via the SR-2
                      Freeway to Angeles Crest Highway, downtown La Cañada Flintridge, and
                      other destinations.
                      LUE Policy 2.3.10: Address drainage and parking lot runoff problems
                      through use of watershed management techniques and/or best management
                      practices developed per the Conservation Element.
                      LUE Policy 2.3.11: Provide landscaping to screen retaining walls abutting
                      residential properties and/or encourage the installation of landscaped
                      cribwall on the north side of Foothill Boulevard in the Link District.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                          2-24

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 2. Land Use Element
                 LUE Goal 3: Ensure that new and rehabilitated development is designed
                 and constructed in an environmentally sustainable and sensitive
                 manner and protects the safety of persons and property.
                 LUE Objective 3.1: Promote sustainable development practices to protect
                 the City’s valuable resources and guide their utilization in a responsible
                 manner, reduce vehicle miles travelled, and reduce GHG emissions.
                      LUE Policy 3.1.1: Encourage development of pedestrian-, bicycle-, and
                      transit-oriented mixed-use projects in designated areas to create or enhance
                      diverse centers of activity; link residential development to local-serving
                      uses; create environments that are walkable and offer convenient pedestrian
                      connectivity to alternative transportation options; and increase the efficiency
                      of resource use by concentrating new development in areas that are already
                      served by infrastructure.
                      LUE Policy 3.1.2: Ensure new development is designed to make public
                      transit a viable choice for residents by locating multi-family residential and
                      mixed-use development on or near streets that are served efficiently by
                      public transit and alternative transportation modes.
                      LUE Policy 3.1.3: Encourage new and redeveloped projects to be designed to
                      improve pedestrian and transit connections and connections to trail and
                      bicycle networks, and to incorporate facilities to support bicycle use (such as
                      bike racks, lockers, and/or employee showers, to the extent possible and
                      appropriate) to reduce the dependence on passenger vehicles.
                      LUE Policy 3.1.4: Allow complementary local-serving uses not already
                      present in zoning district to reduce vehicle miles travelled, promote
                      bicycling and walking, and reduce vehicle-related emissions.
                      LUE Policy 3.1.5: Promote mixed-use development in targeted areas by
                      developing zoning classifications, development standards, and design
                      guidelines that are appropriate for the scale, intensity, and character desired
                      for the particular area.
                      LUE Policy 3.1.6: Provide financial, development, administrative and/or
                      other incentives to encourage mixed-use development and development
                      patterns that support transit use and alternative modes of transportation.
                      LUE Policy 3.1.7: Promote the implementation of Low Impact Development
                      stormwater management techniques in new or rehabilitated commercial or
                      residential projects.
                      LUE Policy 3.1.8: Encourage implementation of green building techniques.
                      LUE Policy 3.1.9: Reduce heat gain from pavement and other hard surfaces
                      by promoting “Cool Communities Measures,” including use of:
                          a. light-colored or porous paving materials parking lots , pathways, and
                             other hard surfaces;
General Plan—January 2013                                                                           2-25

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                Chapter 2. Land Use Element
                          b. trees and other shading vegetation around parking lots and buildings
                             to reduce the amount of energy needed for cooling;
                          c. pervious pavement options;
                          d. low-water landscaping in place of hardscaping around transportation
                             infrastructure and in parking areas; and
                          e. parkway landscaping to provide shade of streets and adjacent
                             parking areas by trees.
                      LUE Policy 3.1.10: Encourage new and redeveloped projects to make
                      optimal use of water conservation techniques.
                      LUE Policy 3.1.11: Pursue opportunities to consolidate parking on Foothill
                      Boulevard and in the DVSP area to encourage a pedestrian- and transit-
                      oriented environment.
                      LUE Policy 3.1.12: Implement the recommendations in the Comprehensive
                      Parking Strategy for the DVSP and Old Town District to improve
                      management of existing parking supply and provide adequate parking for
                      the area.
                      LUE Policy 3.1.13: Prohibit drive-through commercial businesses within the
                      City to mitigate unacceptable levels of noise, odors, and vehicle-related
                      emissions only where proximate to sensitive receptors.
                      LUE Policy 3.1.14: Implement goals, objectives, and policies in the
                      Conservation and Air Quality Elements to promote sustainable and green
                      development practices and reduce GHG emissions.
                 LUE Objective 3.2: Continue to protect the public’s safety by evaluating
                 land and environmental constraints prior to development and requiring
                 that projects mitigate potential negative environmental and safety impacts.
                      LUE Policy 3.2.1: Ensure that future hillside development does not
                      detrimentally impact environmental and recreational resources; is
                      coordinated with available and potential circulation capacities; and is
                      planned, designed, and implemented with regard for natural environmental
                      hazards and constraints.
                      LUE Policy 3.2.2: Conduct appropriate environmental reviews for all
                      projects affecting land use.
                      LUE Policy 3.2.3: Provide a wide range of accessible public facilities and
                      community services, including fire and police protection; flood control and
                      drainage; educational, cultural, and recreational opportunities; and other
                      governmental and municipal services.
                      LUE Policy 3.2.4: Implement goals, objectives, and policies in the Safety
                      Element to protect persons and property from potential safety hazards.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                          2-26

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 2. Land Use Element
                 LUE Goal 4: Maintain hillside areas for the purpose of preserving the
                 visual quality of the City, protecting the public from safety hazards, and
                 conserving natural resources.
                 LUE Objective 4.1: New development and/or remodeling of existing
                 structures and property will be designed, constructed, and maintained to
                 preserve important viewscapes, topographic and other natural features, and
                 the semi-rural character of the City’s hillsides.
                      LUE Policy 4.1.1: Preserve ridgelines, natural slopes, knolls, canyons, and
                      bluffs in their natural state to protect important viewscapes and topographic
                      and other natural features. The land forms identified in Figure CNE-3 of the
                      Conservation Element are examples of landforms that will be protected.
                      LUE Policy 4.1.2: Ensure that land divisions or new development in hillside
                      areas do not alter the character of existing neighborhoods.
                      LUE Policy 4.1.3: Ensure that development preserves the City’s natural
                      environment, setting, and viewsheds, through design, siting, and
                      construction that avoids obtrusive breaks in the natural skylines and
                      minimizes the visual impact of grading, intrusion of highly visible cut
                      and/or fill slopes, building and roof lines, and/or roadway surfaces.
                      LUE Policy 4.1.4: Require human-made slopes to be irrigated and
                      landscaped to prevent erosion and to soften the visual appearance of the
                      finished slope.
                      LUE Policy 4.1.5: Continue to implement the City’s Hillside Development
                      Chapter of the Zoning Ordinance, which establishes standards to minimize
                      landform alteration, preserve significant environmental features, and control
                      development densities.
                      LUE Policy 4.1.6: Encourage residences developed in hillside areas to be
                      designed, landscaped, and built of materials that blend with the existing
                      environment; use of bright or reflective surfaces will be disallowed.
                 LUE Objective 4.2: Ensure that hillside development will be designed,
                 constructed, and maintained to minimize natural and human-made safety
                 hazards to persons and property.
                      LUE Policy 4.2.1: Require that development in hillside areas be designed
                      and constructed in such a manner as to avoid flooding, mudslides, erosion,
                      and subsidence to residents and structures on or near hillside areas as well
                      as downstream of any project.
                      LUE Policy 4.2.2: Ensure that the appropriate goals, objectives, policies, and
                      implementation programs in the Safety and Conservation elements are
                      applied to hillside development.
                      LUE Policy 4.2.3: Discourage development in areas of known slope
                      instability and/or high landslide risk.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                           2-27

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 2. Land Use Element
                      LUE Policy 4.2.4: Require new development north of the A/B Development
                      Line to tie into the public sewer and water supply system as a condition of
                      land use approval and prior to occupancy.
                      LUE Policy 4.2.5: Require new development in hillside areas to use building
                      techniques that minimize fire hazards and reduce risks associated with
                      wildfires.
                      LUE Policy 4.2.6: Require property in hillside areas to be maintained in a
                      manner to reduce risks associated with wildfires.
                 LUE Goal 5: Preserve and enhance the scenic beauty of the community.
                 LUE Objective 5.1: Encourage overall development of the community to be
                 designed and constructed in a manner that is visually pleasing, preserves
                 and enhances the semi-rural character of the local environment, and
                 protects the scenic qualities of the community.
                      LUE Policy 5.1.1: Encourage the preservation and enhancement of scenic
                      vistas and discourage development and additions that obstruct views.
                      LUE Policy 5.1.2: Implement the goals, objectives, and policies in the
                      Conservation Element regarding protection of the City’s topographic and
                      scenic resources.
                      LUE Policy 5.1.3: Review all plans for development for compatibility with
                      surrounding developments and established design guidelines, in accordance
                      with the City’s Design Review process and the DVSP.
                      LUE Policy 5.1.4: Continue to apply the City’s residential design guidelines
                      to all single-family residential zoned lots within the city as a basis for
                      evaluating proposed projects to promote good design, preserve
                      neighborhood character, and protect property values.
                      LUE Policy 5.1.5: Review and revise, as necessary, architectural design,
                      landscaping, and signage guidelines to achieve commercial development of
                      the highest quality and to retain the City’s small-town character.
                 LUE Objective 5.2: Preserve and improve the aesthetic quality of the
                 community through enhancements to the City’s gateways and scenic
                 corridors.
                      LUE Policy 5.2.1: Install and maintain visual and infrastructure linkages
                      on the City’s designated scenic corridors through landscaping and street
                      trees, hardscape, lighting, signage and identity graphics, and street
                      furniture through public improvements and private investment.
                      LUE Policy 5.2.2: Maintain Verdugo Boulevard as a visually pleasing
                      residential corridor that serves as a significant entry point into the City by its
                      designation as the Descanso Gateway District.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                           2-28

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 2. Land Use Element
                      LUE Policy 5.2.3: Implement programs that support the gateway and scenic
                      corridor characteristics along the City’s major roadways.
                      LUE Policy 5.2.4: Preserve the unique views of the mountains and foothills
                      as seen from the City’s designated scenic corridors (as designated on Figure
                      CNE-3 in the Conservation Element) by continuing to implement the
                      development standards and design guidelines in the Hillside Development
                      Ordinance, DVSP, and the design review process, including mixed use and
                      commercial development.
                      LUE Policy 5.2.5: The City will work with utility companies to improve the
                      appearance of Foothill Boulevard, Verdugo Boulevard, and Angeles Crest
                      Highway by undergrounding public utility lines and equipment and
                      eliminating utility poles along these roads as economic resources permit.
                      LUE Policy 5.2.6: In order to improve the general appearance of the
                      community as recommended in this and other elements of the General Plan,
                      the City will evaluate the possibility of using community improvement
                      district(s) as a tool for making certain improvements, such as: 1) the
                      undergrounding of overhead utility lines on Verdugo Boulevard and
                      Angeles Crest Highway; 2) landscaping within the public rights-of-way; and
                      3) assisting the private sector in land acquisition and development of
                      landscaped commercial parking areas.
                 LUE Goal 6: Support the long-term needs of seniors within the City as
                 they relate to land use policies and the stated goals for balanced and
                 compatible development within this low-density, predominantly single-
                 family residential community.
                 LUE Objective 6.1: Implement land use policies and development
                 standards that allow and encourage the development of housing types and
                 other land uses that meet the needs of senior citizens.
                      LUE Policy 6.1.1: Adopt the new Mixed Use zone as proposed on the Land
                      Use Policy Map.
                      LUE Policy 6.1.2: Encourage a mix of residential types to satisfy a variety of
                      senior housing needs.
                      LUE Policy 6.1.3: Require that residential development proposed for senior
                      citizens is designed to facilitate their mobility independence both within the
                      project and through pedestrian connections to the surrounding land uses
                      and transit stops.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                           2-29

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                              Chapter 2. Land Use Element
                      LUE Policy 6.1.4: Evaluate and revise existing development standards for
                      multi-family and senior development projects, such as minimum unit size,
                      parking requirements, and minimum open space; and prepare new mixed
                      use development standards to facilitate and encourage the development of
                      mixed use and multi-family projects as envisioned in the City’s General
                      Plan.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                        2-30

        Chapter 3
    Open Space and
Recreation Elem ent
                                                              3.0
           OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION ELEMENT
3.1            Introduction
               The 2030 Vision prepared for this update to the City’s General Plan emphasizes
               the value residents of La Cañada Flintridge place on preserving their city’s
               natural open spaces, recreation areas, and trails, and the contribution these
               resources make to the City’s quality of life and desirability as a place to live and
               recreate. The Open Space and Recreation Element reflects this priority. It also
               reflects the interrelationship between this element and the goals, objectives, and
               policies in the Land Use,
               Conservation, Safety, and
               Circulation elements.
               The Open Space and Recreation
               Element meets the requirements of
               the State-mandated Open Space
               Element as defined in Section
               55302(e) of the Government Code.
               According to these requirements,              Open space south of Descanso Gardens
               an Open Space Element must
               contain policies concerned with managing all open space areas, including
               undeveloped lands and outdoor recreational areas. It must specifically identify
               open space that is left undeveloped for the preservation of natural resources,
               managed production of natural resources, protection of public health and safety,
               and lands for parks and recreation.
               The Open Space and Recreation Element summarizes existing conditions
               regarding open space, parks and recreation facilities, and trails; describes
               guidelines for the preparation of an integrated parkland system; discusses
               implications and considerations for future parkland planning; and includes
               associated goals, objectives, and policies.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                         3-1

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                  Chapter 3. Open Space and Recreation Element
3.2              Setting
                 La Cañada Flintridge has a significant amount of natural open spaces, public
                 parks, areas devoted to public and private recreation facilities, and trails
                 (collectively described as parkland), which contribute to the semi-rural feel of the
                 community and its distinctive character. The City is situated between the foothills
                 of the San Gabriel Mountains and the Angeles National Forest to the north, and the
                 San Rafael Hills to the south.
                 Since its incorporation, the
                 community has made preservation
                 and protection of its open space
                 areas a high priority. The City has
                 approximately 983 acres of public
                 and private land devoted to
                 parkland, which includes all
                 acreage designated Parks and
                 Recreation and Open Space on the
                 Land Use Policy Map. Much of the undeveloped private land, which is designated
                 Hillside Residential, is on steep, visually prominent hillsides, with slopes in excess
                 of 30 to 40 percent. The hillsides contain or are surrounded by numerous
                 significant environmental and aesthetic resources, and are traversed by hiking,
                 bicycling, and equestrian riding trails.
                 Considerable open space and recreational facilities are adjacent to the City,
                 including the Angeles National Forest and the Hahamogna Watershed Park in
                 Pasadena. The City’s trail system connects to an extensive network of trails in
                 Pasadena, Glendale, South Pasadena, Altadena, and the Angeles National Forest.
3.3              Existing Conditions
3.3.1            Open Space
                 The property designated as Open Space on the City’s Land Use Policy Map
                 serves a variety of purposes, such as: protecting natural resources, including
                 plant and animal habitats and waterways; managing the production of resources,
                 including areas for groundwater recharge and electrical transmission lines;
                 providing active and passive recreation opportunities; protecting the public’s
                 health and safety, including debris basins, watersheds, unstable soil areas, and
                 areas of high wildfire risk; and preserving viewsheds.
                 The primary areas of existing publicly owned open space include, but are not
                 limited to:
General Plan—January 2013                                                                             3-2

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                Chapter 3. Open Space and Recreation Element
                         Approximately 211 acres of City-owned property, including Cherry
                          Canyon in the San Rafael Hills abutting the southern edge of La Cañada
                          Flintridge; Rockridge conservation area; and 69.7 acres of City-owned
                          property north of the A/B Development Line, which includes property in
                          Gould Canyon, Flint Canyon, and Hall-Beckley Canyon.
                         Approximately 297 acres of County-owned property, including Descanso
                          Gardens and undeveloped land north of the A/B Development Line.
                         Approximately 88 acres owned by the Los Angeles County Flood Control
                          District.
                         Approximately 44 acres owned by the federal government north of the
                          A/B Development Line, adjacent to the Angeles National Forest.
                         Approximately 108 acres owned by Southern California Edison (SCE), not
                          including 1.69 acres designated Parks and Recreation on the Land Use
                          Policy Map.
                 The primary areas of existing open space that are privately owned include the
                 golf course of the La Cañada Flintridge County Club and four other parcels of
                 privately owned land. Figure OSRE-1 shows the location of these open space
                 areas. Figure OSRE-2 depicts how the existing publicly owned open space
                 currently contributes to resource protection. Chapter 4, Conservation Element,
                 discusses preservation of open space for habitat conservation and visual and
                 aesthetic resources. Chapter 5, Safety Element, addresses protection of open space
                 for areas that are prone to hazards, including debris and mudflows and
                 wildfires.
3.3.2            Parks and Recreation
                 The City owns and manages five developed parks totaling 4.4 acres, including
                 Glenhaven, Glenola, Mayors’ Discovery, Memorial, and Olberz Parks. In addition,
                 the City has an agreement with SCE to
                 maintain a 1.69-acre portion of its
                 right-of way west of Indiana Avenue
                 as parkland. In order to maximize its
                 recreation facilities, the City has joint-
                 use agreements with the La Cañada
                 Unified School District (LCUSD) to
                 operate and maintain ball fields and
                 other recreational facilities for use by
                 the public during non-school hours.
                 These facilities include soccer, baseball,                 Memorial Park
                 softball, and football fields; tennis and
                 basketball courts; and a skateboard park. The City also has a joint-use agreement
                 with the Church of Latter Day Saints for its ball field, which is located adjacent to
General Plan—January 2013                                                                           3-3

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                  Chapter 3. Open Space and Recreation Element
                 Mayors’ Discovery Park. La Cañada Flintridge is fortunate to have a very strong
                 community support network in place, including parents, volunteers, sports
                 associations, and sponsors, who work with LCUSD to improve its recreation
                 facilities.
                 Organized recreation is also offered through non-City organizations, such as the
                 Community Center of La Cañada
                 Flintridge and the Crescenta-Cañada
                 YMCA. Private recreational facilities
                 include the Flintridge Riding Club, the La
                 Cañada Flintridge Country Club, and the
                 Flint Canyon Tennis Club. Figure OSRE-1
                 shows the location of City-owned, joint-
                 use, and major non-profit and private
                 recreation facilities within the City, and the
                 current trail system.                                      Flintridge Riding Club
                 The City has a Parks and Recreation
                 Commission that is responsible for advising the City Council on various matters
                 pertaining to parks and recreation. The Commission works with local public and
                 private schools in conjunction with non-profit service providers to ensure
                 existing recreational services and facilities are made available and are
                 coordinated for maximal use.
3.3.3            Trails
                 Trails have existed within the community of La Cañada Flintridge since it was
                 settled. When the hills of Flintridge were subdivided in the 1920s, bridle paths
                 were included in the plans. Trails have been, and
                 continue to be, an important recreational asset to the
                 community and contribute to its semi-rural character.
                 The City has been distinguished as one of the top ten
                 trail towns in the country and was given the honor of
                 being named “Trail Town, USA” by the American
                 Hiking Society. The City Council has placed a priority
                 on increasing the trail system and its vital links. In
                 March 2006 the City adopted the City of La Cañada
                 Flintridge Trails Master Plan (Trails Master Plan) that
                 provides a detailed guide for enhancements to the
                 existing trail system and the creation of new trails.
                 According to the Trails Master Plan’s trails inventory,
                 there are approximately 24 miles of existing hiking and riding trails of a variety
                 of levels of difficulty. Approximately 4 miles of trails are maintained by the City;
General Plan—January 2013                                                                             3-4

                                                                                                                                                                            Hall-Beckley Canyon Trail
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Angeles National Forest
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cross
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          os
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Trail
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              wn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            To
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Town
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    i
                                                                                                                                            La Crescenta-Montrose                                                                                                                                                                Tra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Gould Canyon Trail
                                                                                                                                              Hall-Beckley Conservancy                                                                                Tra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         il
                                                                                                                                                                                           2                                                       Tow
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Cro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ss
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Cross Town Trail
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Glenola Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Altadena
                                                                                                                                                                   Gat
                                                                                                                                                                      e wa
                                                                                                                                                                           y Lin
                                                                                                                                                                                k Tr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          State Hwy 2
                                                                                                                                                                                     ail
                                                                                                                                                                    Roc
                                                                                                                                                                        krid
                                                                                                                                                                            ge
                                                                                                                                                                               Ter              Trails Council Link
                                                                                                                                                                                  rac
                                                                                                                                                                                       eT                                                                                                                                                                                              C
                                                                                                                                                                                         rail
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   uld
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Go
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            La Cañada Flintridge                                                                                                                                   il
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Tra
                                                                                                                                                         Glen Haven Park                           6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           yon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Memorial Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                       Mayors' Discovery Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Olberz Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Verdugo Blvd
                                                                                                                                                                                                             De
                                                                                                                                                                                                               sca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  nso                                                         5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Tra                                                          5                                      Fo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           il                                                                                                 oth
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ill B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         lvd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Chevy Chase Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Horse Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Gould Canyon Trail
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Horse Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          rail
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      cy T
                                                                                                                                                     Cherry Canyon Open Space
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              nse rvan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Co            Trail                                                                                                Flin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Loop                                                                                                          t             Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Liz's                                                                                                                               nyo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       n          Tra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     il           Flint Canyon Trail                                                                                 il
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              l   Tra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ow
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Flintridge Feeder Tra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         De The                    erro
K:\IRVINE\GIS\PROJECTS\CITY_OF_LA_CANADA_FLINTRDIGE\00096_07\MAPDOC\GENERAL_PLAN\\FIGOSRE_1_OPEN_SPACE_PARKS_AND_REC.MXD 19542 (10-16-12)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           st U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   il
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             in lti                         ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               at m                       eg                                                                                                                                                                    t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 io at
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n e                           ail                                                                                                                                                        Flin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Tr                        Tr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ai                                                                                                                                                                                           n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                nyo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       il                     Pasadena
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Tra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Glendale
                                                                                                                                                          Local Highways
                                                                                                                                                          Trails
                                                                                                                                                          AB Development Line
                                                                                                                                                  Joint Use Recreation Facilities
                                                                                                                                                          1 - La Cañada Elementary
                                                                                                                                                          2 - Palm Crest Elementary
                                                                                                                                                          3 - Paradise Canyon Elementary
                                                                                                                                                          4 - La Cañada High School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ±
                                                                                                                                                          5 - Foothill Intermediate School
                                                                                                                                                          6 - Church of Latter Day Saints
                                                                                                                                                          Parks and Recreation
                                                                                                                                                          Open Space                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0   0.25                    0.5                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Miles
                                                                                                                                        Source : City of La Canada Flintridge, May 10, 2003, ESRI StreetMap
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure OSRE-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Open Space and Parks & Recreation Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             City of La Cañada Flintridge

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Arr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               oyo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Se
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          co
                                                                                                                                                                                                          on
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ny
                                                                                                                                                                                                Su
                                                                                                                                                                                                  tto                                     on
                                                                                                                                                                                                     n                               Cany
                                                                                                                                                                    Can
                                                                                                                                                                       yo n                     ll   y
                                                                                                                                                                                          Mulla                                                                                                                                                            Angeles National Forest
                                                                                                                                                                                      ( Mullally Debris Basin
                                                                                                                                                                                      !                                                                 Can
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           yo n
                                                                                                                                                                                       on
                                                                                                                                                                                any
                                                                                                                                                                         er C
                                                                                                                                                                    S nov
                                                                                                                                                                          Snover Debris Basin
                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                         an                                                    on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Gould
                                                                                                                                                                                                            yo                                              ny
                                                                                                                                                                                                               n
                                                                                                                                                                                            W                                                          Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   y                             n
                                                                                                                                                                                             eb                                                 er                          Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                               be                                            in
                                                                                                                                                                                                 rC                                         W                                 ny
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Be                                                                 o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                        Big Briar Debris Basin
                                                                                                                                                   Pi                                                                                          Winery                                  (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                           Upper Gould Debris Basin
                                                                                                                                                     ck                                                                                        Debris Basin         Hay                                  (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                       en                         Hall Beckley Debris Basin                                                         Debris Basin              Harter Lane
                                                                                                                                                         s
                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                                                                             Debris Basin
                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                   !    Pickens Debris Basin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Hay
                                                                                                                                                                   Ha
                                                                                                                                                                     ll
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Gould Debris Basin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               STATE HWY 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             nyo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        FO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           O   TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I LL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             VD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        VERDUGO BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GOULD AVE
K:\IRVINE\GIS\PROJECTS\CITY_OF_LA_CANADA_FLINTRDIGE\00096_07\MAPDOC\GENERAL_PLAN\FIGOSRE_2_OPEN_SPACE_RES_PROTECTION.MXD 19542 (10-16-12)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Flin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               tW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ash
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     KSH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           I RE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                            h
                                                                                                                                                                                Verdugo Was
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          OA K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   VY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CHA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GR O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               D DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        L AN                     DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 HIGH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Arr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          oyo
                                                                                                                                                           City of La Cañada Flintridge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sec
                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                    !      Debris Basin Locations                                                                                                                                                                                                               o
                                                                                                                                                           AB Development Line
                                                                                                                                                           Highways and Major Roads
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ±
                                                                                                                                                           Waterways
                                                                                                                                                           Devils Gate Reservoir
                                                                                                                                                           Open Space
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0      1,000    2,000         4,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Feet
                                                                                                                                        Source : California Department of Water Resources (2002); ESRI USA Imagery (5/2006; 0.5m)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Figure OSRE-2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Open Space and Resources Protection
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 City of La Cañada Flintridge

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                   Chapter 3. Open Space and Recreation Element
                 these trails are currently on City-owned, SCE right-of-way, or Caltrans property.
                 The remaining 20 miles of trails are located on County, SCE, federal, and
                 privately owned property; these trails are maintained by the County. Figure
                 OSRE-1 shows the active trail system in La Cañada Flintridge. The City also
                 adopted a Trails Ordinance in 2006, which outlines conduct on City and non-City
                 owned trails and on property adjoining and abutting trails.
3.4              Planning for an Integrated Park, Recreation,
                 Open Space, and Trails System
                 During the planning period, the City will continue to place a high priority on
                 preserving and enhancing open space areas and expanding park and recreation
                 facilities and trails. The following sections describe the process the City will use
                 to develop an integrated parkland system through the creation of an integrated
                 park, recreation, open space, and trail (parkland) system within the City that
                 meets the needs of a full range of community members and interests. The
                 sections also identify a number of key considerations for development of that
                 plan.
3.4.1            Guidelines for Parkland Plan Development
                 Public agencies responsible for identifying goals and developing plans for park,
                 recreation, and open space facilities often refer to the Park, Recreation, Open Space,
                 and Greenway Guidelines (Guidelines) that were developed by the National
                 Recreation and Park Association (NRPA). NRPA is an independent, non-profit
                 organization, and is the primary
                 professional organization in the
                 field. The original 1983 Guidelines,
                 which were updated in 1990,
                 recommended that a park system
                 should be composed of a “core”
                 system of parklands with a total of
                 6.25 to 10 acres of developed open
                 space per 1,000 residents (National
                 Recreation and Park Association
                 1990). When NRPA revised those
                                                                    Tennis court at Glenhaven Park
                 standards in 1996, it acknowledged
                 that every community has its own unique blend of social, economic, institutional,
                 and natural resource characteristics that influence the most appropriate quantity,
                 quality, and mix of park, open space, and recreational facilities within the
                 jurisdiction’s fiscal limits. It also recognized that that the long-standing
                 recommended national standard of 10 acres per 1,000 persons is not necessarily
General Plan—January 2013                                                                              3-5

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                          Chapter 3. Open Space and Recreation Element
                 appropriate for all communities, and that citizens should determine what is best
                 for their own communities (National Recreation and Park Association 1996).
                 In order to help communities evaluate their own parkland needs and develop
                 goals based on a national methodology, NRPA developed a parkland
                 classification system that identifies individual categories of parkland
                 classifications based on use, service area, and/or location criteria; desirable size;
                 recommended acres per 1,000 residents; and desirable characteristics. The
                 classification system should be tailored to address the community’s unique
                 demographic, economic, and natural resource factors noted above, in conjunction
                 with the community’s other General Plan goals, such as land use, safety,
                 conservation, circulation, and sustainability. These classifications may include,
                 but are not limited to, the following: mini-park, neighborhood park, school park,
                 community park, large urban park, natural resource area, greenway, sports
                 complex, special use, park trail, connector trail, on-street bikeway, all-terrain bike
                 trail, equestrian trail, private park, and private recreation facility. The 1996
                 Guidelines also provide recommended minimum goals that cities can use to
                 evaluate and plan for specific activities and facilities, including: sports fields,
                 courts, and rinks; tracks, trails; pools; and golf driving ranges and courses.
                 The former Environmental Resource Management Element (ERME), which was
                 adopted in 1980 and is being replaced by this update of the General Plan, called
                 for the City to implement a parkland standard of 3.5 acres per 1,000 residents.
                 Table OSRE-1 shows the acres required to achieve the standard proposed in the
                 ERME and the acres required to achieve the range identified in the 1990
                 Guidelines.
                 Table OSRE-1. Parkland Guidelines Comparison
                                                                                   Acres of Parkland
                                                                                                   Estimated
                  Overall Parkland Acreage                            Existing Population1        Population2
                  Guideline Options                                      (2010: 20,246)          (2015: 21,399)
                  3.5 acres per 1,000 residents (ERME)                        70.9                     74.9
                  6.25 acres per 1,000 residents (NRPA range)                126.5                   133.7
                  10 acres per 1,000 residents (NRPA range)                  202.5                   213.0
                  1
                    Department of Finance 2008.
                  2
                    Southern California Association of Governments 2004.
                 The combined acreage of the five parks SCE right-of-way and all joint-use
                 recreational facilities in La Cañada Flintridge is 26.21 acres. If the City considers
                 “parkland” to include open space areas that are owned by the City or other
                 public agencies and available to the public for trail use and other passive
                 recreation purposes, the total acreage provided is approximately 345.38 acres.
                 These parkland areas include Rockridge conservation area (5.37 acres), the Hall-
General Plan—January 2013                                                                                       3-6

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                   Chapter 3. Open Space and Recreation Element
                 Beckley Canyon property (5.48 acres), Cherry Canyon (135.93 acres owned by the
                 City), other City-owned property north of the A/B Development Line (64.22
                 acres), and the SCE right-of-way (approximately 108.17 acres). (Note: This is a
                 conservative estimate, because it does not include acreage devoted to trails that
                 are not also a part of a parcel designated for Parks and Recreation or Open Space,
                 or other publicly owned land upon which trails are located.) Figure OSRE-1
                 shows the recreational and open space properties and trail system noted above.
                 Although the City exceeds the total acreage goal based on 1990 Guidelines (10
                 acres per 1,000 residents), it has not evaluated the community’s needs based on
                 the parkland classification system described above or to developed parkland
                 goals based on the identified needs. During the planning period, the City will
                 develop a parkland plan that consists of an integrated and complementary
                 system of parks, recreation facilities, trails, bikeways, and open spaces that, when
                 considered together, meet the needs of a full range of community interests. The
                 Trails Master Plan will be the trails component of the parkland plan. Since the
                 City’s population is not expected to grow significantly, future parkland planning
                 will not have to accommodate a significant change in the number of residents.
                 To develop the plan, the City will evaluate its open space and recreation needs
                 based on community input, evaluation of existing constraints and opportunities,
                 demographic trends and projections, and other General Plan goals.
                 Opportunities for property
                 acquisition and funding will be
                 investigated. Some of the
                 constraints include the following:
                 the City is nearly built out; much
                 of the open space areas that
                 remain are valuable for protecting
                 and/or managing important
                 natural resources and minimizing
                 safety hazards; and the cost of
                 land in the City is very high. The                     Mayors’ Discovery Park
                 plan also should acknowledge the
                 community’s vision and goals, such as the desire to retain the City’s low density,
                 single-family character and the value citizens place on the equestrian nature of
                 the community. Demographic considerations should include the fact that the
                 population is aging and the number of families with young children is declining
                 and projected to continue to do so within the foreseeable future. (See Chapter 9,
                 Housing Element, for relevant demographic data.) Figure OSRE-1 illustrates how
                 the existing parkland spaces are linked currently.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                              3-7

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                Chapter 3. Open Space and Recreation Element
3.4.2            Open Space Planning
                 In response to the City’s ongoing goal of protecting open space areas in La
                 Cañada Flintridge, the Land Use Policy Map in the Land Use Element
                 redesignates all publicly owned open space land as Open Space. With this
                 redesignation, the total amount of land in the City that is designated Open Space
                 (public and private) increases from 856.12 acres to 927.34 acres. (See the Land
                 Use Policy Map in Chapter 2, Land Use Element, and Figure OSRE-1, for land
                 designated for public and private open space uses.)
                 As the City implements the policies and programs in the Conservation and
                 Safety elements during the planning period, it may determine that additional
                 open space is necessary to minimize potential impacts on people and property
                 from natural hazards, conserve and manage natural resources, and preserve
                 viewsheds. Figure OSRE-2 depicts how the existing publicly owned open space
                 currently contributes to resource protection. This map also provides a visual
                 guide for areas that the City may consider for future protection or acquisition,
                 such as property in Webber, Winery, and Gould canyons, and undeveloped
                 property south of Highland Drive in the San Rafael Hills.
3.4.3            Parks and Recreation Planning
                 During the planning period, the City will evaluate its park and recreation needs
                 and develop strategies for implementing them through development of the
                 parkland plan. Because La Cañada Flintridge is mostly built out, it may be
                 difficult to find vacant and available property located in areas that would be
                 appropriate for the
                 development of recreational
                 facilities. For example, lighted
                 fields and courts and noise
                 associated with sports activities
                 often can be incompatible with
                 single-family neighborhoods.
                 Therefore, the City will continue
                 to work with local partners,
                 such as LCUSD, to expand joint-
                 use recreation facilities. The                         Olzberg Park
                 City also will consider its
                 changing demographics as it identifies future recreational needs, such as the
                 trend toward an increasingly older population and a drop in the percentage of
                 people who have young children.
                 The City of La Cañada Flintridge Downtown Village Specific Plan (DVSP) originally
                 identified two sites for potential park development. One site, the 0.75-acre
General Plan—January 2013                                                                           3-8

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                  Chapter 3. Open Space and Recreation Element
                 Olberz Park in the new Town Center project, has been accepted by not yet
                 completed. The second site was redesignated from Park to Mixed Use 1 (shown
                 on Figure LUE-2, Downtown Village Specific Plan) to provide the potential for
                 an additional parking facility. (See Figure OSRE-1 for land designated for public
                 and private parks and recreation uses.)
3.4.4            Trail Planning
                 The Trails Master Plan will continue to provide direction for development,
                 management, usage, and maintenance of the trail system during the planning
                 period. One of the major objectives in the Trails Master Plan is the creation and
                 preservation of a core circular trail within the City that connects with other local
                 and regional trails. The core circular trail system allows trail users to enter or
                 exit the trail system at multiple points throughout the City and to travel up to 12
                 miles without having to leave the trail system. It provides citizens on the
                 westernmost portions of
                 the City a more
                 convenient and accessible
                 route to Cherry Canyon
                 and other remote natural
                 areas. Another key
                 objective is to link the
                 trail system to other
                 parkland uses, activity
                 centers, and bicycle paths
                 within and adjacent to
                 the City as a part of
                 creating an integrated parkland system for the City. Encouraging non-vehicular
                 circulation within the City is also an important objective and opportunity.
                 The Trails Master Plan is the implementing document for the General Plan
                 update for trails and trail-related issues during the planning period. However,
                 as the Trails Master Plan is a stand-alone document that was adopted by the City
                 Council by resolution, amendment of either the Trails Master Plan or the Trails
                 Map will not require amendment of the General Plan unless the changes would
                 create inconsistency with the General Plan’s goals, objectives, and policies.
3.5              Goals, Objectives, and Policies
                 The goals, objectives, and policies in the Open Space and Recreation Element
                 promote the preservation and enhancement of the City’s open space, recreation,
                 and trails resources. They emphasize and support the interrelationship between
                 all General Plan elements to achieve a community whose parkland resources also
General Plan—January 2013                                                                             3-9

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                  Chapter 3. Open Space and Recreation Element
                 support land use, circulation, conservation, and safety goals, objectives, and
                 policies.
                 OSRE Goal 1: Create an integrated park, recreation, open space, and
                 trail (parkland) system within the City that meets the needs of a full
                 range of community interests.
                 OSRE Objective 1.1: Develop and implement an integrated parkland plan
                 that is based on the recreational needs of the residents and preserves and
                 protects the community’s important natural resources.
                       OSRE Policy 1.1.1: Develop a classification system and acreage goals for
                       parkland components that: 1) are tailored to meet the needs of the
                       community; 2) integrate the vision, goals, objectives, and policies of the
                       General Plan and Trails Master Plan; and 3) reflect new data and
                       demographic information.
                       OSRE Policy 1.1.2: Integrate the City’s Bikeway Plan, which shows access to
                       primary destinations for commuting, schools, and recreational activities,
                       into the overall parkland plan.
                       OSRE Policy 1.1.3: Continue to work with citizens, organizations, volunteer
                       groups, and other community partners to identify and acquire land and
                       provide needed active and passive park, recreation, and open space lands.
                       OSRE Policy 1.1.4: Encourage and, where appropriate, require the inclusion
                       of recreation facilities, permanently dedicated open space, and/or trails
                       within new residential land divisions and residential and commercial
                       developments.
                       OSRE Policy 1.1.5: Coordinate the parkland plan and bikeway and trails
                       plans with regional facilities of the County and nearby cities.
                       OSRE Policy 1.1.6: Develop and utilize a funding program for acquisition
                       and/or development of identified parkland property and facilities that
                       includes a variety of methods, such as grants, easements, leaseholds, joint-
                       use, land donations, and gift annuities.
                       OSRE Policy 1.1.7: Develop brochures, maps, a website, and other
                       informational material that inform the community about the parks and
                       recreational opportunities within the City and their linkages with regional
                       systems and facilities.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            3-10

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                  Chapter 3. Open Space and Recreation Element
                 OSRE Goal 2: Preserve, protect, and enhance open space areas within
                 and adjacent to the City.
                 OSRE Objective 2.1: Preserve or enhance open space for preservation of
                 natural resources.
                      OSRE Policy 2.1.1: All publicly owned open space committed to open space
                      land or utility right-of-way should be preserved and designated Open Space
                      on the Land Use Policy Map.
                      OSRE Policy 2.1.2: Reasonable efforts should be made to acquire from
                      willing sellers undeveloped properties that contain significant community
                      features and resources, such as natural chaparral and wildlife habitat,
                      watersheds, areas of passive recreation, settings for riding and hiking trails
                      and outdoor education, and other community-wide hillside amenities.
                      Open space areas of particular value include Cherry Canyon, Webber
                      Canyon, Gould Canyon, Winery Canyon, Hall Beckley Canyon, Snover
                      Canyon, Hay Canyon, and their surrounding hillsides.
                       OSRE Policy 2.1.3: The semi-rural, hillside character of the community
                       should be maintained by regulation and development control, thus
                       preserving the unique setting and significant resources in the San Gabriel
                       Mountains and San Rafael Hills.
                       OSRE Policy 2.1.4: Privately owned recreational and open space areas
                       designed as an integral part of a land use development will be designated
                       Open Space on the Land Use Policy Map.
                       OSRE Policy 2.1.5: Preserve and expand non-vehicular access to the Angeles
                       National Forest trails and open lands remaining in the San Rafael Hills and
                       San Gabriel Mountains, in coordination with the federal Angeles Forest
                       Plan.
                       OSRE Policy 2.1.6: Provide input regarding the federal Angeles Forest Plan
                       to communicate the City’s goals for use and management of the Angeles
                       National Forest, such as expansion of joint use and improved reciprocal
                       mutual aid for emergencies (e.g., fires and flooding).
                       OSRE Policy 2.1.7: Encourage the dedication of additional lands to public
                       open space, in cooperation with the Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy,
                       Rim of the Valley Corridor Special Resource Study, and other partners and
                       open space conservation efforts.
                       OSRE Policy 2.1.8: Cooperate regionally with other municipalities and Los
                       Angeles County to preserve natural open space corridors for wildlife.
                       OSRE Policy 2.1.9: Consider the enhancement of the property currently
                       used for utility transmission lines for use as community gardens or other
                       complementary open space uses, within the constraints of the utility’s
                       requirements.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            3-11

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                    Chapter 3. Open Space and Recreation Element
                       OSRE Policy 2.1.10: Preserve and increase the amount of open space/forest
                       land within the City to provide carbon (CO2) sinks to help mitigate
                       greenhouse gas emissions.
                 OSRE Objective 2.2: Provide and preserve open space areas for the
                 protection of public health and safety.
                       OSRE Policy 2.2.1: Identify potential public safety hazards, such as
                       earthquake fault zones, earthquake-induced landslides, wildfires, debris and
                       mudflows, and unstable slopes, and designate undeveloped areas subject to
                       such hazards as open space areas to minimize potential impacts on people
                       and property.
                       OSRE Policy 2.2.2: Discourage development within open space areas
                       identified for the protection of public safety.
                       OSRE Policy 2.2.3: Provide a combination of brush clearance, irrigated areas,
                       and fire-resistant planting adjacent to large areas of native vegetation to
                       serve as a buffer between highly hazardous natural fuels and developed
                       areas. Ensure that the buffers will be completed in a manner that is sensitive
                       to plant and animal habitats and will promote erosion control.
                       OSRE Policy 2.2.4: In an effort to protect residents from potential adverse
                       environmental impacts, health and safety hazards and audible nuisances,
                       prohibit the use of off-road vehicles from operating within the City limits,
                       except as otherwise authorized by the federal Angeles Forest Plan.
                 OSRE Goal 3: Provide and enhance park and recreation opportunities
                 within the City.
                 OSRE Objective 3.1: Encourage continued cooperation between public and
                 private recreational service providers to assure a wide variety of
                 recreational, educational, and cultural programs for all segments of the
                 community.
                       OSRE Policy 3.1.1: Consider the National Recreation and Park Association
                       Guidelines when evaluating and planning for specific activities and
                       facilities, such as sports fields, courts, and rinks; tracks; trails; pools; and golf
                       driving ranges and courses.
                       OSRE Policy 3.1.2: Consider the community’s changing demographics as the
                       City identifies future recreational needs.
                       OSRE Policy 3.1.3: Consider the acquisition and/or development of
                       playfields (e.g., softball and soccer), picnic grounds, and other similar
                       recreation facilities and maintain the ones the City has.
                       OSRE Policy 3.1.4: Consider developing and imposing impact fees for
                       recreational purposes (such as for trails, acquisition of open space, new
                       recreational facilities, and other purposes that may be identified in the
General Plan—January 2013                                                                              3-12

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                    Chapter 3. Open Space and Recreation Element
                       proposed parkland plan), as a requirement of new residential land divisions
                       and new residential developments over a certain threshold (to be
                       determined through the integrated parkland plan).
                       OSRE Policy 3.1.5: Cooperate with public agencies, public utilities, and
                       private organizations, including the Los Angeles County Flood Control
                       District, the Los Angeles County Fire Department, Los Angeles County
                       Department of Parks and Recreation, LCUSD, and SCE to promote the use
                       and development of public recreation uses on their land. Such facilities are
                       important to the City's efforts in providing a balanced recreation program.
                       OSRE Policy 3.1.6: Implement the Link Linear Park identified in the Link and
                       West Gateway Corridor Improvement Recommendations (2004) from the Crescenta-
                       Cañada YMCA west to the commercial area, using excess right-of-way on the
                       south side of Foothill Boulevard, and screen the high retaining wall.
                       OSRE Policy 3.1.7: Create a multi-use pedestrian/bike parkway along the
                       south side of Foothill Boulevard between Mayors’ Discovery Park and the
                       YMCA, with possible further extension to the west, as per the
                       recommendations in the Link and West Gateway Corridor Improvement
                       Recommendations (2004).
                       OSRE Policy 3.1.8: Encourage the preservation, maintenance, expansion,
                       and development of new privately owned recreation facilities.
                 OSRE Goal 4: Preserve, improve, and expand existing trails and
                 promote coordinated and comprehensive trail systems for hikers,
                 bicyclists, and equestrians.
                 OSRE Objective 4.1: Implement the Trails Master Plan and associated
                 implementing policies and ordinances as the blueprint for continued
                 enhancement and protection of the trails.
                       OSRE Policy 4.1.1: The Trails Master Plan is the implementation document
                       for the General Plan regarding trails and trail-related issues.
                       OSRE Policy 4.1.2: The Trails Map is maintained and updated as the Trails
                       Master Plan is implemented, and is available for public reference and use.
                       The Trails Map is amended by separate resolution of the City Council as
                       additional routes, trails, and facilities are deemed appropriate.
                       OSRE Policy 4.1.3: Amendment of either the Trails Master Plan or Trails
                       Map will not require amendment of the General Plan unless the changes
                       would create inconsistency with the General Plan’s goals, objectives, and
                       policies.
                       OSRE Policy 4.1.4: Use the Community Development Department Project Review
                       Procedure: Trails (Appendix 7 in the Trails Master Plan, or as modified by the
                       Community Development Director) when reviewing proposed development
                       that is located adjacent to or within current trails, existing trail easement(s),
General Plan—January 2013                                                                              3-13

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                  Chapter 3. Open Space and Recreation Element
                       or proposed trail location(s), to evaluate and require mitigation of potential
                       impacts on the trail system.
                       OSRE Policy 4.1.5: Implement the Trails ordinance (Chapter 4.64 of the
                       La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code) to regulate conduct on a City-owned
                       trail, on a non-City-owned trail, and on property adjoining and abutting all
                       trails.
                 OSRE Objective 4.2: Implement the Trails Master Plan through dedication
                 of land, purchase (through various funding sources), easements, or other
                 methods.
                       OSRE Policy 4.2.1: Continue to seek dedication of land and/or fees in lieu of
                       such dedication for trails as a requirement of new residential land divisions,
                       where such dedications or fees have the opportunity to augment the existing
                       trails system.
                       OSRE Policy 4.2.2: Encourage public agencies, public utilities, and private
                       organizations to promote the use and development of trail facilities on their
                       land.
                       OSRE Policy 4.2.3: Promote sustainable maintenance practices of the trail
                       system by public agencies, public utilities, and private organizations and
                       property owners to maintain and keep in good repair all recreational trails,
                       and seek to prevent loss of use or access to existing trails by encroachment
                       or interference from abutting property owners.
                       OSRE Policy 4.2.4: Maintain efforts to work with regional organizations,
                       such as the Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy, to secure funding for the
                       ongoing implementation of the Trails Master Plan.
                       OSRE Policy 4.2.5: Pursue alternative funding sources that support
                       recreational uses, such as bikeway monies, to provide a balanced
                       recreational trail system for the community. Where appropriate, the trails
                       will be identified as an adjunct of the Bikeway Plan.
                       OSRE Policy 4.2.6: Assemble the right-of-way and create improvements for a
                       circular trail to connect Mayors’ Discovery Park, the Rockridge conservation
                       area, the Link Linear Park on Foothill Boulevard, and the YMCA.
                       OSRE Policy 4.2.7: Install and maintain trail signage that promotes safety
                       and courtesy between all trail users, including equestrians, hikers, and
                       bicyclists, and provides information regarding the trails and their use.
                       OSRE Policy 4.2.8: Preserve the core circular trail that connects with other
                       regional trail networks.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            3-14

          Chapter 4
Conservation Elem ent

                                                            4.0
                                             CONSERVATION ELEMENT
4.1            Introduction
               The word conservation can be defined as the careful preservation, protection, or
               planned management of a natural resource to prevent its exploitation,
               destruction, or neglect (Merriam-Webster, Inc. 2008). The City of La Cañada
               Flintridge is fortunate to possess many topographic and biological resources—
               such as trees, wildlife, and stunning mountain and valley views—which
               contribute to its unique
               character, beauty, and
               desirability as a place to
               live, work, and recreate.
               To maintain a healthy
               and vibrant community,
               natural resources, such
               as water and energy,
               must be preserved and
               used in a sustainable
               manner, and waste must
               be managed responsibly. In addition, cultural resources provide a link to a city’s
               past and help shape its present-day character; these too must be preserved. The
               Vision Statement prepared for this update to the City’s General Plan emphasizes
               the value the community places on all of these resources and the desire to
               conserve and protect them.
               The purpose of the Conservation Element is to identify important natural and
               cultural resources in the City and region that are consumed or affected by the
               decisions and actions of those who live, work, and recreate in the City, and to
               provide policies and implementation programs to protect those resources and
               guide their utilization in a sustainable manner. The topics addressed in the
               Conservation Element include water, energy, and biological resources;
               topographic and visual resources; and cultural, historical, and paleontological
               resources. Air quality is addressed in Chapter 8, Air Quality Element. The
General Plan—January 2013                                                                      4-1

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                              Chapter 4. Conservation Element
                 Conservation Element reflects the City’s recognition of the importance of taking
                 an overall sustainable and “green” approach to decision-making in the planning
                 period. It also acknowledges the interrelationship of all of the other General Plan
                 elements in carrying out the City’s goal of promoting sustainability.
4.2              Setting
                 Although relatively modest in area, the City is rich in the quantity and array of
                 natural resources it enjoys. Its location—in the foothills of the San Gabriel
                 Mountains to the north and the San Rafael Hills to the south, and within the
                 Arroyo Seco Watershed—provides the City with significant vegetative and
                 wildlife habitats, as well as prominent landforms that contribute to its visual
                 character. However, its location within Southern California also constrains the
                 amount of water and energy resources that are available for the foreseeable
                 future.
4.3              Existing Conditions
4.3.1            Water Resources
                 The City is located within the southern end of the Arroyo Seco Watershed, which
                 is a subwatershed of the Los Angeles River Watershed. Within the City, streams
                 flow through several canyons and across the foothills and flatlands into the
                 Arroyo Seco River by way of Flint Wash, which is a major tributary to the Arroyo
                 Seco. Flint Wash begins near Descanso Gardens and runs along the toe of the
                 San Rafael Hills, carrying the
                 flow from these canyons and
                 street runoff into the
                 Hahamongna Watershed
                 Park, where it enters just
                 north of Devil’s Gate Dam
                 (North East Trees and Arroyo
                 Seco Foundation 2002). A
                 portion of Flint Wash is a
                 natural, unlined channel; the
                 remainder consists of a series
                 of lined drainage channels on            Water Storage Facility in La Cañada Flintridge
                 a Los Angeles County Flood
                 Control District easement, draining over 5 square miles of the City (Northeast
                 Trees 2006). There are several debris basins within the City. These are
                 engineered structures designed to collect sediment and any loose debris eroded
                 from the steep hillside watershed of the San Gabriel Mountains above, and
General Plan—January 2013                                                                                4-2

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                             Chapter 4. Conservation Element
                 prevent damage to downstream properties and channels. A map of the local
                 hydrology is provided in Figure CNE-1, while surface water and drainage are
                 shown on Figure CNE-2.
                 The City is located in the Raymond Groundwater Basin. Natural recharge in the
                 basin is mainly from direct percolation of precipitation and percolation of
                 ephemeral streamflow from the San Gabriel Mountains. The principal streams
                 that recharge the basin are the Arroyo Seco, Eaton Creek, and Santa Anita Creek.
                 Surface waters of the Arroyo Seco are contaminated by urban runoff, as are most
                 of the lower-elevation watersheds passing through urban areas in Southern
                 California. The Arroyo Seco is listed on the Clean Water Act Section 303(d) list of
                 impaired waterways for coliform bacteria and trash. In general, the City’s
                 groundwater supply requires dilution with other high-quality water supply
                 sources to meet drinking water standards.
                 For example, high nitrate concentrations are found in water from some of the
                 wells in Pasadena. Originally, the City managed sewage with individual septic
                 tank systems, which have been known to leak and cause nitrate contamination in
                 groundwater. Currently, the City has many sewer lines installed and is in the
                 process of incorporating portions of the City into the sewer system. Once
                 individual septic systems are removed, the nitrate-contaminated groundwater
                 should drop below State and federal thresholds.
                 Four water companies serve the City: Mesa Crest Water Company, La Cañada
                 Irrigation District, Valley Water Company, and Crescenta Valley Water District.
                 All four are members of the Foothill Municipal Water District, which is a
                 member of the Metropolitan Water District (MWD) of Southern California. Mesa
                 Crest Water Company, La Cañada Irrigation District, and Valley Water
                 Company have pumping rights to the Raymond Basin. The Crescenta Valley
                 Water District obtains its water from the Los Angeles District local wells in the
                 Verdugo Basin. However, over 70 percent of the water distributed in the City is
                 imported from Northern California (Metropolitan Water District of Southern
                 California 2008).
4.3.2            Energy
                 Southern California Edison (SCE), a subsidiary of Edison
                 International, provides electricity to the City. The City
                 receives its natural gas through the Southern California Gas
                 Company. Development proposals are required to request
                 “will serve” letters on a case-by-case basis.
                 California Assembly Bill (AB) 32, the Global Warming
                                                                                       SCE Right-of-Way
                 Solutions Act, requires a reduction of the State’s greenhouse
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            4-3

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                             Chapter 4. Conservation Element
                 gas (GHG) emissions to 1990 levels by 2020 to address global climate change. An
                 enforceable Statewide cap will be phased in starting in 2012 (AB 32). Although
                 the majority of GHG emissions in California are from vehicles, increasing the use
                 of renewable energy sources and improving efficiency requirements are two
                 methods to assist in reducing overall GHG emissions. (See Chapter 8, Air Quality
                 Element, for more detail regarding AB 32).
4.3.3            Biological Resources
                 The City contains significant biological resources that contribute to the
                 community’s semi-rural character. These biological resources also are part of a
                 larger ecosystem within the Los Angeles Basin and are connected to significant
                 resources outside of the City, including the San Gabriel Mountains, the Angeles
                 National Forest, the Hahamongna Watershed, and the Arroyo Seco Watershed.
                 Open space areas with biological resources include: Cherry Canyon in the San
                 Rafael Hills abutting the southwestern edge of the City; wooded canyons in the
                 San Gabriel Mountains and
                 the San Rafael Hills in
                 which spring-fed,
                 permanent, and seasonal
                 streams flow; private and
                 government owned open
                 space on the slopes of the
                 San Gabriel Mountains; the
                 Angeles National Forest,
                 located on the City’s
                 northern boundary, which
                 provides substantial open                            Cherry Canyon
                 space resources; and the SCE easement, which serves as open space for visual
                 and low intensity recreational purposes and as a wildlife corridor.
                 Within the open space areas of the City containing native vegetation, four
                 dominant vegetation communities were identified.
                         Coastal sage scrub–chaparral is the most dominant native vegetation type
                          within the open spaces of the City. It can be found in Cherry Canyon and
                          the San Gabriel Mountains and on open space hillsides near the City’s
                          eastern border.
                         Oak woodlands can be found in Cherry Canyon and the San Gabriel
                          Mountains along the City’s northern border and in other isolated canyons
                          and near the flood control basins.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            4-4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Arroyo Seco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Angeles National Forest
                                                                                                                                      La Crescenta-Montrose
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Se c o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Arroy
                                                                                                                                                                                              La Cañada Flintridge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Altadena
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Fl
                                                                                                                                                                                                          in
                                                                                                                                                                                                               tW                      co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 as             Arro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     yo S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Arroyo Seco
                                                                                                                                                                     Glendale
                                                                                                                                                       sh
                                                                                                                                                    Wa
                                                                                                                                            du   go
                                                                                                                                        Ver
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Pasadena
K:\GIS\PROJECTS\CITY_OF_LA_CANADA_FLINTRDIGE\00096_07\MAPDOC\SCREEN_CHECK_REVISED\CONSERVATION_ELEMENT\FIGCNE_1.MXD AWC (03-26-09)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    San Marino
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        South Pasadena
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         br  a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              as
                                                                                                                                                                                     Los Angeles                                                                                             W           San Gabriel
                                                                                                                                                                 er
                                                                                                                                                                                iv
                                                                                                                                                                        geles R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         City of La Cañada Flintridge
                                                                                                                                                                 Los An
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Arroyo Seco Watershed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Devils Gate Reservoir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Unnamed Drainage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Waterways
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FEMA Flood Zone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         100-year flooding; no BFEs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         outside the 100- and 500-year floodplains
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0            0.5                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Miles         undetermined but possible flood hazards
                                                                                                                                     Source: ESRI Hydro (2003)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Figure CNE-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Hydrology Map
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       City of La Cañada Flintridge


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               royo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Seco
                                                                                                                                                                                                     on
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Cany
                                                                                                                                                                                            Su                                       on
                                                                                                                                                                                              tton                              Cany
                                                                                                                                                                       Can
                                                                                                                                                                          yo n                     lly
                                                                                                                                                                               Mullally Mulla                                                                                                                                              Angeles National Forest
                                                                                                                                                                          Debris Basin   Mullally
                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                         (                                                    Can
                                                                                                                                                                                         Debris Basin                                            yo n
                                                                                                                                                                                           on
                                                                                                                                                                                     any
                                                                                                                                                                                rC
                                                                                                                                                                            ove
                                                                                                                                                                          Sn
                                                                                                                                                                               Snover
                                                                                                                                                                               Debris Basin
                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ny
                                                                                                                                                                                                   an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Gould
                                                                                                                                                                                                      yo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                         n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              y
                                                                                                                                                                                         W                                                 er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        n
                                                                                                                                                                                          eb
                                                                                                                                                                                            be                                                                       Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                              rC                                       W                               ny o
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Be                           Winery
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ckle                                                Hay Debris
                                                                                                                                                                                                               y                      Debris Basin                               Big Briar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Basin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (                                              Debris Basin              Upper Gould
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (                                           Debris Basin
                                                                                                                                                        Pi                            Hall Beckley                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                          cken
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                              s                       Debris Basin                                                                                         Harter Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                     (                                                                                                     Debris Basin
                                                                                                                                                         ( Pickens
                                                                                                                                                         ! Debris Basin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Hay
                                                                                                                                                                      Hall                                                                                                                                 Gould Debris
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Basin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       STATE HWY 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   nyo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      O   TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               I LL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        VD
                                                                                                                                                                                                               VERDUGO BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GOULD AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Flin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      tW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ash
k:\irvine\gis\projects\city_of_la_canada_flintrdige\00096_07\mapdoc\general_plan\2010nov\figcne_2_surface_waterdrainage.mxd AWC & SM (11-03-10)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            KSH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  I RE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                               h
                                                                                                                                                                                   Verdugo Was
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           VY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CHA                                                       OA K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           GR O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               D DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        L AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 HIGH                        DR
                                                                                                                                                              City of La Cañada Flintridge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Arroyo Seco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ±
                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                        (     Debris Basin Locations
                                                                                                                                                              Highways
                                                                                                                                                              Waterways
                                                                                                                                                              Devils Gate Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                   0   1,000   2,000                 4,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Feet
                                                                                                                                              Source : California Department of Water Resources (2002); ESRI USA Imagery (1m; 2007)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure CNE-2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Surface Water and Drainage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      City of La Cañada Flintridge


City of La Cañada Flintridge                                            Chapter 4. Conservation Element
                         Riparian communities can be found in Cherry Canyon and Flint Wash
                          and toward canyon bottoms where seasonal and intermittent streams
                          flow.
                         Disturbed nonnative grassland can be found on open hillsides near the
                          eastern and southwestern borders of the City, along the northern border
                          of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), in Flint Canyon, and over
                          parts of several trails.
                 The City has an extensive urban forest that contributes to the City’s scenic beauty
                 and enhances resource conservation. The urban forest also provides habitat for
                 wildlife, especially birds. The City’s Preservation, Protection, and Removal of
                 Trees Ordinance (Chapter 4.26 of the Zoning Ordinance) is intended to preserve
                 and encourage the regeneration of the urban forest.
                 The open spaces and urban forest described above provide valuable habitats for
                 a variety of wildlife species, including resident and migratory birds and animals.
                 Many of these species, such as squirrels, rabbits, raccoons, and deer, have
                 adapted to the urbanization of their environment and often can be found within
                 residential neighborhoods.
                 A California Native Plant Society (CNPS) list of special-status plant species and a
                 California Natural Diversity Database (CNDDB) list of special-status wildlife
                 species were reviewed for this update to the Conservation Element. The review
                 found that many special-status plant and wildlife species are known to occur, or
                 have a reasonable probability of occurring, in or near the City. Special-status
                 biological resources are species listed under federal or State Endangered Species
                 Acts, species listed as Species of Special Concern by the State, species protected
                 under official conservation programs, resources considered sensitive under
                 CEQA, and species or habitats designated by legislation as requiring protection.
                 Legal protection for special-status species varies widely, from the relatively
                 comprehensive protection extended to listed threatened and endangered species
                 to no legal status at present.
4.3.4            Topographic and Visual Resources
                 The City is located in the east end of the Crescenta Valley, nestled between the
                 San Gabriel Mountains to the north and the San Rafael Hills to the south. The
                 San Gabriel
                 Mountains
                 and Angeles
                 National
                 Forest
                 provide a
                 dramatic
General Plan—January 2013                                                                           4-5

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                             Chapter 4. Conservation Element
                 panoramic backdrop for the City to the north, while the north face of the San
                 Rafael Hills frames the City’s southern border. The views of the valley,
                 including the Los Angeles Basin and the Arroyo Seco, sweep from the northeast
                 to the southwest through the City. In addition to the spectacular topography of
                 the mountains and hills, the City is lushly vegetated in the valley and up the
                 flanks of the foothills with an extensive urban forest, which also contributes to
                 the overall beauty of the community. Although the City is nearly fully
                 developed, it retains a semi-rural atmosphere that contributes to its scenic
                 beauty.
                 These topographic and visual resources are highly valued by the residents and
                 appreciated by those who work, recreate, and drive through La Cañada
                 Flintridge. The vistas and scenery can be experienced throughout the City, both
                 from private and public vantage points. Private vantage points include views
                 from individual residences, commercial and other buildings, and private
                 recreational facilities. Public vantage points are those locations within the City
                 that can be accessed by every viewer group; key public vantage points include
                 the Interstate (I) 210 and State Route (SR) 2 freeways, as they enter and pass
                 through the City; Foothill Boulevard; Angeles Crest Highway (from I-210 north
                 to the Angeles National Forest); and public recreational and open space areas,
                 such as Cherry Canyon and trails throughout the City.
                 Of special concern is the negative visual effect that future development on
                 remaining hillsides could create as seen from private and public vantage points.
                 The majority of these undeveloped properties are steep, with slopes in excess of
                 30 to 40 percent; many are visually prominent and contain or are surrounded by
                 significant aesthetic resources, such as prominent ridgelines, canyons, and knolls.
                 New development along roadways also has the potential to obstruct views of the
                 mountains and hills as seen by those working, walking, and driving on them. In
                 1980 the City adopted scenic corridors as a part of the approval of the
                 Environmental Resource Management Element of the General Plan. The
                 designated scenic corridors include Foothill Boulevard, I-210, SR-2, and Verdugo
                 Boulevard east of SR-2.
4.3.5            Cultural, Historical, and Paleontological
                 Resources
                 Each city has its own unique history—the people, events, and forces that
                 determine how it was settled in recent times; its place in a historical context,
                 which often shaped its recent history; and its prehistoric past, which reveals itself
                 through archaeological investigations. Together, these components of a city’s
                 history and origin contribute to its present-day uniqueness and community
                 heritage. Cultural resources include physical remains of past human activities:
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            4-6

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                              Chapter 4. Conservation Element
                 prehistoric and historical archaeological remains; historical architectural remains,
                 including building, structures, and other features of the built environment; and
                 places of importance to Native Americans.
                 The first known inhabitants of the area were most likely the Gabrielino (Tongva)
                 Indians, whose territory included the watersheds of the nearby Los Angeles and
                 San Gabriel Rivers, and extended into the San Gabriel Mountains to the north.
                 Archaeological studies in the vicinity of the City indicate the presence of Native
                 American archaeological sites. The records search conducted for this update to
                 the General Plan indicated that no prehistoric or historical archaeological sites
                 have been recorded in the City. However, considering the history of the area,
                 any redevelopment activities have the potential to expose buried deposits.
                 Sensitive archaeological sites are likely to exist within areas that have not been
                 systematically surveyed.
                 The foundation of the present-day City was established in the early 1920s when
                 developers began to subdivide the area to attract buyers with the beautiful
                 scenery (City of La Cañada Flintridge 1980). In 1976, the two unincorporated
                 communities of La Cañada and Flintridge joined to become one incorporated
                 city, called La Cañada Flintridge.
                 A number of buildings within the City
                 have been identified as significant
                 historical resources at the federal, State,
                 and local levels. The City has one
                 structure, the Lanterman House, listed
                 in the National Register of Historic
                 Places. The Lanterman House was
                 opened as a museum and archive in
                 1993. It is owned by the City and its
                 management is supported by the
                 Lanterman House Foundation. Over
                 50 historical structures identified by                    Lanterman House
                 the local historical society as significant
                 predate 1935, and are noted in a previous study for sanitary sewer improvements
                 (McKenna 2000).
                 Under the Mills Act, State law authorizes cities to enter into contract with the
                 owners of qualified historic properties to provide property tax reduction as an
                 incentive for the use, rehabilitation, and restoration of historically designated
                 properties. In early 2012 the City adopted a Mills Act Ordinance to establish the
                 use of Mills Act contracts to foster the preservation of qualifying landmark and
                 historic properties in La Cañada Flintridge.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                             4-7

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                              Chapter 4. Conservation Element
4.3.6            Solid Waste/Recycling
                 The City does not provide trash collection services and requires all generators to
                 contract with one of the waste haulers permitted by the City. All waste haulers
                 operating within the City must enter into an agreement and sign a contract with
                 the City. The contracts include minimum waste diversion (recycling)
                 requirements for waste collected from each of the services’ sectors (i.e.,
                 residential [35 percent], commercial [28 percent], and roll-off boxes [70 percent]).
                 The City has mandatory green waste collection and recycling programs for all
                 single-family residences, which assists in diverting waste from the landfill. The
                 City will investigate expanding the program to commercial operations and
                 multi-family residences. The City currently requires demolition and building
                 permit applicants with projects of 1,000 square feet or more to submit a Building
                 Debris Management Report and performance security. Such “Covered Projects”
                 are required to divert (recycle) at least 50 percent of all project-related
                 construction and demolition debris.
                 La Cañada Flintridge adopted the State “Model Ordinance Relating to Areas for
                 Collecting and Loading Recyclable Materials in Development Projects” pursuant
                 to California Assembly Bill 2176 (Chapter 879, Statutes of 2004). This ordinance
                 requires provision of adequate areas for collecting and loading recyclable
                 materials in development projects. The City Code also includes provisions
                 pertaining to multi-family development standards and guidelines for the
                 Residential Planed Development (RPD) Zone and R-3 Multi-family Zone
                 specifying minimum design standards for trash and recycling enclosures.
4.4              Planning for Resource Conservation,
                 Efficiency, and Sustainability
                 The terms sustainable and green have become common parlance when referring to
                 principles, practices, and application of techniques that conserve energy, water,
                 and other natural resources; manage the use of renewable and non-renewable
                 resources in an efficient and responsible manner; preserve and improve the
                 environment, from the local to the global level; reduce pollution; improve human
                 health and safety; and strengthen the economy. Green Technology, a California-
                 based non-profit initiative, defines sustainability as “Meeting the needs of society
                 in ways that can continue indefinitely into the future without damaging or
                 depleting natural resources. In short, meeting present needs without
                 compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs” (Green
                 Technology 2006).
General Plan—January 2013                                                                             4-8

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                               Chapter 4. Conservation Element
                 As the City is nearly built out, the minimal amount of additional development that
                 is possible within the planning period will not have a significant impact on the
                 City’s natural resources or the supply of water and energy resources. However,
                 the sustainable and efficient use and management of resources can reduce the
                 existing demand for energy and water. Those “green” practices and techniques
                 also can assist the City, as well as State and federal agencies, in their goals and
                 responsibilities to reduce the use of non-renewable resources, reduce GHG
                 emissions, conserve water, and improve the overall quality of the environment.
                 The City is committed to preserving and protecting all of the valuable resources
                 that make it special and unique, including natural, topographic and visual, and
                 cultural resources. The City also recognizes that local decisions can have far-
                 reaching impacts, from the regional to the global scale.
                 California is taking a leadership role in energy efficiency and conservation,
                 sustainability, GHG emission reduction, green building techniques, and green
                 purchasing practices. In 2004, the Governor issued Executive Order S-20-04,
                 known as the “Green Building Initiative,” which calls for all levels of government
                 and the private sector to follow the State’s example by implementing sustainable
                 building practices and energy efficiency efforts Statewide.
                 The Conservation Element reflects the City’s commitment to “going green” in
                 this planning period and its goal to encourage the community to do the same. It
                 also reflects the City’s intent to work cooperatively with other agencies and
                 community partners to manage resources responsibly, efficiently, and in a
                 sustainable manner. The City’s plan to conserve its valuable resources is
                 summarized below and described further in Section 4.5, Goals, Objectives, and
                 Policies. In addition, policies and programs have been incorporated into other
                 General Plan elements to work collectively to support land use, open space and
                 recreation, circulation, air quality, and other decisions to implement sustainable
                 resource management principles. Conservation of air resources is addressed in
                 Chapter 8, Air Quality Element.
4.4.1            Water Resource Sustainability
                 During the planning period, the City will undertake efforts to protect and
                 enhance water resources through water conservation and water quality
                 improvement efforts.
                 Each of the four water companies that serve the City already participates in a
                 Water Conservation Alert System and promotes voluntary water conservation
                 guidelines. During the planning period, the City will work with the local water
                 agencies and the Foothill Municipal Water District to encourage residents and
                 other water consumers to increase their water conservation efforts. In addition,
                 new development and rehabilitation projects will be encouraged to make
                 maximum use of water conservation techniques.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                              4-9

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                              Chapter 4. Conservation Element
                 In 1993, the City recognized the need to conserve water through adoption and
                 implementation of its existing Water Efficient Landscaping Chapter (Chapter
                 4.23) of the Zoning Ordinance. This ordinance currently applies to “all new and
                 rehabilitated landscaping for public agency projects and nonresidential private
                 development projects that require a grading permit, building permit, or use
                 permit” and “all new or rehabilitated landscaping in any common area in any
                 residential project, whether single-family or multi-family” (La Cañada Flintridge
                 Municipal Code, Section 4.23.030). Lush landscaping and an extensive urban
                 forest are two signature features of the City’s character. However, since over 60
                 percent of the land in the City is devoted to single-family uses, considerable
                 opportunity still exists to reduce water usage for landscaping without sacrificing
                 the value that landscaping brings to the community. The City will evaluate
                 whether to extend its existing Water Efficient Landscaping Ordinance to single-
                 family residences or develop a modified version of the ordinance for that use.
                 Another water conservation measure the City will pursue is promoting
                 compliance with Senate Bill (SB) 407 (Chapter 587, Statutes of 2009) prior to the
                 mandatory time frames (between January 1, 2014 and January 1, 2019). This
                 statute (Civil Code Section 1101.1, et seq.) establishes Statewide requirements for
                 the replacement of old, non-compliant plumbing fixtures in existing residential
                 and commercial property (built and occupied on or before January 1, 1994) with
                 new, water conserving models. Water conserving models would meet the
                 requirements of current building standards.
                 The City will also address water quality issues and concerns during the planning
                 period through efforts to manage stormwater runoff, reduce water pollution, and
                 enhance groundwater recharge through public and private sector efforts.
                 The City will coordinate and cooperate with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
                 and other governmental and environmental partners to restore and preserve the
                 natural hydrological functions of the Arroyo Seco Watershed. One of the key
                 projects for the City is to pursue implementation of the proposed Flint Wash
                 Restoration Project, which would involve removal of substantial amounts of
                 existing debris, restoration of natural riparian plant species and habitat, and
                 protection of the Flint Canyon Trail in areas where it is vulnerable to erosion.
                 Environmental enhancement opportunities that were identified in the list of
                 potential Link/West Gateway Corridor Improvement Recommendations,
                 prepared in 2004, also will be undertaken during this planning period. The first
                 project includes enhancement of Rockland Place Street-End where it terminates
                 on the north side of Foothill Boulevard, at the east end of the existing Big Lots!
                 parking lot. This project involves redeveloping the area into a pocket park with
                 native landscaping, dry stream rockscaping to direct runoff, and permeable
                 surfaces for groundwater recharge. Another project includes protection and
                 restoration of creek/drainage sites along Foothill Boulevard and the creation of a
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            4-10

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                              Chapter 4. Conservation Element
                 comprehensive look to the bridges over the numerous stream crossings along
                 Foothill Boulevard.
                 Many simple and cost-effective techniques can be applied to any site to manage
                 stormwater, reduce runoff and pollution, and assist in maintaining or restoring
                 the natural hydrology of the site. This stormwater management strategy is
                 known as Low Impact Development (LID). LID techniques that can be
                 implemented easily on commercial or residential projects include:
                         installation of permeable paving material,
                         use of bioretention areas and bioswales in landscaped areas,
                         use of rain barrels and cisterns,
                         planting of street trees, and
                         installation of vegetated filter strips.
                 The City will encourage use of LID techniques through public outreach and
                 education, and will consider adding design guidelines and/or development
                 standards to require the use of LID techniques in new or rehabilitated projects.
                 The City also will apply LID techniques in its own public projects and will
                 publicize and promote them as demonstration projects for the community. An
                 example of a potential drainage enhancement demonstration project on private
                 property is the Ross Dress-for-Less drainage enhancement project that was
                 identified in the list of potential Link/West Gateway Corridor Improvement
                 Recommendations prepared in 2004.
                 Finally, continued construction of sewers to eliminate septic systems will reduce
                 the rate of infiltration of nitrates to the groundwater system.
4.4.2            Energy Resource Sustainability
                 The City will encourage conservation of energy resources and will address its
                 responsibilities under AB 32 (regarding global climate change) and other energy
                 conservation legislation during the planning period through implementation of
                 sustainability principles and green programs. The City will encourage
                 implementation of green building and site design programs through
                 implementation of the California Green Building Code (Title 24 of the California
                 Code of Regulations [CCR]), development of incentive programs and/or
                 development guidelines and regulations, such as Build It Green and Leadership
                 in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) building and construction
                 standards and Cool Communities Measures. It also will evaluate the extent to
                 which the State’s Green Building Action Plan could be applied to existing or
                 proposed City facilities. (See Chapter 8.0, Air Quality Element, for air quality
                 conservation strategies.)
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            4-11

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                              Chapter 4. Conservation Element
                 Some of the City’s service providers are already implementing strategies to
                 address global climate change and energy efficiency and sustainability. SCE is
                 working toward reducing GHG emissions by providing customers with energy
                 from renewable resources, such as solar, biomass, hydropower, and geothermal.
                 SCE is also working with the California Action Registry on a new program called
                 the “Cool Planet Project,” which will provide SCE customers with incentives
                 when they participate in energy efficiency programs. The Southern California
                 Gas Company also encourages environmental consciousness by offering rebate
                 programs for energy efficient homes. The City will support and encourage these
                 and future energy conservation efforts.
4.4.3            Biological Resource Sustainability
                 The City will implement policies and programs to preserve its biological
                 resources, including vegetation and wildlife. These efforts also will support the
                 conservation of other resources, including water and energy, and will benefit
                 regional resources, such as the Hahamongna and Arroyo Seco Watersheds. The
                 City will consider evaluating and mapping all vegetation and habitat
                 communities on property that is designated open space on the Land Use Map in
                 order to make informed decisions regarding development and/or preservation.
                 Riparian corridors and coastal sage scrub–chaparral communities represent
                 significant biological resources in the City. These native vegetation communities
                 provide a physical connection between the mountains and the ocean, provide
                 refuge for wildlife in urban areas, enhance water quality and groundwater
                 recharge, reduce flooding, and potentially support many special-status species.
                 The City will take measures to preserve and enhance the riparian corridors and
                 sage scrub-chaparral communities, such as through participation in the Flint Wash
                 Restoration Project and implementation of the Hillside Development Ordinance.
                 La Cañada Flintridge’s urban forest is also a valuable biological resource;
                 therefore, the City will continue to implement its Preservation, Protection and
                 Removal of Trees Ordinance. In addition, the City will encourage the planting of
                 native tree species on public and private lands.
                 A key to protecting biological resources is to preserve the open spaces in which
                 they exist. The Land Use Element redesignates approximately 43 acres of
                 government-owned Hillside Residential property north of the A/B Line to Open
                 Space, and redesignates a total of 20.4 acres of other property to Open Space.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            4-12

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                               Chapter 4. Conservation Element
4.4.4            Prominent Landform and Viewscape
                 Conservation
                 The City continues to place a high priority on preserving and protecting its
                 prominent landforms and viewscapes, including ridgelines, knolls, valleys,
                 creeks, and other unique
                 topographic features.
                 Much of the remaining
                 undeveloped property in
                 La Cañada Flintridge can
                 be described as visually
                 prominent and containing
                 significant environmental
                 and aesthetic resources.                 Panorama of the San Gabriel Mountains
                 Figure CNE-3 shows
                 certain specific features that the City will preserve during the planning period.
                 Goal 2 and objectives and policies of this element, as well as implementing
                 regulations (such as hillside development), call for the maintenance of additional
                 landforms and/or preservation of viewscapes. Some of the ways the City will
                 conserve prominent landforms and viewscapes in the planning period are
                 highlighted below.
                 The Land Use Map redesignates certain properties with prominent landforms
                 from currently developable designations (including Hillside Residential and
                 Very Low Density Residential) to Open Space. This includes all government-
                 owned property north of the A/B Development Line and City-owned property
                 in Cherry Canyon.
                 The City will continue to implement Chapter 11.35 of the Zoning Ordinance
                 (Hillside Development), which pertains to all residentially zoned and used
                 property that has an average slope of 15 percent or greater. The Hillside
                 Development Chapter acknowledges the value of the hillsides as a significant
                 aesthetic feature, and was enacted to ensure that hillside development proceeds
                 in an orderly, regulated manner that is consistent with surrounding
                 development, enhances public safety and welfare, and maintains the
                 community’s “hillside character.” Regulations and guidelines in the Hillside
                 Development Chapter require maintenance of prominent landforms and
                 aesthetic resources.
                 Figure CNE-3 includes City-designated scenic corridors that offer key public
                 vantage points from which prominent viewscapes can be seen. Foothill
                 Boulevard, Verdugo Boulevard, and the portion of the I-210 Freeway that
                 traverses La Cañada Flintridge were City-designated Scenic Corridors in the
General Plan—January 2013                                                                             4-13

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                Chapter 4. Conservation Element
                 City’s 1980 General Plan. Angeles Crest Highway (SR-2) is an “officially
                 designated” State Scenic Highway north of the City boundary, and it is
                 considered an “eligible” route within the City from the I-210 Freeway north to
                 the City boundary (Caltrans 2008). It is being added as a City-designated scenic
                 corridor as part of this General Plan update, and the City may consider pursuing
                 its designation as a State Scenic Highway.
                 Protection of viewscapes was addressed for a portion of Foothill Boulevard in the
                 City of La Cañada Flintridge
                 Downtown Village Specific Plan
                 (DVSP) by requiring new
                 development to mitigate impacts
                 on views as seen from Foothill
                 Boulevard. The City may
                 consider implementing similar
                 guidelines or standards to
                 protect views as seen from the
                 portions of Foothill Boulevard         View of San Gabriel Mountains from Foothill Boulevard
                 not covered by the DVSP and
                 from other City-designated scenic corridors.
                 The General Plan includes policies that encourage sustainable energy sources,
                 such as solar energy systems, which may have negative aesthetic impacts on
                 the City’s viewscapes. However, the State has, or may adopt in the future,
                 codes that affect a local agency’s ability to regulate them. For example, the
                 Solar Rights Act (Government Code Section 65850.5) precludes local agencies
                 from adopting “…ordinances that create unreasonable barriers to the
                 installation of solar energy systems, including, but not limited to, design
                 review for aesthetic purposes…” While the City recognizes the importance of
                 encouraging sustainable energy systems and its requirement to enforce any
                 applicable State codes, such as the Solar Rights Act, it will encourage their
                 design and/or installation in a manner that minimizes negative aesthetic
                 impacts to the extent practical.
4.4.5            Cultural, Historical, and Paleontological
                 Resource Conservation
                 Cultural, historical, and paleontological resources contribute to La Cañada
                 Flintridge’s heritage and character. During the planning period the City will
                 undertake actions to assist in conserving these important resources.
                 The City will continue to implement the Mills Act Ordinance, which provides a
                 process to enter into Mills Act Contracts with owners of qualified properties to
                 assist them in preserving, rehabilitating, and maintain their landmark and
General Plan—January 2013                                                                                 4-14

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     eco
                                                                                                                                                                                           yo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 yo S
                                                                                                                                                                                              n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Arro
                                                                                                                                                                                           an
                                                                                                                                                                                  Su
                                                                                                                                                                                    tto                                                     on
                                                                                                                                                                                       nC                                               Cany
                                                                                                                                                                yon
                                                                                                                                                                                      lly
                                                                                                                                                                                 Mulla
                                                                                                                                                               Can
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            yon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Can
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Angeles National Forest
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                                                     !         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                      n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                  n yo !
                                                                                                                                                                                                        !   !                   !                                               !                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                Ca!
                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                           !r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                        o ve
                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                !                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                      Sn                                                                                                         n
                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               yo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         n
                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                           !            !                       !                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                              n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                         yo                                                     er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   y
                                                                                                                                                                                                       an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                       !                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         in
                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                   C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                              er                                                                                                                                        Gould
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                            bb
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                        e                                                                                                Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                       W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  le
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ny
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                       !Beck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                  !         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !         !
                                                                                                                                                     en s                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                    Pick                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                            Hall
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Hay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              STATE HWY 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Canyo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  OT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     H   I LL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            VERDUGO BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GOULD AVE
K: \ IRVINE \ GIS \ PROJECTS \ CITY_OF_LA_CANADA_FLINTRDIGE \ 00096_07 \ MAPDOC \ GENERAL_PLAN \ 2009OCT \ FIGCNE_3_TOPO_VISUAL.MXD SM (11-09-09)
                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Flin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Was
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            K   SHI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    R   EA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                OAK GROVE DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        VY
                                                                                                                                                                             Verdugo Was
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           C    HAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AND    DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HIGHL
                                                                                                                                                                                h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                eco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            yo S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Arro
                                                                                                                                                       City of La Cañada Flintridge
                                                                                                                                                       Highways
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                Knolls
                                                                                                                                                       City Designated Scenic Corridors                                                                                          Prominent Ridgelines
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ±
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Waterways
                                                                                                                                                       US Forest Service Scenic Byway & State Scenic Highway
                                                                                                                                                       AB Development Line                                                                                                       Devils Gate Reservoir                                                                                     0   1,000           2,000                  4,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Feet
                                                                                                                                Source : California Department of Water Resources (2002); ESRI USA Imagery (5/2006; 0.5m)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure CNE-3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Topographic and Visual Resources
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              City of La Cañada Flintridge


City of La Cañada Flintridge                                               Chapter 4. Conservation Element
                 historic properties. In addition, the City will provide information to residents
                 about environmental benefits of preserving and revitalizing existing structures
                 rather than demolishing them and rebuilding from scratch. Information will be
                 provided to residents about opportunities to place structures on the National
                 Register of Historic Places voluntarily.
                 If buildings within La Cañada Flintridge that have been identified as significant
                 historical resources at the federal, State, and local levels become available for
                 purchase and/or are threatened with demolition, the City may consider
                 acquiring them if they could be used for public purposes.
                 If significant archaeological sites or artifacts are discovered on a site, or if
                 excavation uncovers significant archaeological sites or artifacts, the City will
                 require coordination with professional archaeologists, relevant State agencies,
                 and concerned Native American tribes regarding preservation of sites or
                 professional retrieval and preservation of artifacts prior to development of the
                 site.
4.4.6            Solid Waste Reduction
                 To reduce the environmental impacts of increased amounts of solid waste
                 disposal, the City will comply with the Integrated Waste Management Act by
                 maintaining an up-to-date Source Reduction and Recycling Element and Non-
                 Disposal Facility Element. The City will continue to implement its mandatory
                 green waste collection and recycling programs for all single-family residences,
                 which assists in diverting waste from the landfill. The City will investigate
                 expanding the program to commercial and multi-family uses. The City currently
                 requires demolition and building permit applicants with projects of 1,000 square
                 feet or more to submit a Building Debris Management Report and a performance
                 security.
                 The City will continue to encourage the community to produce less waste by
                 reducing the amount and toxicity of trash discarded, reusing containers and
                 products, and recycling as much as possible. This effort also supports the goals
                 of conserving energy and reducing pollution and GHG emissions.
4.4.7            Interrelationship of Sustainability Principles
                 The Land Use, Circulation, Air Quality, and Open Space and Recreation elements
                 of this plan include many sustainable principles through goals, objectives,
                 policies, and programs to support conservation and preservation of the City’s
                 resources. They are described in more detail in the various elements, but are
                 noted here for reference. Some of them include:
General Plan—January 2013                                                                             4-15

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                              Chapter 4. Conservation Element
                         creation of new Mixed Use land use designations to promote walkability
                          and reduce the need for use of personal vehicles;
                         promotion of green and sustainable building and site design policies and
                          principles via design guidelines and/or development standards and City-
                          sponsored demonstration projects;
                         continued implementation of the DVSP and expansion of its design
                          guidelines and development standards to the remainder of Foothill
                          Boulevard;
                         redesignation of certain properties to the Open Space land use
                          designation; and
                         increased emphasis on alternative modes of transportation to the
                          personal automobile.
4.5              Goals, Objectives, and Policies
                 The goals, objectives, and policies in the Conservation Element promote the
                 conservation, preservation, and sustainability of the City’s significant resources.
                 They also emphasize and support the interrelationship of all General Plan
                 elements to achieve a sustainable community.
                 CNE GOAL 1: Preserve and conserve natural resources in the
                 community.
                 CNE Objective 1.1: Promote water conservation and increase the use of
                 recycled water to reduce the projected demand for water service.
                      CNE Policy 1.1.1: Work with water providers to reduce per capita water
                      consumption by 20 percent by 2020.
                      CNE Policy 1.1.2: Establish a water conservation plan that may include such
                      policies and actions as:
                          a. tiered rate structures for water use;
                          b. restrictions on time or use for landscape watering and other demand
                              management strategies;
                          c. performance standards for irrigation equipment and water fixtures;
                              and
                          d. requirements that increased demand from new construction be offset
                              with reductions so that there is no net increase in water use, where
                              feasible.
                      CNE Policy 1.1.3: Work with water providers to establish criteria and
                      standards consistent with State regulations to permit the safe and effective
                      use of gray water (on-site water recycling), and review and appropriately
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            4-16

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                             Chapter 4. Conservation Element
                      revise, without compromising health and safety, other building code
                      requirements that might prevent the use of such systems.
                      CNE Policy 1.1.4: Work with water providers to comply with State mandates
                      to implement or enhance programs to educate the community about the
                      importance of water conservation and methods to reduce water use.
                      CNE Policy 1.1.5: Work with water providers to update the City’s existing
                      Water Efficient Landscaping Ordinance to ensure that it remains at least as
                      effective as the State’s Model Efficient Landscape Ordinance pursuant to AB
                      1881 and/or any subsequent legislation.
                      CNE Policy 1.1.6: Encourage the installation of water-efficient landscaping
                      and irrigation, including:
                          a. planting drought-tolerant and native species;
                          b. covering exposed dirt with moisture-retaining mulch; and
                          c. installing water-efficient irrigation systems and devices, including
                             advanced technology such as moisture-sensing irrigation controls.
                      CNE Policy 1.1.7: Require new development and rehabilitation projects to
                      make maximum use of water conservation techniques, pursuant to SB 407
                      (Chapter 587, Statutes of 2009) and subsequent legislation, and to document
                      efforts through the development review process.
                      CNE Policy 1.1.8: Encourage Caltrans to expand the use of reclaimed water
                      on freeway rights-of-way.
                      CNE Policy 1.1.9: Encourage early compliance with SB 407 (Chapter 587,
                      Statutes of 2009), which establishes Statewide requirements for the
                      replacement of old, non-compliant plumbing fixtures in existing residential
                      and commercial property (built and occupied on or before January 1, 1994)
                      with new, water conserving models.
                 CNE Objective 1.2: Preserve and improve local water quality.
                      CNE Policy 1.2.1: Ensure that new projects are designed to preserve and
                      protect the watershed in and near the City from pollutants, excessive
                      changes in natural drainage courses, wildfires, and other natural or
                      human-made detrimental effects on the watershed system. Where
                      practical and feasible, the City may undertake programs to accomplish
                      these ends.
                      CNE Policy 1.2.2: Require the implementation of Low Impact Development
                      stormwater management techniques in new or rehabilitated commercial or
                      residential projects. Actions include:
                          a. Minimizing pollutant loading and changes in hydrology; ensuring
                             that post-development runoff rates from a site do not negatively
                             impact downstream erosion and stream habitat; minimizing the
                             amount of stormwater guided to impermeable surfaces; and
General Plan—January 2013                                                                           4-17

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                            Chapter 4. Conservation Element
                             maximizing percolation of stormwater into the ground where
                             appropriate.
                          b. Preserving wetlands, riparian corridors, and buffer zones.
                          c. Establishing reasonable limits on the clearing of vegetation from a
                             project site.
                          d. Requiring incorporation of structural and non-structural best
                             management practices (BMPs) to mitigate projected increases in
                             pollutant loads and flows, such as the use of tree boxes, retention
                             basins, bioswales, rain gardens, and roof gardens; to minimize
                             impacts on the groundwater basins; and to allow stormwater to
                             percolate into the groundwater basins.
                      CNE Policy 1.2.3: Work with governmental and environmental partners to
                      improve water quality in the Arroyo Seco Watershed through support of
                      water quality improvement programs.
                      CNE Policy 1.2.4: Encourage the implementation of the Flint Wash
                      Restoration Project.
                      CNE Policy 1.2.5: Undertake environmental enhancement opportunities that
                      were identified in the list of potential Link/West Gateway Corridor
                      Improvement Recommendations (2004), during this planning period.
                      Publicize these projects as demonstration projects for protection and
                      enhancement of the watershed.
                      CNE Policy 1.2.6: Develop best management practices for water quality and
                      watershed enhancements and encourage their implementation voluntarily
                      and through review of development applications.
                      CNE Policy 1.2.7: Improve water quality through public education programs.
                      CNE Policy 1.2.8: Continue to implement upgrades to the local drainage
                      system, including storm water collection and curbs and gutters and other
                      appropriate measures.
                      CNE Policy 1.2.9: Require review of all development projects that have a
                      potential for causing a deterioration of groundwater quality beyond
                      standards imposed by the State Water Resources Control Board to assure
                      compliance with State and federal standards. Methods should be developed
                      to control activities that have detrimental impacts on groundwater quality.
                      CNE Policy 1.2.10: Prior to issuance of permits on existing vacant lands
                      designated for residential and mixed-use uses, require confirmation that a
                      wastewater treatment facility (sewer or septic) will treat the wastewater
                      generated by the new development and the development will connect to
                      that facility.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                          4-18

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                              Chapter 4. Conservation Element
                 CNE Objective 1.3: Promote efficient and sustainable use of energy resources
                 through conservation and demand-reduction activities.
                      CNE Policy 1.3.1: Encourage implementation of green building techniques.
                      CNE Policy 1.3.2: Encourage implementation of Cool Communities
                      Measures, including use of light-colored or porous paving materials in
                      parking lots and light-colored roofs and increased use of trees and other
                      shading vegetation around parking lots and buildings to reduce the amount
                      of energy needed for cooling.
                      CNE Policy 1.3.3: Evaluate the extent to which the City could implement the
                      State’s Green Building Action Plan, which is the detailed direction that
                      accompanied the Governor’s Executive Order S-20-04.
                      CNE Policy 1.3.4: Continue to support the City’s Green Team to identify
                      ways the City could implement green programs in its own operations and
                      projects; create incentives for those who implement green programs; and
                      develop green best management practices to share with the public and to
                      use when reviewing applications for development.
                      CNE Policy 1.3.5: As green technology continues to develop, the City will
                      monitor its changes and enhancements and add policies and/or programs,
                      as appropriate.
                      CNE Policy 1.3.6: Encourage new development to exceed Title 24 Green
                      Building energy efficiency standards.
                      CNE Policy 1.3.7: Establish outdoor lighting standards in the Zoning Code,
                      including requirements that:
                          a. all outdoor lighting fixtures be energy efficient; and
                          b. light levels in all new development, parking lots, and street lighting
                             do not exceed State standards.
                      CNE Policy 1.3.8: Provide good examples of the best available technologies
                      and methods for minimizing energy consumption and waste through all
                      City facilities, actions, and policies. Examples may include:
                          a. replacing fleet vehicles and equipment with the most fuel efficient
                             vehicles practical;
                          b. implementing a comprehensive plan to improve energy efficiency of
                             municipal facilities, which could include installing energy efficient
                             appliances, lighting, air conditioning, heating, and building retrofits;
                             and
                          c. providing bicycle facilities, ridesharing, ride-home programs, and
                             transit passes to employees.
                      CNE Policy 1.3.9: Promote, support, and require, as appropriate, the
                      development of solar energy.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            4-19

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                Chapter 4. Conservation Element
                      CNE Policy 1.3.10: Encourage that, where appropriate, all new buildings be
                      constructed to allow for easy, cost-effective installation of solar energy
                      systems in the future by incorporating “solar-ready” features.
                      CNE Policy 1.3.11: Encourage that residential projects of 6 units or more and
                      commercial and mixed-use developments participate in available rebate
                      programs.
                      CNE Policy 1.3.12: Provide, where possible, incentives for renewable energy
                      projects (e.g., reduced fees and expedited permit processing), creative
                      financing (e.g., subsidized or other low-interest loans and/or the option to
                      pay for system installation through long-term assessments on individual
                      property tax bills), as well as other support for community members or
                      developers seeking funding for such projects.
                      CNE Policy 1.3.13: Work with energy providers to develop or enhance
                      communication and outreach strategies to inform the community about the
                      need for and benefit of energy conservation and green programs, SCE’s
                      energy conservation opportunities and programs, and City programs.
                 CNE Objective 1.4: Reduce the amount of solid waste generated and diverted
                 to landfills.
                      CNE Policy 1.4.1: Comply with the Integrated Waste Management Act by
                      maintaining an up-to-date Source Reduction and Recycling Element and
                      Non-Disposal Facility Element.
                      CNE Policy 1.4.2: Continue the City’s mandatory green waste collection and
                      recycling program for all single-family residences.
                      CNE Policy 1.4.3: Consider creating a mandatory green waste collection and
                      recycling program for multi-family residences and commercial and retail
                      operations.
                      CNE Policy 1.4.4: Encourage the community to produce less waste by
                      reducing, reusing, and recycling, including encouraging individual on-site
                      composting.
                 CNE Objective 1.5: Preserve biological resources, including vegetative communities
                 and wildlife and its habitat, subject to the safety of residents and property.
                      CNE Policy 1.5.1: Retain publicly owned open space land as such. Make
                      reasonable efforts to acquire from willing sellers large portions of hillside
                      and other properties that contain significant biological resources, such as
                      coastal sage scrub–chaparral, oak woodlands, riparian communities, and
                      wildlife habitat. Open space areas of particular value include Cherry
                      Canyon, Weber Canyon, Gould Canyon, Winery Canyon, Hall-Beckley
                      Canyon, Snover Canyon, Hay Canyon, and their surrounding hillsides.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                              4-20

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                             Chapter 4. Conservation Element
                      CNE Policy 1.5.2: Consider conducting evaluations and mapping of all
                      vegetation and/or habitat communities on vacant and undeveloped land
                      that is ½-acre or greater in area property.
                      CNE Policy 1.5.3: Require development proposals in areas expected to
                      contain important vegetation and wildlife communities to conduct
                      biological assessments and mitigate impacts, as appropriate.
                      CNE Policy 1.5.4: In areas that are adjacent to sensitive vegetation and/or
                      wildlife communities and/or open spaces, require new development to
                      employ site design techniques that provide buffers between the
                      development and the biological resources and to landscape their sites with
                      vegetation that is consistent with the adjacent resources, in balance with
                      “fire safe” considerations.
                      CNE Policy 1.5.5: Preserve and protect the City’s urban forest, which
                      contributes to clean air, soil conservation, shade and windbreak protection,
                      moderation of climatic extremes, and reduction of flood hazards and risk of
                      landslides.
                 CNE GOAL 2: Preserve the remaining natural ridgelines, canyons,
                 streams, springs, urban forest, and other natural resources and
                 attributes that contribute to the aesthetic and scenic qualities of the
                 community.
                 CNE Objective 2.1: Require new development to be compatible with the
                 natural and existing human-made resources that make the community special.
                      CNE Policy 2.1.1: Protect natural and aesthetic resources through continued
                      implementation of the Hillside Development Ordinance.
                      CNE Policy 2.1.2: Maintain prominent landforms within the community in
                      their natural state to the maximum extent feasible, including but not limited
                      to: ridges, knolls, waterways, creeks (either dry or active), canyons, or other
                      unique topographic features or viewscapes. The most significant landforms
                      are identified on Figure CNE-3 in the Conservation Element.
                      CNE Policy 2.1.3: Protect major hillside viewscapes visible from points
                      within the City from detrimental alteration by the intrusion of highly visible
                      cuts and/or fill slopes, building lines, and/or road surfaces.
                      CNE Policy 2.1.4: Minimize the visual impact of grading. Irrigate and
                      landscape human-made slopes to prevent erosion and soften the visual
                      appearance of the finished slope.
                      CNE Policy 2.1.5: Preserve and protect the City’s urban forest in order to
                      maintain the community’s wooded character and protect the scenic beauty
                      of the area, through continued implementation of the City’s Preservation,
                      Protection, and Removal of Trees Ordinance.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                           4-21

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                              Chapter 4. Conservation Element
                      CNE Policy 2.1.6: Pursue opportunities to acquire from willing sellers
                      undeveloped land that includes prominent landforms and other natural and
                      scenic resources.
                 CNE Objective 2.2: Preserve the scenic beauty of viewscapes as seen from
                 public vantage points and designated streets and locations.
                      CNE Policy 2.2.1: Consider adopting special scenic corridor design criteria
                      for development and maintenance of properties adjoining designated scenic
                      corridors, which may include regulation of architectural design, setbacks,
                      building height, signing, and landscaping.
                      CNE Policy 2.2.2: Preserve the unique views of the mountains and foothills
                      as seen from Foothill Boulevard by continuing to implement the
                      development standards and design guidelines in the Hillside Development
                      Ordinance and DVSP.
                      CNE Policy 2.2.3: Consider pursuing official State Scenic Highway
                      Designation for the portion of Angeles Crest Highway between the I-210
                      Freeway north and the City boundary.
                 CNE Goal 3: Encourage the preservation of significant historical
                 resources within the City.
                 CNE Objective 3.1: Mitigate the loss or compromise of significant
                 archaeological, historical, and other cultural resources within the City.
                      CNE Policy 3.1.1: Encourage designation and preservation of local historical
                      resources.
                      CNE Policy 3.1.2: Encourage use of the Mills Act as economically feasible.
                      CNE Policy 3.1.3: Encourage public awareness of the significance of the
                      area’s cultural resources and historic features.
                      CNE Policy 3.1.4: Identify landmarks by means of appropriate monuments,
                      plaques, displays, or other means to publically designate historic sites and
                      commemorate their significance to the City.
                      CNE Policy 3.1.5: Require that archaeological reports (prepared by a
                      certified archaeologist and including a literature search and a site survey) be
                      completed for large, undeveloped parcels for which development is
                      proposed, consistent with CEQA.
                      CNE Policy 3.1.6: If any archaeological excavations are recommended on a
                      project site, require that such investigations include Native American
                      consultation prior to project approval.
                      CNE Policy 3.1.7: If any significant archaeological sites or artifacts are
                      discovered on a site, require coordination with professional archaeologists,
                      relevant State agencies, and concerned Native American tribes regarding
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            4-22

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                             Chapter 4. Conservation Element
                      preservation of sites or professional retrieval and preservation of artifacts
                      prior to development of the site.
                      CNE Policy 3.1.8: Consult with Native American tribes under Senate Bill 18
                      for amendments to the General Plan.
                      CNE Policy 3.1.9: Consider acquisition of identified historical buildings for
                      public uses.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                           4-23

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                     Chapter 4. Conservation Element
                             This page intentionally left blank.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                   4-24

    Chapter 5
Safety Elem ent

                                                                5.0
                                                                SAFETY ELEMENT
5.1            Introduction
               The safety of a community is a key component of its quality of life. Protection of
               its citizens, visitors, structures, infrastructure, and public facilities from natural
               and human-made hazards is an important function of local government. The
               purpose of the Safety Element of the General Plan is to identify natural and
               human-made hazards in or near the City that pose potential danger to the safety
               and welfare of the community, and to establish goals, objectives, and policies to
               reduce risk to life and property from these hazards.
               The Safety Element addresses seismic and other geologic hazards, flooding and
               other hydrologic hazards, fires and fire-related hazards, hazardous material and
               sites, crime, and emergency preparedness. Hazardous incidents most likely to
               occur in La Cañada Flintridge include earthquakes, landslides, wildfire, hazardous
               material spills on the Interstate (I) 210 Freeway, and storm-related incidents such
               as debris and mud flows. Summaries of pertinent technical information regarding
               each of these topics are provided in the Safety Element for general information and
               to provide a context for the goals, objectives, and policies.
5.2            Setting
               La Cañada Flintridge occupies the east end of the Crescenta Valley (Valley) and
               adjacent highlands on the Valley’s south margin. The Valley is the westernmost
               portion of the larger San Gabriel Valley, and is set between the San Gabriel
               Mountains to the north and the Verdugo Mountains and San Rafael Hills to the
               south. Topography in the City is dominated by dramatic alluvial fans along the
               San Gabriel rangefront. Consistent with this setting, slopes are steeper adjacent
               to the rangefront, decreasing southward toward the valley floor. The valley floor
               itself is fairly flat and slopes eastward toward the main San Gabriel Valley. The
               highest point in the City is on its northern boundary on the San Gabriel Valley
               rangefront, at an elevation of 3,200 feet above mean sea level (AMSL). The
               lowest point in the City, near Devil’s Gate Dam, has an elevation of 1,100 AMSL.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                           5-1

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 5. Safety Element
                 A significant portion of vacant land within the La Cañada Flintridge is on steep
                 slopes with gradients greater than 30 percent. Much of this vacant land abuts the
                 Angeles National Forest along the City’s northern boundary. The combination of
                 southern California’s Mediterranean climate, with its winter and spring rainfall
                 and hot dry summers, a preponderance of highly flammable vegetation within
                 and adjacent to La Cañada Flintridge, the steep topography within the City, and
                 the frequency of high wind velocity from the Santa Ana winds creates optimum
                 conditions for wildfires and debris flows.
                 Land uses within the City are predominantly single-family residential, with
                 local-serving commercial development located primarily along Foothill
                 Boulevard. The City does not have manufacturing or industrial development,
                 although NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) is located within the City
                 limits. The I-210 Freeway bisects the City.
5.3              Existing Conditions
5.3.1            Geologic and Soils Related Hazards
5.3.1.1          Soils and Erosion
                 The City is situated on soils assigned to the Hanford and Vista-Amargosa soil
                 associations. Lowland areas are underlain by Hanford soils; uplands are
                 underlain by Vista-Amargosa soils (U.S. Soil Conservation Service 1969). The
                 Hanford association consists of loam and sandy loam soils that are well
                 drained, with slow runoff, slight erosion hazard (except where dry soils are
                 subject to wind erosion), and moderately rapid subsoil permeability. Shrink-
                 swell hazard (i.e., expansion potential) is typically low (U.S. Soil
                 Conservation Service 1969).
                 The Vista-Amargosa association consists of thinner sandy loam soils are well
                 drained and exhibit moderately rapid subsoil permeability. Amargosa soils are
                 excessively drained, with rapid runoff and moderately rapid subsoil
                 permeability. Erosion hazard is high; Amargosa soils are prone to sheet and rill
                 erosion and gullying. Shrink-swell hazard is low (U.S. Soil Conservation Service
                 1969) (see Figure SE-1 for soils of the City).
                 As noted above, soils upon which the City is situated pose potential hazards,
                 including erosion and topsoil loss due to wind and rainfall, and slope instability
                 resulting from development.
                 Construction of new development and some retrofits or remodels require
                 excavation and/or fill placement to create appropriate building pads. If
                 improperly designed or constructed, cut slopes and fills can become unstable,
General Plan—January 2013                                                                          5-2

                                                                                                                                       32
                                                                                                                                       32
                                                                                                                                       14
                                                                                                                                       14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               32
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               32
K:\Irvine\GIS\Projects\City_of_La_Canada_Flintrdige\00096_07\mapdoc\EIR\2010Feb\Fig4_5_2_Soils.ai SM (02-11-10)
                                                                                                                                                                                              14
                                                                                                                                                                                              14                               14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               14
                                                                                                                      32
                                                                                                                      32
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                         32
                                                                                                                                                                                         32
                                                                                                                        Legend
                                                                                                                                     La Cañada Flintridge city limits
                                                                                                                                     SSoil mapping unit boundary
                                                                                                                            14       Hanford association, 2–5% slopes                                       0       0.5        1.0
                                                                                                                            21       Agoura-Placentia association, 2–5% slopes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Mile
                                                                                                                            32       Vista-Amargosa association, 30–50% slopes, eroded
                                                                                                                  Source: U.S. Soil Conservation Service 1969.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Figure SE-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Soils of the City and Vicinity
                                                                                                                                                                                                   City of La Cañada Flintridge


City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                    Chapter 5. Safety Element
                 potentially leading to settlement or failure that could damage structures and
                 create a safety hazard. Improper grading and fill activities also have the
                 potential to destabilize existing slopes, potentially increasing landslide risks.
                 Loss of topsoil can occur due to grading and other ground disturbance, and also
                 as a result of land that has been denuded due to wildfires, as in the case of
                 property on the City’s northern rangefront that was burned in the Station Fire of
                 2009. Topsoil is essential to support vegetation to reduce erosion and to provide
                 natural habitats. Hazards regarding erosion and debris flows are discussed in
                 greater detail in Section 5.3.2, Flooding and Other Hydrologic Hazards.
5.3.1.2          Seismic Hazards
                 La Cañada Flintridge is located in a seismically active region. Large earthquakes
                 have occurred in the vicinity and will occur again in the future. Estimates by the
                 Southern California Earthquake Center indicate a 35 percent probability of a
                 magnitude 7 event in the next 30 years (Southern California Earthquake Data
                 Center 2007a); smaller but still potentially damaging earthquakes can be
                 expected to occur more frequently.
                 The State of California recognizes two broad categories of hazards associated
                 with earthquake events: 1) primary seismic hazards, which include surface fault
                 rupture and groundshaking; and 2) secondary seismic hazards, which include
                 corollary results of groundshaking, such as seismically induced landslides and
                 various types of ground failure, including liquefaction and ridge-top
                 shattering. (Ridgetop shattering refers to earthquake-related shattering of
                 bedrock materials along a ridgeline or other topographic high point.) Based on
                 current knowledge of the City’s geology, earthquake groundshaking,
                 liquefaction, and seismically induced landslides are the most significant
                 geologic hazards in the City. The Sierra Madre fault may also pose a localized
                 risk of surface fault rupture.
                 Primary Seismic Hazards
                 As of the date of preparation of this Plan, the City does not contain any faults
                 recognized as active by the State of California and zoned under the Alquist-
                 Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act. Nonetheless, the level of hazard associated
                 with the Sierra Madre fault zone, which traces the south flank of the San Gabriel
                 Mountains across the City’s northern edge, may be substantial. The California
                 Geological Survey is currently evaluating whether this segment of the Sierra
                 Madre system warrants zoning under the Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault
                 Zoning Act.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                             5-3

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                                  Chapter 5. Safety Element
                  Recent studies suggest that a large earthquake on the San Andreas fault to the
                  north—like that responsible for the 1857 Fort Tejon earthquake—could trigger
                  corollary ruptures on reverse faults along the southern margin of the San Gabriel
                  Mountains (Southern California Earthquake Data Center 2007b). Whether all
                  segments of the Sierra Madre fault zone would or could rupture in such an event
                  is unknown. However, this and other reverse faults of the Transverse Ranges
                  continue to be the subject of intense scrutiny, and estimates of the potential for
                  surface rupture along the Sierra Madre fault may need to be revised as
                  understanding of this important feature increases.
                  A number of other faults, recognized as active by the State of California and/or
                  the California Building Code, are present in the surrounding region, and a
                  moderate to major event on any of these faults could result in potentially
                  damaging groundshaking in the City. Figure SE-2 delineates the location of
                  principal active faults in the City and surrounding area. Table SE-1 summarizes
                  their characteristics.
Table SE-1. Maximum Credible Earthquake and Recurrence Interval for Key Southern California Faults
                                                    Magnitude of Maximum            Approximate Recurrence
 Fault                      Zoned by State?1        Credible Earthquake             Interval3
 Cucamonga                  Yes                     Mw 6.0–7.03                     Estimated at 600–700 years
                                                                                                                  3
 Hollywood                  No                      Mw 5.8–6.53                     Uncertain; believed to be
                                                                                                                3
                                                                                    approximately 1,600 years
 Newport-Inglewood          Yes                     Mw 6.0–7.43                               3
                                                                                    Unknown ; 1,200-3000
                                                                                                              4
 Raymond, Raymond Hill      Yes                     Mw 6.0–7.03                     Roughly 4,500 years
                                                                                                          3
 San Andreas                Yes                     Mw 6.8–8.03                     Ranges from less than 20 years at
                                                                                    Parkfield in the north to more than
                                                                                    300 years; averages about 140 years
                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                    on Mojave segment of fault
 San Fernando               Yes                     Mw 6.0–6.83                     100–300 years
                                                                                                   3
 San Gabriel                Portions are zoned                3                               3
                                                    Unknown                         Unknown
 Santa Monica               No                      Mw 6.0–7.03                               3
                                                                                    Unknown ; 7,000-8,000 years
                                                                                                                    4
 Sierra Madre               No                      Mw 6.0–7.0?3, possibly >7.04    Uncertain; believed to be several
                                                                                    thousand years.3 May be as much as
                                                                                    7,000-8,000 years for events >M 7).4
 Verdugo                    No                      Mw 6.0–6.83                     Unknown
                                                                                              3
 Whittier                   Yes                     Mw 6.0–7.23                     Unknown
                                                                                              3
 Mw = moment magnitude.
 Sources: 1Hart and Bryant 1997, 2ICBO 1997, 3Southern California Earthquake Data Center 2007b, 4U.S. Geological Survey
 2009.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                                               5-4

                                                                                                                                          Sa n
                                                                                                                                               Ga b
                                                                                                                                                   ri   el F
                                                                                                                                                             ault
                                                                                                                                                                  Zo        ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Angeles National Forest
                                                                                                                                    Sa n Fe                                                                                             Sa n
                                                                                                                                           rnan do                                                                                           Ga b
                                                                                                                                                   Fau lt Z                                                                                      r      iel F
                                                                                                                                                            one                                                                                                    ault
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Zo    ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Si
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         e   rra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      re
                                                                                                                                                  Ve                                                                           Sie                                         Fa
                                                                                                                                                    rd                                                                             rra                                       ul
                                                                                                                                                      ug                                                                               Ma                                       t                                                                                                                      ult
                                                                                                                                                        o                                                                                 dr   eF                                   Zo                                                                                                            n Fa
                                                                                                                                                                Fa                                                                                  aul                                ne                                                                                                C   a nyo
                                                                                                                                                                  ul                                                                                    tZ                                                                                                                        awp it
                                                                                                                                                                       t V
                                                                                                                                                                          erd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          o ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        s h ell S
                                                                                                                                                                             u                                                                                                                                                                                     Cla m
                                                                                                                                                                                     go                                                                                                      Sie
                                                                                                                                                                                        F   au                                                                                                   rra
                                                                                                                                                                                               lt                                                                                                    Ma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        dre
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ve                                                                                                Fa
                                                                                                                                                                                                              rd                                                                                                ult
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ug                                                                                                  Zo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  oF                                                                                                   ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               au
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  lt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sierra Madre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ea                                                                                                             Fault Zo ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         gle                                                               a ult
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ro                                                ill F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ck                                         dH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Fa                                mon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              u lt                    Ray
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Raymond Hill Fault
                                                                                                                                                                       o d Fau lt
                                                                                                                                                                Hollywo
                                                                                                                                          u lt
                                                                                                                                    a   Fa
                                                                                                                                nic
                                                                                                                           a Mo
                                                                                                                         nt
                                                                                                                      Sa
                                                                                                                                                        New
                                                                                                                                                                        w
                                                                                                                                                                 Ing le
                                                                                                                                                          po rt-                                                                                                                                                                   Wh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      itti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           er
                                                                                                                                                                     F                                                                                                                                                                          Fa
                                                                                                                                                                oo d                                                                                                                                                                              ult
                                                                                                                                                                         o ne
                                                                                                                                                                   ault Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Los Angeles - Long Beach - Santa Ana
AWC (07-24-2008)
                                                                                                                                                                                                             o rt-
                                                                                                                                                                                                           wp
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ing le
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       wood
K:\GIS\PROJECTS\CITY_OF_LA_CANADA_FLINTRDIGE\00096_07\MAPDOC\SCREEN_CHECK_DRAFT\SAFETY_ELEMENT\FIG5_1.MXD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 o ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             lt Z
                                                                                                                                             Z                                                                            Fau
                                                                                                                                         ult
                                                                                                                                      Fa
                                                                                                                                   es
                                                                                                                                 rd
                                                                                                                               Ve
                                                                                                                           los
                                                                                                                        Pa
                                                                                                                                          one
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LosA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         le
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t-I                        lam
                                                                                                                                                                                     Pa                                                                                          or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               wp                                itos
                                                                                                                                                                                        los                                                                                  Ne
                                                                                                                                                                                            Ve                                                                                                                         ult
                                                                                                                                                                                              rde                                                                                             od
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Fa
                                                                                                                                                                                                 sF                                                                                         wo
                                                                                                                                                                                                   au
                                                                                                                                                                                                     lt Z                                                                                        ult
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   on                                                                          Fa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Zo ne
                                                                                                                                                                                       br il                 Pa l
                                                                                                                                                                                     Ca                            os
                                                                                                                                                                                            lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                ul t                      rdes
                                                                                                                                                                                              Fa                        Ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ca                          ul t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Fa
                                                                                                                                                                                                          br
                                                                                                                                                                                                             il   lo                     ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Fa              Zo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ult
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Pacific Ocean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    lt Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  au
                                                                                                                                City of La Cañada Flintridge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                sF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             rde
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ve
                                                                                                                                Developed Areas
                                                                                                                   Regional Faults                                                                                                                                     los
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Pa
                                                                                                                                Regional Faults                                  0                  2                  4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Miles                                                          one
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Figure SE-2
                                                                                                            Source: California Geological Survey 2001; ESRI Streetmap (2006)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Principal Faults in the City and Surrounding Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         City of La Cañada Flintridge


City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                   Chapter 5. Safety Element
                 Secondary Seismic Hazards
                 Liquefaction: Liquefaction hazard is generally low in the City’s northern
                 portion, which is largely underlain by alluvial fan deposits dominated by coarse
                 material (boulders, gravel, and sand), with the exception of sand-dominated
                 strata along major drainages, which are believed to be liquefiable (Tinsley et al.
                 1985, California Division of Mines and Geology 1999). Portions of the City’s
                 central Valley floor area south of I-210 and Foothill Boulevard are subject to
                 liquefaction, as is the area around Devil’s Gate Reservoir, which is adjacent to the
                 City’s eastern boundary (see Figure SE-3).
                 Seismically Induced Landslides: Any earthquake with a magnitude of 4 or
                 above may result in seismically induced landslides; a magnitude 8 event may
                 result in thousands or tens of thousands of slope failures at distances as far as 250
                 miles from the fault responsible for the earthquake (Wilson and Keefer 1985).
                 Consequently, the northern edge of the City could experience seismically
                 induced landslides triggered by a local event, or as a result of a major earthquake
                 event at a substantial distance from the City center. Areas of seismically induced
                 landslide hazard are also present in hillside areas in the southern portion of the
                 City. Figure SE-3 shows State Seismic Hazards Zones in the City and vicinity.
                 Steep bedrock exposures in the City’s hillside areas may be at some risk of
                 bedrock landslides, particularly where they have been steepened and/or loaded
                 as a result of development.
5.3.2            Flooding and Other Hydrologic Hazards
                 The City is susceptible to flooding due to its proximity to the Los Angeles River
                 and the fact that it is a hillside community. The City is also subject to debris and
                 mud flows and landslides due to the steep topography. Figure SE-4 presents the
                 hydrology of the City and vicinity. Figure SE-5 shows the location of surface
                 water, drainage, and debris basins within and adjacent to the City.
5.3.2.1          Flooding
                 Per the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA’s) Flood Insurance
                 Rate Map, portions of the City that are located in the Valley are classified by
                 FEMA as being located in Zone X. Zone X is defined as being an area outside the
                 0.2 percent annual chance floodplain. Other portions of the City located in or at
                 the base of the foothills are defined as being in Zone D. Flood Zone D is assigned
                 to “areas in which flood hazards are undetermined, but possible.” Areas
                 assigned this flood zone designation have not been reviewed through a detailed
                 hydraulic study process and are assumed to have the potential to flood based
                 upon typical rainfall patterns, watershed characteristics, and land use in the area.
                 No 100-year or 500-year floodplains have been identified in the City.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            5-5

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                        Chapter 5. Safety Element
                 Minor flooding problems occur during intense storm periods at several locations,
                 including Foothill Boulevard, on the north side east of Ocean View Boulevard;
                 Foothill Boulevard, on the north side at Lasheart Drive; and Georgian Road,
                 south of Flintridge Oaks Drive.
5.3.2.2          Debris and Mud Flow Hazards
                 In the City’s upland areas, the steepness of the terrain and the potential for
                 periods of intense rainfall combine to create a substantial erosion hazard. Large
                 amounts of debris and soil are washed down from higher elevations within and
                 adjacent to the City during and after large storms. This creates the potential for
                 significant erosion on vacant land with steep slopes.
                 With its steep topography and semi-arid Mediterranean-type climate typified by
                 heavy seasonal rainfall, the San Gabriel Mountains rangefront is a known area of
                 substantial debris flow (i.e., mudslide) hazard; similar hazards apply in the
                 Verdugo and San Rafael Hills. The greatest risks associated with debris flows are
                 concentrated in and adjacent to rangefront and hill-area drainages, and in and
                 adjacent to upper alluvial fan
                 channels, where drainages exit
                 the range onto the valley floor.
                 Some soils in the City are also
                 highly erodible; the potential for
                 rapid erosion contributes to
                 debris flow hazards by providing
                 sediment input to rain-swollen
                 drainages. These risks are
                 exacerbated when the land has
                 been denuded due to wildfires.          Debris Basin (above) and Storm Drain Channel (below)
                 The City has several flood-
                 control facilities in place,
                 including stormwater systems,
                 drainage channels, and debris
                 basins. Although these facilities
                 have historically controlled the
                 vast majority of flooding and
                 debris flows within developed
                 portions of the City, many debris
                 basins were unable to hold back the torrents of mud, rocks, trees, and ash that
                 flowed from the San Gabriel rangefront onto property, into homes, and down
                 streets after the Station Fire (described below) during the winter storms of 2009–
                 2010. The Los Angeles County Flood Control District reported that
                 approximately 407,000 cubic yards of debris was removed from debris basins in
                 the City during the 2009–2010 winter storm season.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                                  5-6

                                                                                             0          0.5         1.0
                                                                                                        Mile
                                                                       La Cañada Flintridge City Limits
Source: California Division of Mines and Geology 1999
                                                                                                             Figure SE-3
                                            State of California Seismic Hazard Zones in the City and Vicinity
                                                                                       City of La Cañada Flintridge


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Arroy o Seco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Angeles National Forest
                                                                                                                                    La Crescenta-Montrose
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Seco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Arroy
                                                                                                                                                                                       La Cañada Flintridge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Altadena
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Fl
                                                                                                                                                                                                     in
                                                                                                                                                                                                       tW
                                                                                                                                                                                                         as           o Se
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          co
                                                                                                                                                                                                            h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Arro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        y
                                                                                                                                                                    Glendale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Arroyo Seco
                                                                                                                                                  W   ash
                                                                                                                                          du   go
                                                                                                                                      Ver
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Pasadena
K:\GIS\PROJECTS\CITY_OF_LA_CANADA_FLINTRDIGE\00096_07\MAPDOC\SCREEN_CHECK_DRAFT\CONSERVATION_ELEMENT\FIG4_1.MXD AWC (07-24-2008)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     San Marino
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          South Pasadena
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Al h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         bra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       am
                                                                                                                                                                              Los Angeles                                                                                                   San Gabriel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ash
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            W
                                                                                                                                                                           iver
                                                                                                                                                                  g eles R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           City of La Cañada Flintridge
                                                                                                                                                            Los An
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Arroyo Seco Watershed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Devils Gate Reservoir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Unnamed Drainage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Waterways
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FEMA Flood Zone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           100-year flooding; no BFEs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0           0.5             1              outside the 100- and 500-year floodplains
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Miles         undetermined but possible flood hazards
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Figure SE-4
                                                                                                                                   Source: ESRI Hydro (2003)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Hydrology Map
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         City of La Cañada Flintridge


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Arr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           oyo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Se
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   co
                                                                                                                                                                                        on
                                                                                                                                                                                     Cany
                                                                                                                                                                              Su                                        on
                                                                                                                                                                                tton                               Cany
                                                                                                                                                          Can
                                                                                                                                                             yo n                       y
                                                                                                                                                                             Mulla
                                                                                                                                                                                   ll
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Angeles National Forest
                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                           (                                                     Can
                                                                                                                                                                             Mullally                                               yo n
                                                                                                                                                                             Debris
                                                                                                                                                                             Basin
                                                                                                                                                                             on
                                                                                                                                                                       any
                                                                                                                                                                  rC
                                                                                                                                                              ove
                                                                                                                                                            Sn
                                                                                                                                                                Snover
                                                                                                                                                             ( Debris
                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                Basin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ny
                                                                                                                                                                                     an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Gould
                                                                                                                                                                                        yo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                           n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 y
                                                                                                                                                                           W                                                  er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              n
                                                                                                                                                                            eb
                                                                                                                                                                              be                                                                           Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                rC                                        W                                  ny o
                                                                                                                                                                                            Be                             Winery                 Hay
                                                                                                                                                                                              ck                                                  Debris               Big Briar
                                                                                                                                                                                                ley                        Debris                                                           Upper Gould
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Basin                Debris
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Basin                                                Harter Lane Debris
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (                                                 Basin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (                            Debris Basin Basin
                                                                                                                                           Pick                         Hall Beckley                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (
                                                                                                                                               en                       Debris Basin                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                 s
                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                            ( Pickens
                                                                                                                                            ! Debris
                                                                                                                                               Basin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Hay                                                        Gould
                                                                                                                                                         Hall                                                                                                                                    Debris
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Basin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             STATE HWY 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         nyo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                      FO
                                                                                                                                                                                                         O   TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  I LL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           VD
                                                                                                                                                                                                  VERDUGO BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           GOULD AVE
K:\GIS\PROJECTS\CITY_OF_LA_CANADA_FLINTRDIGE\00096_07\MAPDOC\SCREEN_CHECK_REVISED\SAAFETY_ELEMENT\FIGSE-4.MXD AWC (03-23-2009)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Flin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ash
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  KSH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        I RE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                 h
                                                                                                                                                                     Verdugo Was
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 VY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CHA                                                         OA K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GR O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     D DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              L AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       HIGH                          DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Arro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   o Se
                                                                                                                                                 City of La Cañada Flintridge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ±
                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                           (     Debris Basin Locations
                                                                                                                                                 Local Highways
                                                                                                                                                 Waterways
                                                                                                                                                 Devils Gate Reservoir                                                                                                                                                                      0     1,000   2,000             4,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Feet
                                                                                                                                 Source : California Department of Water Resources (2002); ESRI USA Imagery (1m; 2007)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Figure SE-5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Surface Water and Drainage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                City of La Cañada Flintridge


City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                      Chapter 5. Safety Element
5.3.3            Wildfires
                 Potential fire hazards for a community exist due to natural and human-made
                 conditions. The most significant fire hazard in the City is the potential for
                 wildfires. There are several factors that contribute to the susceptibility of
                 wildfire danger in the City,
                 including climate, winds, steep
                 terrain, vegetation (e.g., chaparral),
                 subdivision design, and water
                 supply. Much of the hillsides and
                 mountainous terrain on the
                 northern and southern slopes
                 within the City are largely covered
                 in chaparral grasses. Chaparral
                 poses unique problems for fire
                 prevention because its components
                 are extremely combustible and
                 genetically predisposed to burn.
                                                                       Wildland-urban interface
                 These hillside areas directly abut
                 developed properties within the
                 City, resulting in a condition
                 known as the wildland-urban
                 interface (WUI). The WUI is
                 commonly described as the area
                 where human development meets
                 and intermingles with
                 undeveloped wildland and/or
                 vegetative fuels. This results in creation of a wildfire-hazard area that poses
                 significant risks to life, property, and infrastructure. In addition, areas
                 surrounding the City, such as the Angeles National Forest, are subject to
                 wildfire hazard due to their native vegetation and steep topography.
                 Such a wildfire, known as the Station Fire, broke out on August 26, 2009, north of
                 the City in the Angeles National Forest near the U.S. Forest Service Angeles Crest
                 Station off Angeles Crest Highway. The Station Fire is the largest fire in Los
                 Angeles County recorded history. It burned over 160,500 acres, caused the death
                 of two fire fighters, destroyed 209 structures, including 89 homes, and caused
                 mandatory evacuations in adjacent communities, including La Cañada Flintridge.
                 Although no structures were destroyed within the City, the fire burned vegetation
                 on the steep northern foothills of the San Gabriel Mountains adjacent to and within
                 the City. As a result of deforestation, ongoing potential impacts resulting from the
                 fire include mudslides, debris flows, and flooding, as well as impacts on
                 watersheds. TreePeople and the Foothill Grassroots Committee are supporting the
General Plan—January 2013                                                                               5-7

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                          Chapter 5. Safety Element
                 U.S. Forest Service reforestation program by donating funds to purchase several
                 million seedlings and volunteering time to plant them.
                 One of the human-
                 made conditions that
                 contributes to potential
                 fire hazards is the
                 original city design.
                 Portions of the City
                 were developed into
                 the steep terrain,
                 resulting in long,
                 winding roads that
                 terminate on the sides
                 and tops of ridges
                 leading to single-
                 family residences.
                                                    Station Fire (2009), as seen from Foothill Boulevard
                 Due to the age of many
                 of these areas, water supply may be insufficient for fire fighting. In addition,
                 some of the older structures in the City may be susceptible to fires due to systems
                 that fail to meet current codes, such as roofing materials and heating and
                 electrical systems.
5.3.4            Hazardous Materials and Sites
                 Hazardous materials are used, stored, produced, and transported throughout
                 Los Angeles County, including within the City. Hazardous materials are defined
                 as those that pose a potential threat to human health, having the capacity to
                 cause serious illness or death. These materials include chemicals, radioactive
                 waste and explosives, natural gas and petroleum, pesticides, agricultural
                 chemicals, and household cleaning products.
5.3.4.1          Transportation of Hazardous Materials
                 Many miles of natural gas and petroleum pipelines traverse Los Angeles County.
                 Hazardous materials are also carried on railcars throughout the region, as well as
                 within tanker trucks on the region’s freeways, including I-210, which transects
                 the City. There is a potential for accidental releases into the environment in the
                 event of a pipeline break or accident on the freeway or rail line.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                                   5-8

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                  Chapter 5. Safety Element
5.3.4.2          Sites Associated with Hazardous Materials
                 Various entities and businesses in the City generate, transport, store, treat, or
                 dispose of hazardous waste as defined under the Resource Conservation and
                 Recovery Act (RCRA). Since most fuels, lubricants, solvents, and paints are
                 considered hazardous materials under RCRA, businesses and institutions that
                 use substantial quantities of such materials are required to adhere to very strict
                 regulations regarding the handling, transport, and storage of hazardous
                 materials. Facilities that are required to adhere to such regulations include, but
                 are not limited to, the following:
                         automobile repair facilities;
                         gas stations;
                         automobile service facilities;
                         construction firms;
                         research and development and manufacturing firms;
                         painting contractors and paint suppliers;
                         dry cleaning firms;
                         schools;
                         hospital and medical facilities; and
                         trucking firms.
                 Businesses other than those listed above, as well as residences, also pose risks
                 associated with hazardous materials. Improper storage and disposal of
                 household hazardous waste pose risks to people and the environment. Many
                 people are unaware that common household products, such as batteries, paint,
                 and pesticides, are not allowed to be disposed of in landfills.
                 JPL, which is located at the eastern edge of the City, was placed on the EPA
                 National Priorities List (NPL) of sites governed by the federal Comprehensive
                 Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA), also
                 known as the Superfund law. In the 1940s and 1950s, chemicals were disposed
                 of in seepage pits on the JLP site. More than 50 chemicals have been detected in
                 the groundwater beneath JPL, including volatile organic compounds (VOCs)—
                 carbon tetrachloride, trichloroethene, dichlorethane, and tetrachloroethene—and
                 perchlorate (a component of solid rocket fuel). Over the years, these chemicals
                 moved down through the soils and into the deep groundwater aquifer of the
                 Raymond Basin watershed in a south/southeasterly direction from JPL (NASA
                 2008). NASA has or is in the process of constructing groundwater treatment
General Plan—January 2013                                                                           5-9

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                   Chapter 5. Safety Element
                 plants in Altadena, Pasadena, and on the JPL site (Environmental Protection
                 Agency 2008).
5.3.5            Crime and Criminal Activity
                 The City has a very low crime rate relative to the greater metropolitan region.
                 The most common crimes are residential burglaries and malicious mischief,
                 including youth-related offenses.
                 The City contracts with the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department for law
                 enforcement services. The Crescenta Valley Station, at 4554 Briggs Avenue in La
                 Crescenta, serves the La Cañada Flintridge community, as well as the
                 unincorporated areas of Montrose, La Crescenta, Lopez Canyon, and the
                 mountainous areas north of these communities. At this time, the Sheriff’s
                 Department plans no major upgrades and the City does not anticipate any
                 change to current contract levels with the Sheriff’s Department.
5.3.6            Emergency Preparedness and Response
                 Emergencies and disasters can result from natural or human-made causes, such
                 as earthquakes, wildfires, landslides, civil disturbance, national security
                 emergencies, technological incidents, and health-related epidemics and
                 pandemics. Although communities put policies, plans, and programs in place to
                 minimize the potential for such events, they must be prepared for the possibility.
                 Even emergencies and disasters that do not occur physically within a community
                 can have significant impacts on the community. Proper preparation and
                 coordination for such events can minimize the extent of adverse consequences.
                 Preventative measures taken before an emergency occurs can also expedite
                 recovery from such incidents.
5.3.6.1          National and State Level
                 The National Incident Management System (NIMS) was established by the
                 federal Department of Homeland Security as a unified approach to incident
                 management. The intent is to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of
                 responders from different jurisdictions and disciplines when jointly responding
                 to natural disasters and emergencies. In California, NIMS is implemented at the
                 State level through the Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS).
                 All agencies that participate in any emergency are required to have and maintain
                 appropriate training and certification and operate under NIMS and SEMS. The
                 City is compliant with NIMS and SEMS.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                           5-10

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                      Chapter 5. Safety Element
5.3.6.2          Local and Regional Level
                 La Cañada Flintridge has a Public Safety Commission that evaluates the
                 community’s safety needs, provides direction for emergency preparedness, and
                 makes recommendations to the City Council. The City also has a Public Safety
                 Coordinator whose responsibility is to coordinate emergency preparedness
                 between the City and other key agencies. An Emergency Operations Center is
                 operated by trained City staff and the Volunteer Emergency Response Team.
                 The City has prepared a Hazard Mitigation Plan (HMP) in collaboration and
                 coordination with the La Cañada Unified School District (LCUSD). The HMP is
                 intended to serve as a mechanism for the community to promote sound public
                 policy to reduce the risk and impact of disaster events. It identifies natural
                 hazards to the community; determines likely impacts from those hazards; sets
                 mitigation goals; and provides action items, including ideas for implementation,
                 identification of the coordinating organization, and a proposed time line. The
                 HMP will assist the community in allocating appropriate resources and setting
                 priorities and standards to ensure the safety of people, property, infrastructure,
                 and the environment.
                 The City is also part of a Disaster Management Area through a Joint Powers
                 Agreement with Los Angeles County. It is part of Disaster Management Area C
                 that also includes Monterey Park, Alhambra, Burbank, and Glendale. The goal
                 of this program is to coordinate in planning for preparedness, mitigation, and
                 recovery from emergencies or disasters.
5.4              Planning to Address Safety Issues
                 Planning to address safety issues includes the consideration and integration of
                 many elements, such as preparation, mitigation, response, recovery, and
                 ensuring continuity of government, services, and operations. The City’s plan to
                 address safety issues is summarized below and described further under
                 Section 5.5, Goals, Objectives, and Policies. In addition, policies have been
                 incorporated into other General Plan elements to work collectively to support
                 land use, conservation, and other actions and decisions to reduce safety risks for
                 residents and the greater community.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                              5-11

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                      Chapter 5. Safety Element
5.4.1            Addressing Seismic, Soils, and Other Geologic
                 Hazards
                 La Cañada Flintridge is subject to seismic hazards and other geologic hazards, as
                 listed below.
                         There is potential for structural and infrastructure damage as a result of
                          strong seismic shaking throughout the City
                         Upland and rangefront areas are at risk from landslides (including
                          seismically induced landslides) and landslide runout.
                         There are risks associated with landslide runout zones adjacent to steep
                          slopes.
                         Lowland areas are at risk of liquefaction.
                         There is potential for accelerated erosion and loss of topsoil resources,
                          particularly in upland areas where soils are highly erodible or have been
                          denuded by wildfires.
                         Upland areas are at risk of non-seismic landslides and the potential for
                          hillside grading to increase the risk of slope failure.
                         The corridor along the Sierra Madre fault zone may be subject to surface
                          fault rupture hazard.
                 Since the City’s existing geology cannot be altered and earthquakes are
                 unavoidable, the City’s plan is to mitigate these potential hazards to the extent
                 possible through good planning, regulations, public education and outreach, and
                 keeping current on research and new regulations.
                 The City’s existing Hillside Development Ordinance, which applies to residential
                 parcels that have an average slope of 15 percent or greater, includes
                 requirements to mitigate potential geologic impacts associated with development
                 in areas with steep slopes. In addition to grading, the ordinance requires a soils
                 engineering report and a geology report where alteration to existing topography
                 is proposed. The Hillside ordinance was adopted subsequent to approval of the
                 previous Safety Element and Seismic Safety section of the Environmental
                 Resources Management Element. Therefore, the updated Safety Element reflects
                 policies consistent with this ordinance.
                 The Safety Element includes policies supportive of the City’s responsibilities in
                 enforcing the State Seismic Hazards Zonation Program, established pursuant to
                 the Seismic Hazards Mapping Act of 1990 (SHMA), which had not been
                 enacted at the time the Safety and Environmental Resource Management
                 elements were last updated. Figure SE-2 delineates State-identified areas of
                 liquefaction and earthquake-induced landslide hazards per the State’s Seismic
                 Hazards Zone Maps. The City is responsible for applying specific criteria when
General Plan—January 2013                                                                              5-12

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                   Chapter 5. Safety Element
                 reviewing and approving projects that fall within a “mapped zone of required
                 investigation,” per the California Geological Society’s Special Publication 117:
                 Guidelines for Evaluation and Mitigating Seismic Hazards in California (Guidelines
                 2008). The City may apply the criteria to other areas outside the mapped zones
                 along the Sierra Madre fault zone. Additionally, SHMA permits local
                 jurisdictions to enforce more stringent standards within State-identified Seismic
                 Hazards Zones. The City will continue to require approval of proper soil
                 reports, bedrock foundation reports, and other engineering or technical
                 documents prior to approval of hillside development proposals in order to
                 ensure safe development. The Guidelines also note that just because “. . .a site
                 lies outside a mapped zone of required investigation does not necessarily mean
                 that the entire site is free from seismic or other geologic hazards, nor does it
                 preclude lead agencies from adopting regulations or procedures that requires
                 site-specific and/or geologic investigations and mitigation of seismic or other
                 geologic hazards.” For instance, a site could be at risk of debris flow
                 inundation, surface fault rupture, etc. The City may consider establishing its
                 own Earthquake Fault Zone along the Sierra Madre fault. There is precedent
                 for that approach in the Los Angeles area, as Los Angeles County zones a
                 number of faults not zoned by the State.
                 The City and LCUSD have completed a HMP, which includes goals and action
                 items to identify potential natural hazards and develop strategies to lessen their
                 impacts on the community. The Safety Element includes policies to integrate
                 goals and action items from the HMP into regulations, policies, and programs, as
                 appropriate.
                 Information is a key component of staying current regarding potential hazards
                 and new regulations that could mitigate negative impacts on the community.
                 The City will monitor research and changes in State, county, and other
                 regulations related to seismic geohazards, including the Alquist-Priolo
                 Earthquake Fault Zoning Act and SHMA, and will fulfill its responsibilities
                 regarding their implementation.
                 The City will encourage the community to be aware of and better prepared for
                 emergencies from earthquakes via outreach, education, and communication. It is
                 also committed to continue to coordinate and cooperate with various agencies,
                 such as LCUSD. This is discussed in more detail under Section 5.4.6, Emergency
                 Preparedness and Response.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                           5-13

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                      Chapter 5. Safety Element
5.4.2            Addressing Flooding and Other Hydrologic
                 Hazards
                 La Cañada Flintridge is subject to flooding and other hydrologic hazards that are
                 exacerbated by existing geologic, soils, and other conditions, such as wildfires,
                 described in the previous section. These include:
                         Minor flooding on the valley floor.
                         Debris and mud flow hazards in and adjacent to rangefront drainages.
                 During the planning period, the City will implement
                 policies, programs, and regulations to prepare for and
                 mitigate impacts from flooding and other hydrological
                 hazards. Refer to SE Goal 1 and SE Objective 1.3 and
                 associated policies for more detail.
                 Implementation of policies and development standards is
                 one way the City can reduce risks from flooding and
                 debris flow hazards. The City’s Hillside Development
                 Ordinance includes requirements to mitigate potential
                 hydrologic impacts associated with development. It
                 requires a hydrology report, including design criteria to
                 mitigate any identified hydrologic hazards. The City may
                 update or add new ordinances based on new information and/or to reduce
                 further the risks associated with development. The City will continue to
                 implement its Floodplain Management and Flood Control ordinances and may
                 update them if additional information or need arise.
                 Another method to mitigate hydrologic impacts is to improve and/or maintain
                 permanent drainage infrastructure within or adjacent to the City, such as curbs
                 and gutters, storm drain
                 systems, and sediment
                 entrapment (debris) basins.
                 To maintain adequate
                 citywide drainage and flood
                 control, the City will work
                 with LACPWD to identify
                 infrastructure needs and
                 deficiencies, update relevant
                 plans, and prioritize projects.
                 An example is the project to
                                                              K-rails on Ocean View Boulevard
                 enlarge the Big Briar,
                 Mullally, and Snover debris basins during the summer and fall of 2010 in
General Plan—January 2013                                                                              5-14

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                   Chapter 5. Safety Element
                 response to the flooding and debris flows that occurred during the winter storms
                 of 2009–2010. The City will also continue to improve and maintain infrastructure
                 over which it has sole responsibility. Temporary measures, including k-rails and
                 sandbags, can also be used to divert rain and debris flows.
5.4.3            Fires and Fire-Related Hazards
                 Although the danger cannot be completely avoided, the City can take steps to
                 reduce the impact that a wildfire could have on the community. The City’s plan
                 is to mitigate wildfire hazards to the extent possible and feasible through
                 policies, regulation, public education and outreach, and implementing and
                 updating regulations
                 regarding fire-related hazards.
                 Refer to SE Goal 1 and SE
                 Objective 1.4 and associated
                 policies for more detail.
                 Government Code Section
                 51179 requires each local
                 agency to designate, by
                 ordinance, Very High Fire
                 Hazard Severity Zones
                 (formerly known as Fire Zone 4) in its jurisdiction. The entire City of La Cañada
                 Flintridge is designated a Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone by the City
                 Council. Properties located in these designated zones are subject to more
                 stringent building code requirements than properties outside of these zones. The
                 City will continue to implement building and fire code provisions and will
                 enhance them as appropriate to increase the resistance of structures to damage
                 by fire and to improve public safety. During the development review process,
                 the City and the Los Angeles County Fire Department (LACoFD) will review
                 water flow and distribution requirements for new development projects to
                 ensure adequate water pressure for firefighting. The City also will evaluate the
                 adequacy of emergency water line capacity as it relates to fire flow requirements.
                 Education also plays an important role in fire safety. There is much that
                 residents and those who work and recreate in the City can do to minimize
                 wildfire-related threats. The City will work with LACoFD and other community
                 partners to communicate actions that individuals can take to reduce potential
                 wildfire hazards. Special attention will be paid to those who live and recreate in
                 the wildland-urban interface.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                           5-15

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                  Chapter 5. Safety Element
5.4.4            Hazardous Materials and Sites
                 Hazardous materials and sites that use, produce, store, or transport hazardous
                 materials are a potential hazard to people and the environment if they are
                 misused, released into the ground or atmosphere, or discarded illegally in
                 landfills. The City will implement its regulatory responsibilities and will work
                 cooperatively with agencies to mitigate the risks associated with hazardous
                 materials. Refer to SE Goal 1 and SE Objective 1.5 and associated policies for
                 more detail. LACoFD’s Health Hazardous Material Division provides oversight
                 of hazardous materials and regulates permits for handling, storage, and use of
                 any explosive or other hazardous material.
                 The City has and implements its own Stormwater Management and Discharge
                 Ordinance. It also requires that development projects conform to the regulations
                 of the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) and City
                 permit.
                 Information and education are also key components of mitigating potential
                 impacts associated with hazardous materials. The City will work with Los
                 Angeles County to provide information to residents and those who work in La
                 Cañada Flintridge to minimize environmental contamination and public health
                 hazards from household hazardous materials.
5.4.5            Crime Prevention
                 Although the City currently has a low crime rate, it can take actions to maintain
                 that low rate during the planning period. Refer to SE Goal 2 and SE Objective 2.1
                 and associated policies for more detail.
                 The City will work with the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department to
                 undertake programs to reduce crime and protect persons and property from
                 criminal activity, including public awareness programs and those that are
                 directed toward increasing the quality and quantity of communication between
                 the City’s youth and law enforcement officers.
5.4.6            Emergency Preparedness and Response
                 The City places a high priority on emergency preparedness and response for
                 both natural and human-made disaster events and values interagency
                 cooperation in that endeavor. During the planning period, the City will enhance
                 those efforts. Refer to SE Goal 3 and SE Objective 3.1 and associated policies for
                 more detail.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                          5-16

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                      Chapter 5. Safety Element
5.5              Goals, Objectives, and Policies
                 The goals, objectives, and policies in the Safety Element promote appropriate
                 land use planning, development standards, building standards, emergency
                 preparedness planning and training, education and outreach, interagency
                 coordination, and continued monitoring of research and changes in regulations
                 related to hazard management to address potential safety hazards.
                 SE Goal 1: Mitigate damage to life, property, infrastructure, and the
                 environment, and economic and social displacement from natural and
                 human-made hazards.
                 SE Objective 1.1: Develop and implement policies and programs that reduce
                 the risk to the community caused by seismic and other geologic hazards.
                       SE Policy 1.1.1: Ensure proper implementation of the City’s adopted
                       building and development codes to provide safe construction (resistant to
                       earthquake, wind, and other structural loading) and responsible building
                       and site preparation practices.
                       SE Policy 1.1.2: Require development to be planned and designed to avoid
                       flood, mudslide, and subsidence hazards to structures on or near hillside
                       areas, as well as downhill of any project.
                       SE Policy 1.1.3: Require approval of preliminary soil reports and other
                       engineering or technical documents prior to approval of hillside
                       development proposals in order to ensure safe development.
                       SE Policy 1.1.4: Development will only be allowed outside of areas of known
                       slope instability and/or high landslide risk unless fully mitigated.
                       SE Policy 1.1.5: Require assessment of landslide run-out risk for new
                       development in rangefront areas.
                       SE Policy 1.1.6: Improve knowledge of landslide hazard areas and
                       understanding of vulnerability and risk to life and property in hazard-prone
                       areas.
                       SE Policy 1.1.7: Implement the City’s regulatory responsibilities through the
                       permit review process for projects that fall within seismic hazard zones on
                       the Seismic Hazards Zones Map for the City, per Los Angeles County
                       building codes.
                       SE Policy 1.1.8: Implement the City’s regulatory responsibilities through
                       the permit review process under the Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault
                       Zoning Act.
                       SE Policy 1.1.9: Support the implementation of State standards for
                       construction of “critical facilities,” such as schools and hospitals.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                              5-17

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                       Chapter 5. Safety Element
                       SE Policy 1.1.10: Encourage seismic strength evaluations of critical facilities in the
                       City, such as schools, assembly buildings, police and fire stations, emergency
                       operations centers, and public infrastructure, to identify vulnerabilities and
                       develop actions to upgrade them to meet current seismic standards.
                       SE Policy 1.1.11: Encourage programs to assist in the seismic upgrading of
                       buildings to meet building and safety codes; investigate funding
                       opportunities and possibilities for cost-sharing.
                       SE Policy 1.1.12: Identify seismically inadequate buildings, including non-
                       ductile concrete structures, and encourage implementation of appropriate
                       seismic retrofit programs.
                       SE Policy 1.1.13: Coordinate with Los Angeles County and Caltrans to
                       identify and correct any structural deficiencies of bridges or overpasses
                       within the City.
                       SE Policy 1.1.14: Promote earthquake preparedness within the community by
                       providing information and participating in earthquake awareness programs.
                       SE Policy 1.1.15: Develop a Grading and Erosion Control Ordinance to
                       reduce sediment impacts associated with construction. The ordinance shall
                       include the following:
                           a. When construction occurs in areas not previously graded, the extent
                               of disturbance shall be limited to the minimum needed for
                               construction, staging, and access.
                           b. Topsoil removed during grading shall be stockpiled for onsite reuse
                               during site landscaping. Topsoil stockpiles shall be kept separate
                               from other excavated materials to facilitate effective reuse.
                       SE Policy 1.1.16: Require the mandatory geotechnical reports prepared for
                       all hillside development and other implementing ordinances to include a
                       site- and project-specific assessment of ridge-top shattering risks. If
                       appropriate in the professional judgment of the geotechnical engineer
                       and/or certified engineering geologist of record, the report shall also
                       identify geotechnical measures to mitigate the hazard to the extent feasible.
                       SE Policy 1.1.17: Modify the City’s existing Hillside Development
                       Ordinance or establish new ordinances to require the following.
                           a. For any hillside development qualifying as a project as defined by the
                               Seismic Hazards Mapping Act, the City shall require preparation of a
                               site-specific geotechnical investigation that includes an evaluation of
                               landslide hazard. Reports shall be prepared by qualified, California-
                               licensed professional personnel—geotechnical engineer (GE) and
                               certified engineering geologist (EG)—and shall be independently peer
                               reviewed by personnel with commensurate licensure. The City shall
                               enforce recommendations of the site-specific geotechnical
                               investigation via the building permit process, and shall be responsible
                               for proper implementation.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                                5-18

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                     Chapter 5. Safety Element
                          b. For any new development in rangefront areas, the City shall require a
                              site-specific assessment of risks related to landslide runout. The
                              assessment shall be performed and reported by qualified, California-
                              licensed professional personnel—GE and certified EG—and shall be
                              independently peer reviewed by personnel with commensurate
                              licensure. The City shall enforce any recommendations of the report
                              via the building permit process, and shall be responsible for proper
                              implementation.
                 SE Objective 1.2: Keep current regarding research and regulations related to
                 geohazards and geohazards management.
                       SE Policy 1.2.1: Monitor the State of California’s review of the Sierra Madre
                       fault system for potential zoning under the Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault
                       Zoning Act.
                       SE Policy 1.2.2: Monitor State zoning laws, including the Alquist-Priolo
                       Earthquake Fault Zoning Act and SHMA.
                       SE Policy 1.2.3: Monitor changes in State regulations, such as those related to
                       geohazards management and improvement in building standards, and
                       update local regulations as appropriate.
                 SE Objective 1.3: Develop and implement policies and programs that reduce
                 the risk to the community from flooding and other hydrologic hazards.
                       SE Policy 1.3.1: Ensure that new construction conforms to all applicable
                       provisions of the National Flood Insurance Program in order to protect lives,
                       buildings, and property from flooding.
                       SE Policy 1.3.2: Require approval of preliminary hydrology reports prior to
                       approval of hillside development proposals where necessary in order to
                       ensure safe development.
                       SE Policy 1.3.3: Continue to install curbs and gutters where appropriate to
                       meet the long-term needs of the City.
                       SE Policy 1.3.4: Evaluate and make improvements to inadequate storm drain
                       systems, including channels, drains, catch basins, pipes, and inlets, to ensure
                       capacity for maximum runoff flows.
                       SE Policy 1.3.5: Continue to work with LACPWD to update its Plan for
                       Flood Control and Water Conservation for the La Cañada Flintridge area
                       and to prioritize projects.
                       SE Policy 1.3.6: Encourage LACPWD to adequately maintain the sediment
                       entrapment (debris) basins for which it is responsible.
                       SE Policy 1.3.7: Identify surface water drainage obstructions for all parts of
                       the City of La Cañada Flintridge and develop potential mitigation actions.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                             5-19

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                    Chapter 5. Safety Element
                       SE Policy 1.3.8: Identify flood hazard areas and develop appropriate land
                       use regulations for areas subject to flooding.
                       SE Policy 1.3.9: Continue to implement the City’s Flood Control and
                       Floodplain Management ordinances.
                       SE Policy 1.3.10: Maintain natural stream gradients to ensure hydrologic
                       drainage and bulked-flow runoff.
                       SE Policy 1.3.11: Work with the Federal Emergency Management Agency to
                       prepare a detailed hydraulic study to assess the City’s 100-year flood zone
                       for future development.
                       SE Policy 1.3.12: Develop a Grading and Erosion Control Ordinance to
                       reduce sediment impacts associated with construction.
                 SE Objective 1.4: Develop and implement policies and programs that reduce
                 the risk to the community from fires and fire-related hazards.
                       SE Policy 1.4.1: Ensure that the City’s contractual arrangement with
                       LACoFD provides an adequate level of fire protection to provide reasonable
                       security of persons and property throughout the community.
                       SE Policy 1.4.2: Work with Los Angeles County to review and update its
                       building and/or fire codes to address construction in the wildland-urban
                       interface (WUI), including requirements of the California Building
                       Commission’s adopted WUI codes.
                       SE Policy 1.4.3: Work with CAL-FIRE regarding updates to the Very High
                       Fire Hazard Severity Zone in Local Responsibility Areas.
                       SE Policy 1.4.4: Encourage implementation of wildfire mitigation activities in
                       a manner consistent with the goal of promoting sustainable ecological
                       management.
                       SE Policy 1.4.5: Require property owners to create and maintain defensible
                       space around their buildings and structures in those portions of the City that
                       are adjacent to the WUI interface as mapped.
                       SE Policy 1.4.6: Require the use of fire-retardant roofing material for all new
                       construction and major remodels involving roof additions. Encourage
                       property owners with shake shingle roofs to upgrade to fire-retardant
                       materials.
                       SE Policy 1.4.7: Continue to enforce the brush clearance/weed abatement
                       program.
                       SE Policy 1.4.8: To the extent of the City’s authority, strongly encourage
                       water providers to conduct an evaluation of the water infrastructure based
                       on current code standards with special emphasis on the upslope WUI area.
                       Results of the evaluation should disclose deficiencies (differences between
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            5-20

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                    Chapter 5. Safety Element
                       current code and existing conditions). During the planning period, a
                       method should be developed and initiated to correct identified deficiencies.
                       SE Policy 1.4.9: Coordinate with LACoFD to operate an education program
                       regarding fire hazards and strategies to minimize risk for residential,
                       commercial, and institutional uses.
                       SE Policy 1.4.10: Increase communication, coordination, and collaboration
                       between WUI property owners, the City, and fire prevention crews and
                       officials to address risks and implement mitigation measures.
                 SE Objective 1.5: Develop and implement policies and programs that
                 minimize the level of risk to public health, safety, and the environment
                 associated with the use, transport, treatment, and disposal of hazardous
                 materials and waste.
                       SE Policy 1.5.1: Cooperate with Los Angeles County to implement applicable
                       portions of the County’s Hazardous Waste Management Program.
                       SE Policy 1.5.2: Coordinate with Los Angeles County in the implementation
                       of NPDES regulations.
                       SE Policy 1.5.3: Require development projects to conform to the regulations
                       of the NPDES permits.
                       SE Policy 1.5.4: Continue to enforce the City’s Stormwater Management and
                       Discharge Ordinance.
                       SE Policy 1.5.5: Encourage safe disposal of household hazardous waste through
                       Los Angeles County’s Household Hazardous Waste Collection Program.
                       SE Policy 1.5.6: Require completion of a Phase I, II, or III Environmental Site
                       Assessment (ESA), prepared by a Registered Environmental Assessor (REA),
                       and remediation or further analysis, such as a Phase II or Phase III ESA, for
                       any future project that would take place on a site included on a list of
                       hazardous materials sites compiled pursuant to Government Code Section
                       65962.5 (Cortese List), or on a site that was previously occupied by a land
                       use that use or generated hazardous materials or wastes.
                 SE Goal 2: Provide a safe and secure community that minimizes impact
                 on citizens and property from criminal activity.
                 SE Objective 2.1: Undertake programs and policies to reduce crime and protect
                 persons and property from criminal activity.
                       SE Policy 2.1.1: Ensure that the City’s contractual arrangement with the Los
                       Angeles County Sheriff’s Department provides an adequate level of police
                       services to provide reasonable security of persons and property throughout
                       the community.
                       SE Policy 2.1.2: Provide education and assistance to citizens for the purpose
                       of preventing crimes against persons and property.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            5-21

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                        Chapter 5. Safety Element
                       SE Policy 2.1.3: Encourage and support programs that increase the quality
                       and quantity of communications between law enforcement officers and the
                       community's youth, improve youth recreational and leisure time
                       opportunities, improve youth employment opportunities, and strengthen
                       the family unit.
                       SE Policy 2.1.4: Support citizen efforts to organize neighborhood and
                       business watch programs.
                 SE Goal 3: Ensure that the community is prepared for and able to
                 respond to natural and human-made emergencies and disasters, such
                 as earthquakes, wildfires, flooding, debris and mud flows, landslides,
                 release of hazardous materials, civil disturbances, national security
                 emergencies, technological incidents, and health-related epidemics or
                 pandemics.
                 SE Objective 3.1: Develop plans and programs to prepare for and provide
                 rapid and effective response to disasters and threats of danger to life and
                 property.
                       SE Policy 3.1.1: Continue to implement the City’s Hazard Mitigation Plan
                       (HMP) and integrate the goals and action items into regulatory documents
                       and programs, where appropriate.
                       SE Policy 3.1.2: Maintain and periodically update the City’s Hazard
                       Inventory.
                       SE Policy 3.1.3: Coordinate with appropriate public and private agencies and
                       organizations, citizens, and businesses to implement the City’s HMP.
                       SE Policy 3.1.4: Evaluate the City’s roadways regarding access, alignments,
                       two routes for egress, etc., to facilitate fire, police, and ambulance access and
                       resident egress in case of an emergency.
                       SE Policy 3.1.5: Continue to utilize and support the City’s Public Safety
                       Commission and Public Safety Coordinator, and the La Cañada Flintridge
                       Volunteer Emergency Response Team.
                       SE Policy 3.1.6: Establish a formal role for the City’s Hazards Mitigation
                       Committee to develop a sustainable process for implementing, monitoring,
                       and evaluating city-wide mitigation activities.
                       SE Policy 3.1.7: Continue to participate in Disaster Management Area C
                       through a Joint Powers Agreement with Los Angeles County.
                       SE Policy 3.1.8: Maintain compliance with the federal National Incident
                       Management System (NIMS) and the State Standardized Emergency
                       Management System (SEMS).
                       SE Policy 3.1.9: Develop and implement education and outreach programs
                       to increase public awareness of the risks associated with natural and human-
General Plan—January 2013                                                                                5-22

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                      Chapter 5. Safety Element
                       made hazards, and to assist the public in being prepared for emergencies or
                       disasters. Involve all sectors of the community, including the real estate and
                       insurance industries, schools, public and private sector organizations, the
                       business community, and residents.
                       SE Policy 3.1.10: Identify and pursue funding opportunities to develop and
                       implement mitigation activities.
                       SE Policy 3.1.11: Encourage critical City facilities to purchase and/or test
                       back-up power facilities for use during a power failure.
                       SE Policy 3.1.12: Refine the existing warning system to alert residents of
                       potential hazards as well as provide post-disaster information.
                       SE Policy 3.1.13: Mobilize a core group of volunteer professionals to render
                       prompt structural evaluation of sites potentially used for emergency mass
                       shelters.
                       SE Policy 3.1.14: Ensure adequate seismic performance of emergency shelter
                       facilities.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                              5-23

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                     Chapter 5. Safety Element
                             This page intentionally left blank.
General Plan—January 2013                                                             5-24

         Chapter 6
Circulation Elem ent

                                                                     6.0
                                                       CIRCULATION ELEMENT
6.1            Introduction
               The Circulation Element of La Cañada Flintridge’s General Plan is intended to
               guide the development of the City’s circulation system in a manner that is
               compatible with the Land Use Element. Due to the importance of a well-planned
               circulation system, the State has mandated the adoption of a citywide Circulation
               Element since 1955. The current State mandate for a Circulation Element is
               found in Government Code section 65302(b), which states that the General Plan
               shall include:
                   ... a circulation element consisting of the general location and extent of existing and
                   proposed major thoroughfares, transportation routes, terminals, and other local
                   public utilities and facilities, all correlated with the land use element of the plan.
               To help meet the future demands and achieve balanced growth, the City has
               adopted specific goals, objectives, and policies, which serve as the basis for the
               Circulation Element.
6.1.1          Related Plans and Programs
6.1.1.1        Southern California Association of Governments
               Regional Transportation Plan (RTP)
               As the designated Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO) for six Southern
               California counties, the Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG)
               is mandated by the federal government to prepare a Regional Transportation
               Plan (RTP) every 4 years to address the region's transportation needs. The RTP
               represents the collective vision of the SCAG region and provides a framework
               for the future development of our regional transportation system. It must
               address all modes of transportation within the region; it must have a planning
General Plan—January 2013                                                                                 6-1

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                       Chapter 6. Circulation Element
                  horizon of at least 20 years; and it must be developed through a collaborative,
                  comprehensive, and continuous process. The projects addressing these needs are
                  identified in the RTP and become eligible for State and federal funding once the
                  Plan is adopted. The 2008 RTP project list includes only one project in La Cañada
                  Flintridge—the East/West Bikeway Corridor, which includes design and
                  construction of 3.42 miles of east/west directional Class II and Class III bikes
                  lanes on Verdugo Boulevard, Descanso Drive, and Oak Grove Drive. The 2012
                  RTP includes the “SR-710 Transportation Improvement Options” project in its
                  regional plan.1 One of these potential options entails a northward tunnel
                  extension of the I-710 Freeway from its current terminus in Alhambra to intersect
                  with the I-210/SR-134 freeways in Pasadena. The northward extension would be
                  designated as the SR-710 Freeway. It is important that the City remain actively
                  involved in implementation of the 2012 RTP to protect against potential adverse
                  impacts to La Cañada Flintridge.
6.1.1.2           Regional Transportation Improvement Program (RTIP)
                  The Regional Transportation Improvement Program (RTIP) is SCAG’s
                  compilation of State, federal, and locally funded transportation projects. In
                  addition to projects identified in the State Transportation Improvement Program
                  (STIP), the RTIP includes federal Congestion Mitigation Air Quality (CMAQ)
                  and Surface Transportation Program (STP) funds, other federal funds, and
                  projects entirely funded by local and private means. The only project included in
                  the 2006 RTIP within La Cañada Flintridge was the East/West Bikeway Corridor,
                  described above.
6.1.1.3           Congestion Management Program (CMP)
                  Under California State law, every county with an urbanized area of 50,000 or
                  more must adopt a Congestion Management Program (CMP). The CMP has
                  been implemented locally by the Los Angeles County Metropolitan
                  Transportation Authority (Metro). The Los Angeles County CMP identifies
                  major corridors to monitor levels of service and congestion throughout the
                  County. Corridors include all freeways, selected major arterial roadways, and
                  intersections. La Cañada Flintridge contains the following roadways and
                  intersections that are monitored as part of the CMP program:
                         Foothill (Interstate 210 [I-210]) Freeway
                         Glendale (State Route 2 [SR-2]) Freeway
1
  Subsequent to approval of the 2012 RTP, the description “SR-710 Transportation Improvement Options” was
changed by SCAG staff, without approval, to “SR-710 North Extension” and “SR-710 North Extension (tunnel)
(alignment TBD).”
 General Plan—January 2013                                                                                     6-2

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                              Chapter 6. Circulation Element
                         Angeles Crest Highway (SR-2)
                         Angeles Crest Highway/I-210 Westbound Ramp Intersection
                 As of the latest 2010 CMP, the intersection of Angeles Crest Highway/I-210
                 Westbound Ramps operated at level of service (LOS) A during the AM peak
                 hour and LOS B during the PM peak hour. CMP monitoring methodologies are
                 distinct from those used to determine roadway LOS in this General Plan.
6.2              Setting
                 The City is situated between the foothills of the San Gabriel Mountains and the
                 Angeles National Forest to the north, and the San Rafael Hills to the south. A
                 well-established roadway network allows residents and commuters to travel
                 within the City and provide connectivity to surrounding cities such as Glendale,
                 Pasadena, and Los Angeles. La Cañada Flintridge is served by two major
                 regional freeways (I-210 and SR-2), a local roadway network with relatively few
                 arterial streets, and several transit lines.
6.3              Baseline Circulation System
                 This section describes the City’s local roadway system, transit system, bicycle
                 paths, goods movement infrastructure, and parking availability. Since La
                 Cañada Flintridge is predominantly a hillside residential community with
                 limited through arterial access, the street system is comprised of primarily
                 residential and residential collector roadways, with only a few arterials. The City
                 also has a network of riding and hiking trails that traverse the community.
6.3.1            Regional Freeways
                 The two freeways that traverse the City are under the jurisdiction of the
                 California Department of Transportation (Caltrans) and provide regional access
                 to the greater Los Angeles area:
                         The Foothill Freeway, I-210, is a
                          regional east–west limited-access
                          facility between Interstate 5 (I-5) in
                          Sylmar to the west and Pasadena
                          and San Bernardino County to the
                          east. In the City, the I-210 Freeway
                          has four travel lanes in each
                          direction with interchange ramps
                                                                     Foothill Freeway approaching SR-2
General Plan—January 2013                                                                              6-3

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                  Chapter 6. Circulation Element
                          at the Glendale (SR-2) Freeway, Angeles Crest Highway (SR-2), Gould
                          Avenue (half-interchange), Foothill Boulevard (half-interchange), and
                          Berkshire Place.
                         The Glendale Freeway, SR-2, is a regional north–south limited-access
                          facility that extends from the I-210 in the City to Glendale and Los
                          Angeles in the south. In the City, SR-2 has four to five travel lanes in each
                          direction with interchange ramps at the I-210, Verdugo Boulevard, and
                          Foothill Boulevard.
6.3.2            Roadway Classifications
                 Five general roadway classifications are used to designate the public streets
                 within the roadway network of La Cañada Flintridge: Primary, Major, Collector,
                 Residential Collector, and Local
                 Residential. The first four of
                 these categories are considered
                 part of the City’s General Plan
                 circulation network because
                 their function is to move traffic
                 efficiently from one part of the
                 City to another as well as in and
                 out of the City. Local
                 residential streets and private
                 roadways, in contrast, provide               Foothill Boulevard at Verdugo Boulevard
                 direct access to adjacent
                 properties. Figure CE-1 illustrates the Primary, Major, Collector, and Residential
                 Collector roadways. Foothill Boulevard east of I-210, while classified as a Major
                 Roadway, is indicated as a “Special Major” Roadway because of its limited
                 width. Figure CE-2 illustrates the typical cross-sections of all of the roadway
                 classifications in the City. The following sections describe the classifications.
6.3.2.1          Primary Roadway
                 This classification has an ideal 80-foot curb-to-curb width within a 100-foot right-
                 of-way. A four-lane, divided roadway can be provided within this street section,
                 based on the typical section shown in Figure CE-2. However, the actual design
                 may vary depending on the specific roadway needs. In some cases, the curb-to-
                 curb width may change to best accommodate the overall transportation system
                 and topography, but the right-of-way needs are expected to remain constant.
                 The following are the roadways designated as Primary Roadways in the City:
                         Foothill Boulevard is the only regional arterial street in the City. It
                          traverses the City in a generally east–west orientation with two travel
General Plan—January 2013                                                                                 6-4

              Ocean View Blvd
                                Castle Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Gr
                                                                 Fairmount Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    nri
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         dg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    eD
                                                                                   Ea
                                                                                    r l m
                                                                                            o
                                                                                            n                                                                                                                                                                                          r
                                                                                                                        El Vago St
                                                                                                t
                                                                                                A   ve
                                                                    Hillard Ave
            Cross St
                                                       Palm Dr
                                                                                                                                               Vista del Valle
                                                                                                                                                       Green Ln                                                                                                                          Sta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 rlig
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ht
                                                                                                                                                                                             Princess
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Cre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               st D
                                                                                                Alta Canyada Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       r
                                        Foo                                                                        Olive Ln
                                            thill
                                                                                                                                                                         Angeles Crest Hwy
                                                    Blvd                                                                                                                                        Ann
                                                                                                                                                                                                   e
                                                                                                                                      La Canada Blvd
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Lyn
                                                                                                                                                                                                       n            eha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ven
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ln
                                (
                                g
                                &
                                %                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Knight                       Way
                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                        g
                                                                                                                        &
                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                   Verdugo         Blvd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Gould Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     nta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ine
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              zW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ay
                                                                                                                                                         Cornishon Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Rd
                                                                                                                                                                         Chevy Chase Dr
                                                                                                                  Des
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Hampton               Crown Ave
                                                                                                                     can
                                                                                                                          so                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Dr
                                                                                                                               D                                                                                                                                                                                                             Bap
                                                                                                                               r                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                tist
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Oak Grov
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    eW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Commonweath Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Beulah Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Viro Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Oakwood Ave         Woodleigh Ln
                                   N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Berkshire Ave
              NOT TO SCALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ire Pl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Flin                                                                                                         Berksh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        trid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ge
Legend                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                e                          Highla
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        nd Dr
                         Freeway
                         Primary (100’ R.O.W)
                         Major (80’ R.O.W)
                         Special Major (<80’ R.O.W)
                         Collector
                         Residential Collector
                         City Limit
                         Signal Locations
Note: roads not shown are Residential Roadways
                                                                                  General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Figure CE-1
                                                                                  City of La Cañada Flintridge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Roadway Classification Map
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          G:\USERS\2007\J07-1651 La Canada General Plan\gra\RoadwayClassification.CDR


  Primary
         10’                40’              40’                   10’
     Shoulder                                                     Shoulder
                                    Roadway
  Major
                                     80’
      Varies                      Varies                  Varies
  Special Major
                                     66’
  Foothill Blvd
  (East of Crown)
                      8’                           Varies*
                                                             (*) Sidewalk and Bike Path
                                                                 Through the “Hill” Section
  Collector
                                    88’
         10’                        68’                     10’
  Residential Collector
                                   60’
                  10’              40’            10’
  Local Residential
                                   52’
                    8’            36’           8’
                                 IDEAL
                                    44’
                      8’(b)         28’     8’(b)
                                                       (b) Shoulder should be improved if
                                                           parking, bicycle use or pedestrians
                                                           are to be accommodated
                                MINIMUM
                                                                                         * Note: Images are Not to Scale
General Plan                                                                                          FIGURE CE-2
City of La Cañada Flintridge                                          Standard Street Sections
                                                                          G:\USERS\2007\J07-1651 La Canada General Plan\gra\10-17-12


City of La Cañada Flintridge                                              Chapter 6. Circulation Element
                          lanes in each direction. It is a Primary Roadway west of the I-210
                          interchange. Foothill Boulevard is generally divided by a raised or
                          painted median. The street is the primary commercial thoroughfare and
                          provides access to the downtown area of the City. It also has a half-
                          interchange to/from the east with the I-210 Freeway near its eastern
                          terminus.
                         Verdugo Boulevard provides east–west access between the communities
                          of Montrose and La Crescenta to the west and the downtown area to the
                          east. It is a Primary Roadway only west of Alta Canyada Road. With two
                          travel lanes in each direction, Verdugo Boulevard is divided by a painted
                          median. The arterial has a half-interchange with the SR-2 Freeway
                          to/from the south.
                         Angeles Crest Highway provides north–south access to the downtown
                          area at its south end and the Angeles National Forest to its north. It
                          serves as SR-2 north of the I-210 Freeway. It has two travel lanes in each
                          direction within the City and is divided by a raised or painted median.
                          Angeles Crest Highway has a full-access interchange with the I-210
                          Freeway.
6.3.2.2          Major Roadway
                 A Major Roadway generally has an ideal 80-foot right-of-way width, but the
                 street width may vary to accommodate the distinctive transportation needs of
                 the specific area. There is one Special Major section on Foothill Boulevard, east
                 of Crown Avenue. This section needs to provide a higher function than a
                 Residential Collector, but has existing right-of-way and roadway constraints.
                 The following are the roadways designated as Major Roadways:
                         Foothill Boulevard east of the I-210 interchange is classified a Major
                          Roadway to its terminus at Oak Grove Drive. It is divided by double
                          yellow striping.
                         Verdugo Boulevard east of Alta Canyada Road is classified a Major
                          Roadway, with one lane in each direction from Alta Canyada Road to
                          Foothill Boulevard, and is divided with double yellow striping.
                         Alta Canyada Road south of Foothill Boulevard provides north–south
                          access to the west of the downtown area toward Descanso Gardens south
                          of Verdugo Boulevard. It has one lane in each direction and is divided by
                          double yellow striping.
                         Descanso Drive provides east–west access southwest of the downtown
                          area to Descanso Gardens south of Verdugo Boulevard. It has one lane in
                          each direction and is divided by double yellow striping.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                             6-5

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                               Chapter 6. Circulation Element
                         Gould Avenue north of Foothill Boulevard provides north–south access
                          to the east of the downtown area with one travel lane in each direction. It
                          has a half-interchange (to/from the west) with the I-210 and is divided by
                          a painted median.
                         Oak Grove Drive provides north–south access along the far eastern edge
                          of the City. It has two travel lanes in each direction with raised and
                          painted medians. The street primarily provides access to the NASA Jet
                          Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), La Cañada High School, and the Flintridge
                          Riding Club. Only a portion of Oak Grove Drive is within La Cañada
                          Flintridge city limits.
                         Berkshire Place between Berkshire Avenue and Oak Grove Drive
                          provides east–west access to the I-210 via a full interchange west of Oak
                          Grove Drive. It has one travel lane in each direction west of the
                          eastbound freeway ramps and two lanes in each direction east of these
                          ramps. Berkshire Place is divided by double yellow striping.
6.3.2.3          Collector
                 Collector roadways are designed to carry traffic between local streets and the
                 arterial street network. The typical right-of-way dimension is 88 feet with a 68-foot
                 curb-to-curb width. The typical designated roadway width allows for on-street
                 parking or a center left-turn lane. Currently, the only collector roadway in the City
                 of La Cañada Flintridge is Town Center Drive east of Angeles Crest Highway,
                 providing parallel capacity to Foothill Boulevard. It has one travel lane in each
                 direction, with a painted median, and is located south of the I-210 Freeway.
6.3.2.4          Residential Collector
                 Residential Collector roadways are residential in nature due to surrounding
                 development, but are also designed to carry traffic between local streets and the
                 arterial street network. The typical right-of-way dimension is 60 feet with a
                 40-foot curb-to-curb width. However, some streets have different widths and are
                 still classified as Residential Collectors. The typical designated roadway widths
                 allow for on-street parking or, in rare cases, a left-turn lane.
6.3.2.5          Local Residential
                 Local residential roadways provide direct access to adjacent properties, short
                 distance intra-neighborhood traffic, and access to higher classification roads
                 and streets. The ideal local residential right-of-way is 52 feet wide, while the
                 minimum is shown as 44 feet wide. “Ideal” and “minimum” cross-sections
General Plan—January 2013                                                                              6-6

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                            Chapter 6. Circulation Element
                 are shown in Figure CE-2, giving the preferred design compared to existing
                 conditions in some locations. Although many existing areas do not meet this
                 ideal, it may be beneficial to have a desired street section for new
                 development or redevelopment. The ideal cross-section may not always be
                 feasible, but would provide for multiple modes of transportation including
                 pedestrians, bicyclists, and vehicles. It can be beneficial to obtain the ideal
                 right-of-way for short sections, even if the overall street improvements are not
                 provided until a future date. The minimum right-of-way provides an interim
                 section, which can allow a phased widening for areas that fall below the
                 minimum standard and for which widening to the ideal is not feasible in the
                 foreseeable future, and does not mean the entire width of right-of-way will be
                 paved. The City may allow flexibility in the Local Residential cross-sections
                 in consideration of several factors, including terrain and developable lands
                 areas, context of the roadway in comparison to land uses, among others.
6.3.2.6          Private Roadways
                 Private roadways are neighborhood roadways not dedicated to the City and not
                 maintained by the City. These streets are typically maintained by a
                 homeowners’ association. They must be designed to City standards for
                 emergency access and accessibility.
6.3.3            Roadway Capacities
                 Table CE-1 presents the maximum operational daily traffic capacity for each
                 roadway classification within the City. The roadway capacities were developed
                 by the Florida Department of Transportation based on road width, number of
                 lanes, and other characteristics, and are used by many jurisdictions across the
                 country.
                 Table CE-1. Typical Daily Roadway Capacity by Roadway Classification
                                                Typical Number of Lanes     Maximum Operational
                  Roadway Classification             per Direction         Daily Roadway Capacity
                  Primary Roadway                          2                        32,900
                  Major Roadway                            1                        15,600
                  Collector                                1                        15,600
                  Residential Collector                    1                        12,600
                  Local Residential                        1                         5,000
                  Source: Florida DOT
General Plan—January 2013                                                                           6-7

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 6. Circulation Element
6.3.4            Existing Transit System
                 The City of La Cañada Flintridge is presently served by several bus lines
                 provided by a number of transit systems: Metro, Los Angeles Department of
                 Transportation (LADOT), Pasadena Area Rapid Transit (ARTS), Glendale
                 Beeline, and the City of La Cañada Flintridge (LCF). There is also a Dial-A-Ride
                 service available to seniors and disabled persons. Major bus stops include the
                 park-and-ride lot located on Verdugo Boulevard, adjacent to the SR-2 Freeway
                 southbound on-ramp, and JPL. Several bus lines have termini there, and many
                 serve La Cañada Flintridge. The LCF Shuttle is the primary bus line serving the
                 City, with 37 stops along Foothill Boulevard. This service is provided by the
                 City. Figure CE-3 illustrates these routes.
6.3.5            Existing Bikeway Facilities
                 The City of recognizes that a safe and effective bikeway network enhances the
                 quality of life for residents, visitors, and employees and encourages bicycle travel
                 for recreation and as an alternative form of transportation. Bikeways are
                 included in the management of the circulation network, and are classified
                 according to the location of the facility within the right-of-way. Bikeway
                 classifications include:
                         Class I Bikeway: Bike paths provide for bicycle travel on a paved right-
                          of-way completely separated from vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
                         Class II Bikeway: Bike lanes are striped and stenciled onto a vehicular
                          street. Vehicles are prohibited from entering the bike lane except within
                          200 feet of making a right turn or turning on or off of the road.
                         Class III Bikeway: Bike routes provide for shared use with pedestrian or
                          vehicular travel and are identified only by posted signage. Class III bike
                          routes typically share the road alongside vehicular traffic.
                 Existing bicycle facilities in La Cañada Flintridge are identified on Figure CE-5
                 and include:
                         Class II bike lanes on Town
                          Center Drive, Oak Grove Drive,
                          Descanso Drive, and Berkshire
                          Place east of the I-210 Freeway.
                         Class III route on Berkshire
                          Drive and Chevy Chase Drive
                          between Berkshire Drive and
                          Descanso Drive.
                                                                    Bicyclist at Mayor's Discovery Park
General Plan—January 2013                                                                                6-8

       Ocean View Blvd
                         Castle Rd
                                                             Fairmount Ave                                                                                                                                                                               Gr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         nr
                                                                              Ea       o                                                                                                                                                                                   idg
                                                                               r l m   nt                                                                                                                                                                                             e
                                                                                                                    El Vago St                                                                                                                                                            Dr
                                                                                           A ve
                                                                Hillard Ave
     Cross St
                                                   Palm Dr
                                                                                                                                            Vista del Valle
                                                                                                                                                    Green Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                          Princess
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Starli
                                                                                            Alta Canyada Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ght
                                     Foo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Cres
                                        thill                                                                  Olive Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t Dr
                                                                                                                                                                      Angeles Crest Hwy
                                                Blvd
                                                                                                                                                                                             Ann
                                                                                                                                                                                                e
                                                                                                                                   La Canada Blvd
                                                                                                                                                                                                Lyn
                                                                                                                                                                                                    n            eha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ven
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ln
                         (
                         g
                         &
                         %                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Knight                       Way
                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                g
                                                                                                                &
                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                               Verdugo          Blvd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Gould Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           nta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ine
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    zW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               JPL
                                                                                                                                                      Cornishon Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Rd
                                                                                                                                                                      Chevy Chase Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Crown Ave
                                                                                                              Des
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Hampton
                                                                                                                 can
                                                                                                                      so
                                                                                                                           Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Bap
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               k Grove D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      tist
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            eW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Commonweath Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Beulah Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Viro Rd      Oa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Oakwood Ave    Woodleigh Ln
    N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Berkshire Ave
NOT TO SCALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ire Pl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Flin                                                                                                    Berksh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     trid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               nd Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Highla
Legend
                         Glendale Beeline - Route 3
                         Pasadena ARTS - Line 52
                         Metro - Line 177
                         Metro - Line 268
                         LADOT Commuter Express -
                         Route 409
                         LCF Shuttle
                         City Limit
                                                                              General Plan Update                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Figure CE-3
                                                                              City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Transit Line Map
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     G:\USERS\2007\J07-1651 La Canada General Plan\gra\Fig5_TransitLines.CDR


City of La Cañada Flintridge                                              Chapter 6. Circulation Element
                         Bicycle racks, bike lockers, and restrooms located at Mayor’s Discovery
                          Park.
                 The Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority (Metro)
                 identified a key gap in the 2006 Metro Bicycle Transportation Strategic Plan,
                 along Foothill Boulevard between Wentworth in the City of Los Angeles and
                 Oak Grove in La Cañada Flintridge. There is an existing Class II route along a
                 portion of this gap, extending from Briggs Avenue to Pennsylvania Avenue, west
                 of the City. As bicycle facilities within the City are completed, the locations may
                 be submitted to Metro for inclusion on the Countywide map.
6.3.6            Existing Trails Network
                 The City provides access to open space via a network of multi-use trails that
                 enhances the quality of life for the community. The trails network is incomplete
                 at this time, and several projects are planned to link trails in the northern and
                 southern portions of the City, with enhanced connections to the regional trail
                 network. The La Cañada Flintridge Trails Master Plan was adopted on March 6,
                 2006 by the City Council. According to the Trails Master Plan’s trails inventory,
                 there are approximately 24 miles of existing hiking and riding trails.
                 Approximately 4 miles of trails are maintained by the City; these trails are
                 currently on City-owned, Southern California Edison (SCE) right-of-way, or
                 Caltrans property. The remaining 20 miles of trails are on County, SCE, federal,
                 and privately owned property; these trails are maintained by the County. Figure
                 CE-4 shows the active trail system in La Cañada Flintridge. The City also
                 adopted a Trails Ordinance in 2006, which outlines conduct on City and non-City
                 owned trails and on property adjoining and abutting trails.
6.3.7            Truck Circulation
                 The City does not have any designated truck routes. Trucks utilize the freeways,
                 State routes, and Foothill Boulevard as functional truck routes. Commercial
                 trucks with three or more axles or over 4½ tons are prohibited from using
                 Angeles Crest Highway. Given the predominance of local streets in the City and
                 the absence of a grid arterial system, there is not expected to be high demand for
                 through truck traffic on City streets. Truck traffic in La Cañada Flintridge is
                 associated almost exclusively with local deliveries or pick-ups. Due to the
                 absence of designated truck routes, the legal truck route is the shortest distance
                 to the origin/destination from the I-210 or SR-2 freeways, both regionally
                 designated truck routes.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                             6-9

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                Chapter 6. Circulation Element
6.3.8            Parking Facilities
6.3.8.1          General Parking Provisions
                 Chapter 8.10.020 of the City’s Zoning Code describes the off-street parking
                 requirements, regulations, and design standards for various categories of
                 residential, commercial, office, and other development projects within the City.
                 On-street parking is currently permitted on most streets with a few exceptions:
                 commercial parking is prohibited at night on City streets, and all parking is
                 prohibited on Foothill Boulevard and Angeles Crest Highway at night except by
                 permit. Diagonal on-street parking is
                 available in portions of the
                 downtown area along Foothill
                 Boulevard and Town Center Drive.
                 A Comprehensive Parking Strategy
                 Report was completed in 2008. The
                 purpose of the report is to evaluate
                 parking conditions along and
                 adjacent to Foothill Boulevard,
                 ensure that parking supply can be
                 managed to meet parking demand in
                 the business district, and identify              Diagonal Parking on Foothill Boulevard
                 opportunities to increase parking
                 supply where possible and needed. The report included short-term strategies,
                 code change recommendations, and long-term strategies that will enhance
                 parking availability, which are summarized below.
                         Short-term strategies include adding signage and improving the
                          appearance of the public parking lot across from City Hall, adding
                          signage for the Farmer’s Market on Foothill Boulevard, reducing the
                          length of bus stops, improving curb markings, and limiting parking to
                          2 hours along Foothill Boulevard during peak usage periods.
                         Code change recommendations include simplifying parking
                          requirements and developing a streamlined process for shared parking
                          between businesses in order to optimize parking availability and
                          minimize curb cuts for entry ways to parking lots.
                         Long-term strategies include studying the possibility of reverse angled
                          parking in order to increase safety in the Old Town area and establishing
                          agreements between owners of neighboring properties to share parking.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                                6-10

       Ocean View Blvd
                         Castle Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Gr
                                                          Fairmount Ave                                                                                                                                                                                  ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             nri
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           dg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             e
                                                                           Ea
                                                                            r l m
                                                                                    o
                                                                                    n
                                                                                                                El Vago St                                                                                                                                                              Dr
                                                                                        t
                                                                                        A   ve
                                                             Hillard Ave
     Cross St
                                                Palm Dr
                                                                                                                                       Vista del Valle
                                                                                                                                               Green Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sta
                                                                                                                                                                                         Princess
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             rligh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  t Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           est
                                                                                        Alta Canyada Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Dr
                                 Foo                                                                        Olive Ln
                                     thill
                                             Blvd                                                                                                                                           Ann
                                                                                                                                                                                               e
                                                                                                                                                                     Angeles Crest Hwy
                                                                                                                              La Canada Blvd
                                                                                                                                                                                              Lyn
                                                                                                                                                                                                  n             eha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ven
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ln
                         (
                         g
                         &
                         %                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Knight                      Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Gould Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sa
                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                g
                                                                                                                &
                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     nta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ine
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              zW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ay
                                                                                                            Verdugo         Blvd
                                                                                                                                                 Cornishon Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Rd
                                                                                                                                                                 Chevy Chase Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Crown Ave
                                                                                                          Des
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Hampton
                                                                                                             can
                                                                                                                  so
                                                                                                                       Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Viro R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Bap
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Grove D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tist
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     eW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Commonweath Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Beulah Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Oakwood Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Woodleigh Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Oa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Berkshire Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ire Pl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Flin                                                                                                   Berksh
      N                                                                                                                                                                                                             trid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ge
  NOT TO SCALE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               nd Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Av                                       Highla
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        e
Legend
                              Freeway
                              Streets
                              Riding and Hiking Trails
                              City Limit
                                                                           General Plan Update                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure CE-4
                                                                           City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Trails Map
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 G:\USERS\2007\J07-1651 La Canada General Plan\gra\Trails.CDR 2013/01/02


City of La Cañada Flintrridge                                                    Chapter 6. C
                                                                                            Circulation Eleement
6.3.8.2  2       Park   k and Rid    de Facilities
                 Theree are two Parrk and Ride facilities loccated in the C    City of La Caañada Flintrridge.
                 One iss located on Verdugo Bo     oulevard adjjacent to thee SR-2 Freew   way southbou    und
                 rampss at the far western
                                     w         edgee of the
                 City. This facility y serves com mmuters
                 who carpool
                        c        and those who utilize
                                                   u       the
                 Comm  muter Expresss Line 409 to  t and from
                 down ntown Los Angeles durin      ng peak
                 period ds. The seco ond facility is located at
                 the Mayor’s
                      M          Disco
                                     overy Park, at a the
                 intersection of Foo  othill Boulevvard and
                 the SRR-2 Freeway ramps.
6.3.9            Trafffic Con       nditions      s and Le       evel of S     Service     e
                 This Circulation
                       C             Element
                                     E          evalluates generral traffic flow
                                                                               ws and leveels of servicee for
                 roadw ways in the City.
                                     C       Roadwway analysis is generally   y quantified using the total
                 trafficc counted du uring a typiccal weekday,, called the A   Average Daiily Traffic (A ADT).
                 Speciffic intersection traffic annalysis is typpically reserv ved for moree specific typ  pes
                 of ana alysis, such as
                                     a for new developmentt projects or a Specific Pllan area.
                 Intersection trafficc analyses use weekday peak-hour ttraffic volum        mes as a meaasure
                 of the performancce of intersecctions at theiir highest peeriods of utilization. Th     his
                 Circullation Elemeent does not evaluate thee performan       nce of interseections.
6.3.9.1  1       Leve   el of Serrvice Deffinitions
                 Level of service iss a measure of  o transportaation system  m performan   nce based up pon
                 the ratio of traffic volume rela  ative to the ccapacity of thhe roadway   y or intersecttion.
                 Roadw  way capacity  y is a factor of the numb  ber of travel lanes, the prresence of leeft-
                 turn pockets,
                       p          park
                                     king, and oth  her specific attributes. T The volume--to-capacity ratio
                 (V/C)) indicates th he overall peerformance o   of the roadw way or interssection and
                 corressponds to a rating
                                      r       of A through
                                                   t         F, id
                                                                 dentifying itts level of cappacity utilization
                 and reelative level of congestio  on. LOS A rrepresents frree-flow trafffic with littlee or
                 no dellay, whereass LOS F reprresents a breeakdown of ttraffic flow aand a high
                 incideence of delay y. Table CE--2 defines an   nd describess the level off service criteeria
                 for roa adway segm ments.
General Plan—January
         P               2013                                                                                6-11

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                         Chapter 6. Circulation Element
Table CE-2. Level of Service (LOS) Criteria and Definitions
                                                                                                    Volume-to-
 LOS       Interpretation/Definition                                                              Capacity Ratio
 A         Free-flow speeds prevail. Vehicles are almost unimpeded in their ability to               0.00–0.60
           maneuver within the traffic stream.
 B         Reasonably free-flow speeds are maintained. The ability to maneuver within                0.61–0.70
           traffic is only slightly restricted.
 C         Flow with speeds at or near free-flow speed of the roadway. Freedom to                    0.71–0.80
           maneuver within the traffic stream is noticeably restricted, and lane changes
           require more care and vigilance on the part of the driver.
 D         Speeds begin to decline slightly with increasing flows. In this range, density            0.81–0.90
           begins to increase somewhat more quickly with increasing flow. Freedom to
           maneuver within the traffic stream is noticeably limited.
 E         Operation at capacity with no usable gaps in the traffic stream. Any disruption            0.91–1.0
           to the traffic stream has little or no room to dissipate.
 F         Breakdown of the traffic flow with long queues of traffic. Unacceptable                      >1.0
           conditions.
 Source: Los Angeles County METRO 2004 Congestion Management Program
6.3.9.2            Existing Roadway Conditions—Daily Traffic
                   Average Daily Traffic volumes are measured as an indicator of daily roadway
                   usage. The ADT can be used to determine adequate capacity and appropriate
                   roadway classification for roadways in the City. Table CE-3 presents 2009 ADT
                   volumes for selected roadway segments in the City of La Cañada Flintridge,
                   along with the daily level of service for each segment.
Table CE-3. Existing Daily Traffic Volumes and Level of Service (20091)
                                                           Roadway           Total
Roadway                   Location                         Classification    Lanes Capacity ADT           V/C2 LOS
Angeles Crest Hwy         North of Foothill Blvd           Primary             4     32,900 16,9123       0.51    A
                                                           Roadway
Foothill Blvd             East of Ocean View Blvd          Primary             4     32,900     23,643    0.72    C
                                                           Roadway
Foothill Blvd             East of Hillard Ave              Primary             4     32,900     15,600    0.47    A
                                                           Roadway
Foothill Blvd             East of Verdugo Blvd             Primary             4     32,900     21,362    0.65    B
                                                           Roadway
Foothill Blvd             East of Gould Ave                Primary             4     32,900     22,670    0.69    B
                                                           Roadway
Descanso Dr               West of Chevy Chase Dr           Major Roadway       2     15,600     4,460     0.29    A
General Plan—January 2013                                                                                       6-12

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                                Chapter 6. Circulation Element
                                                             Roadway               Total
Roadway                   Location                           Classification        Lanes Capacity        ADT       V/C2 LOS
Gould Ave                 North of I-210 Westbound           Major Roadway           2      15,600       5,926     0.38    A
                          Ramp
Oak Grove Dr              South of Foothill Blvd             Major Roadway           4      31,200      11,709     0.38    A
Verdugo Blvd              East of Alta Canyada Rd            Major Roadway           2      15,600       8,333     0.53    A
Alta Canyada Rd           North of Foothill Blvd             Residential             2      12,600       1,417     0.11    A
                                                             Collector
Berkshire Ave             East of Commonwealth Ave           Residential             2      12,600       2,346     0.19    A
                                                             Collector
Chevy Chase Dr            South of Berkshire Ave             Residential             2      12,600       2,976     0.24    A
                                                             Collector
Chevy Chase Dr            South of Foothill Blvd             Residential             2      12,600       2,150     0.17    A
                                                             Collector
Commonwealth Ave          South of Foothill Blvd             Residential             2      12,600       1,144     0.09    A
                                                             Collector
Crown Ave                 North of Santa Ynez Way            Residential             2      12,600       1,833     0.15    A
                                                             Collector
Cornishon Ave             South of Foothill Blvd             Residential             2      12,600       1,907     0.15    A
                                                             Collector
Highland Dr               East of Chevy Chase Dr             Residential             2      12,600       2,043     0.16    A
                                                             Collector
Hillard Ave               North of Foothill Blvd             Residential             2      12,600       1,900     0.15    A
                                                             Collector
La Cañada Blvd            North of Fairview Dr               Residential             2      12,600       1,535     0.12    A
                                                             Collector
Ocean View Blvd           North of Foothill Blvd             Residential             2      12,600       4,917     0.39    A
                                                             Collector
1
  Although the baseline for the EIR used 2007 data, the 2009 data provided here is not worse than the 2007 data used and
therefore the EIR considered the worst-case scenario.
2
  Volume-to-capacity ratio
3
  2008 ADT, 2009 ADT not available
6.4                Issues and Opportunities
                   Several issues and opportunities to address and improve circulation in the City
                   were identified as a part of the General Plan update.
6.4.1              Roadway Network
                   As seen in Table CE-3, all of the study roadway segments are currently operating
                   at LOS C or better. Because there will be future traffic growth on the City’s
                   roadways, it is important that the City adopt an LOS impact standard for its
                   roadways and intersections. An LOS impact standard will allow the City to
General Plan—January 2013                                                                                                6-13

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                             Chapter 6. Circulation Element
                 evaluate proposed projects based on the amount by which they degrade the
                 operations of the City’s transportation system. Because many of the City’s
                 roadways are operating at very good levels of service, projects should be
                 evaluated based on their incremental impact on traffic operations on a specific
                 roadway, regardless of the roadway’s LOS.
6.4.2            Trip Reduction
                 Reducing the number of vehicle trips on the City’s streets has several important
                 benefits. Not only can it improve the efficiency of the circulation system and
                 mitigate the need for costly infrastructure improvements, it can also reduce air
                 pollution and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. The City will encourage trip
                 reduction by promoting use of alternative modes of transportation, including
                 walking, transit, and bicycling; encouraging smart growth principles in new and
                 redeveloped projects; and encouraging employers to implement transportation
                 demand management strategies, such as carpooling.
6.4.3            Bicycle Network
                 Although it was contemplated in the 1995 General Plan, a Bicycle Transportation
                 Plan has not been implemented in the City. In order to promote bicycle use for
                 commuting and recreational purposes (see CE Goal 6),
                 the City will strive to provide, at a minimum,
                 connected Class III bike paths on the City’s roadway
                 network.
                 Metro has established a bicycle planning process
                 through which cities are able to apply for State Bicycle
                 Transportation Account (BTA) program funds.
                 Metro’s Bicycle Transportation Strategic Plan (BTSP) is
                 a regional plan designed to be used by cities, the
                 County of Los Angeles, and transit agencies in
                 planning bicycle facilities around transit and setting
                 priorities that contribute to regional improvements.
                 The Bicycle Transportation Account Compliance
                 Document (BTA Document) contains local information
                                                                                Cyclists crossing I-210
                 and serves three purposes: 1) helps local agencies
                 establish funding eligibility for the BTA program; 2) provides Metro with an
                 inventory and mapping of existing and proposed bicycle facilities in the County,
                 an estimate of ridership, and future local needs; and 3) provides information for
                 production of a public bike map.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                             6-14

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                   Chapter 6. Circulation Element
                 In order to be eligible for BTA grant funds, a city or county must have an
                 adopted Bicycle Transportation Plan (BTP) that is no more than 5 years old and
                 fulfills a series of requirements. The City has fulfilled most of the requirements
                 through its participation in Metro’s BTSP process. Table CE-4 provides a
                 checklist of all the required information. Connecting a bikeway to the City’s
                 Park and Ride facility and coordination with employers such as JPL, which has
                 an active bike commute program, will also increase likelihood of funding for
                 bikeways.
                 Table CE-4. Checklist of Required Information for the BTSP Process
                  Requirements                        City Status
                  Bicycle Commuter Estimates          419—Existing; 1168—future
                  Map and description of existing and Provided in the Land Use Element of this General Plan
                  proposed land uses
                  Map and description of existing and See Figure CE-5
                  proposed bikeways
                  Bike Parking                        Existing TDM Ordinance requiring bike parking; bike
                                                      parking at Mayor’s Discovery Park
                  Multimodal Connections              Yes, parking ordinance and the City is served by buses
                                                      with bike racks
                  Existing and proposed changing      Yes, publically accessible restrooms at public parks
                  facilities
                  Safety and Education Programs       None
                  Citizen and Public Involvement      Public Meeting to be held as part of the General Plan
                  Plan Consistency                    Yes, participant in the BTSP process
                  Project List                        To be determined as part of the Capital Projects List
                  Past Expenditures                   $10,000
                  Source: BTA Document, Metro
6.5              Circulation Plan
                 The Circulation Plan embodies the approach the City will take to ensure safe and
                 convenient operation of the circulation system and identifies improvements
                 required to accommodate traffic from planned development. As described in the
                 Land Use Element, the proposed changes in land use designations will only
                 moderately increase mixed-use densities along Foothill Boulevard. Development
                 under the Mixed Use designation, as proposed in the Land Use Element, will not
                 cause significant increases in vehicle trips because development in these areas is
                 expected to attract seniors, and the use of alternative modes of transportation
                 will be encouraged through design and land use planning. Instead, most of the
General Plan—January 2013                                                                                  6-15

City of La Cañada Flintrridge                                                      Chapter 6. C
                                                                                              Circulation Eleement
                 futuree growth in traffic
                                       t       will be
                                                    b related to regional ratther than loccal growth, aand it
                 will occur mainly on Foothill Boulevard.
                 In ordder to mitiga ate the effects of long-terrm traffic gro   owth, the usse of active,
                 altern
                      native modess of transporrtation, such     h as transit, b
                                                                               bicycling, an  nd walking, iis
                 encou uraged to red  duce depend   dency on auttomobile traansportation     n. The City aalso
                 recogn  nizes that a safe, well-
                 conneected, and aeesthetically
                 pleasiing bicycle, pedestrian,
                                      p              and
                                                     a
                 equestrian networrk enhances the
                 qualitty of life for those
                                       t       who liive,
                 work,, and recreatte in La Caña     ada
                 Flintriidge. As a part
                                     p of
                 implementation of   o the
                 Circullation Plan, the City willl
                 promo   ote the conceept of complete
                 streetss, which are transportatiion
                 facilitiies that are planned,
                                      p          dessigned, operrated, and m  maintained to   o provide saafe
                 and effficient mobility for userrs of all agess and abilitiees, including    g bicyclists,
                 pedesstrians, transsit riders, and motorists..
6.5.1            Mas   ster Plan of Strreets
                 The Master
                      M         Plan of
                                      o Streets is established
                                                     e            w
                                                                  with hierarcchical roadw   way designattions,
                 physiccal design sttandards forr the roadwaay designatio        ons, and service standarrds.
                 The Master
                      M         Plan of
                                      o Streets is shown
                                                     s       in Fig
                                                                  gure CE-1. R   Review of daily traffic
                 volummes and road    dway capaciities under th   he General P  Plan build-out indicates that,
                 with the
                        t exception    n of one loca ation, the Maaster Plan off Streets is adequate to
                 accommmodate futu     ure growth.
                 CE Po olicy 1.2.1 staates that the City Counccil may adop     pt, based on the
                 recommmendationss of the City Engineer, a threshold o         of significancce for traffic
                 growtth impacts on  o City roadw    ways and in ntersections. Thus, a dev    velopment m   may
                 have significant
                         s           trraffic impactts if the increement of gro  owth in cong  gestion
                 generated by the developmen
                                       d            nt exceeds thhe adopted tthreshold forr any City
                 roadw way or interssection.
                 In thee absence of an a adopted threshold off significancee for traffic iimpacts in th       he
                 City, the
                         t CMP wa    as used to deetermine wh    hich location ns in the Masster Plan of
                 Streetts would be significantly
                                       s            y impacted u under Generral Plan build     d-out condittions.
                 As specified in Ap   ppendix B.9.1 of the CM   MP, a significcant impact o    occurs when  n
                 trafficc demand on  n a facility inncreases by ttwo percent of capacity ((change in V      V/C
                 ≥ 0.022), causing LO  OS F (V/C > 1.00). If th  he facility is aalready at LO OS F, a
                 signifiicant impactt occurs wheen traffic dem    mand on thee facility incrreases by
General Plan—January
         P                2013                                                                                 6-16

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Los Angeles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     County
      Ocean View Blvd
                        Castle Rd
                                                            Fairmount Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Gr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                nri
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       dg
                                                                                                               El Vago St                                                                                                                                                      e
                                                                            Ea
    Cross St                                                                  rlm                  ve
                                                              Hillard Ave
                                                                                 ont
                                                  Palm Dr
                                                                                       Av
                                                                                          e                                              Vista del Valle                                                                                                                            Dr
                                                                                                                                          Green Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   rlig
                                                                                                                                                                                                    nn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ht
                           Foo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                         Princess A
                                                                                       Alta Canyada Rd
                                    thill                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                es
                                                                                                          Olive Ln                                                                                                                                                                                         t
                                            Blv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Dr
                                               d
                                                                                                                                                                                                e
                                                                                                                                                                    Angeles Crest Hwy
                                                                                                                        La Canada Blvd
                                                                                                                                                                                             Lyn
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ve
      (
      g
      &
      %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              nL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Knight                     Way
                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                         g
                                                                                                         &
                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                         Verdugo     Blvd
                                                                                                                                                                                  Tow
                                                                                                                                                                                        nC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Gould Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   nta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ine
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               zW
                                                                                                                                         Cornishon Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                           en                                                                                                                    ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ter
                                                                                               Des                                                                                                        Dr
                                                                                                                                                         Chevy Chase Dr                                                                                                                     Hampton Rd
                                                                                                         can
                                                                                                            so
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Crown Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                          Beulah Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  r
                                                                                                                   Dr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ba                           ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ptis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   te
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Oak G
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Commonweath Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Wa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ro
                  Glendale                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Viro R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Oakwood Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Woodleigh Ln
    N
NOT TO SCALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Berkshire Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            e                                                                         Altadena
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Flin
Legend                                                                                                                                                                                               tri                                                                                                        Berkshire Pl
                                                                                                                                                                                                        dge
                                    Freeway                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               d Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e                                          Highlan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Av
                                    Streets
                                    City Limit
                                    Planned Class II
                                    Planned Class III
                                    Existing Class II
                                    Existing Class III
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pasadena
                                                                            General Plan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure CE-5
                                                                            City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                                                                                                                                                                               Existing & Planned
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Bikeway System
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  G:\USERS\2007\J07-1651 La Canada General Plan\gra\BikewaySystem.CDR


City of La Cañada Flintridge                                              Chapter 6. Circulation Element
                 2 percent of capacity (V/C ≥ 0.02). Development should be monitored and
                 evaluated as it occurs to determine its impacts on the City’s street system.
6.5.2            Public Transportation Plan
                 A key component of the Circulation Plan is the promotion of public transit as an
                 alternative mode of transportation. Increasing the use of this mode of
                 transportation will produce a number of benefits for the community, including
                 reduced traffic, less need for costly roadway improvement projects, improved air
                 quality, and a reduction in GHG emissions.
                 The City will continue to fund the free City of La Cañada Flintridge Foothill
                 Boulevard Shuttle along Foothill Boulevard and will enhance its level of service
                 as part of continued development of the Downtown Village Specific Plan (DVSP)
                 and new mixed use development, as efficient public transportation service is
                 complementary to a pedestrian-oriented area. As development continues in the
                 DVSP area the City should consider providing transit service along Town Center
                 Drive. The City also will pursue improved and expanded connections to the
                 regional transit system.
6.5.3            Bicycle Transportation Plan
                 In order to facilitate and support an increase in the use of bicycles for both
                 commuting and recreational purposes, the City has developed a Bikeway Master
                 Plan, illustrated in Figure CE-5. The City should pursue more funding
                 opportunities as appropriate to complete the City’s Bicycle Transportation Plan,
                 including BTA, Congestion Mitigation, and Air Quality funds. Connecting a
                 bikeway to the City’s Park and Ride facilities and coordination with employers
                 such as JPL will also increase the likelihood of funding for bikeways.
                 The Los Angeles County and Metro Bicycle Transportation Plans have
                 incorporated the City’s existing and future bikeways into the regional plans.
                 Correspondingly, the City has integrated the same regional bikeway
                 transportation plans into the Bikeway Master Plan. The City will continue to
                 strive to close gaps in the intra-jurisdictional network, which would provide
                 residents with more travel options other than the automobile. This will require
                 coordination with adjacent jurisdictions. Many of the planned bicycle facilities
                 within the City will connect to neighboring planned facilities, including Foothill
                 Boulevard, Ocean View Boulevard, Verdugo Boulevard/Honolulu Avenue, and
                 Highland Drive/Woodbury Road.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            6-17

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                             Chapter 6. Circulation Element
6.5.4                Truck Access
                     La Cañada Flintridge has limited truck through traffic, given the lack of local
                     truck routes. Regional truck routes are provided on the I-210 and SR-2 freeways.
                     All City streets are prohibited to through truck traffic. Delivery trucks, however,
                     are permitted to travel on City streets, thus allowing them to quickly access
                     destinations within the City limits via the shortest routes from the freeway.
6.6                  Future Conditions of Traffic Flow
                     The potential traffic and circulation impacts related to the adoption of the
                     updated General Plan are determined by forecasting future daily traffic volumes
                     and calculating future daily V/C ratios for all major roadways. Future daily
                     traffic volumes were developed using SCAG’s RTP (20042) Regional Model and
                     adjusted to reflect changes in the land use proposed as part of the General Plan
                     update. Table CE-5 summarizes the forecast daily traffic volumes, capacities,
                     V/C ratios, and LOS for 20 roadways roadway segments. As shown in Table
                     CE-5, none of the studied roadway segments is anticipated to be significantly
                     affected by the General Plan build-out.
Table CE-5. Future Daily Traffic Volumes and Level of Service (2030)
                                                               Roadway          Total
 Roadway                    Location                           Classification Lanes Capacity ADT V/C1 LOS
 Angeles Crest Hwy          North of Foothill Blvd             Primary             4      32,900 16,900 0.51 A
                                                               Roadway
 Foothill Blvd              East of Ocean View Blvd            Primary             4      32,900 25,200 0.77 C
                                                               Roadway
 Foothill Blvd              East of Hillard Ave                Primary             4      32,900 24,100 0.73 C
                                                               Roadway
 Foothill Blvd              East of Verdugo Blvd               Primary             4      32,900 29,600 0.90 D
                                                               Roadway
 Foothill Blvd              East of Gould Ave                  Primary             4      32,900 28,600 0.87 D
                                                               Roadway
 Descanso Dr                West of Chevy Chase Dr             Major               2      15,600      9,100 0.58 A
                                                               Roadway
 Gould Ave                  North of I-210 Westbound Ramp Major                    2      15,600      7,700 0.49 A
                                                               Roadway
 Oak Grove Dr               South of Foothill Blvd             Major               4      32,900 17,700 0.57 A
                                                               Roadway
 Verdugo Blvd               East of Alta Canyada Rd            Major               2      15,600      9,500 0.61 B
                                                               Roadway
2
  The baseline for the Circulation Element and Environmental Impact Report was developed in 2007 and was based on SCAG’s
2004 RTP, which was the most current data.
 General Plan—January 2013                                                                                           6-18

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                             Chapter 6. Circulation Element
                                                                 Roadway         Total
Roadway                    Location                              Classification Lanes Capacity      ADT V/C1 LOS
Alta Canyada Rd            North of Foothill Blvd                Residential        2     12,600     2,900 0.23 A
                                                                 Collector
Berkshire Ave              East of Commonwealth Ave              Residential        2     12,600     3,500 0.28    A
                                                                 Collector
Chevy Chase Dr             South of Berkshire Ave                Residential        2     12,600     5,400 0.43    A
                                                                 Collector
Chevy Chase Dr             South of Foothill Blvd                Residential        2     12,600     4,600 0.37    A
                                                                 Collector
Commonwealth Ave           South of Foothill Blvd                Residential        2     12,600     3,100 0.25    A
                                                                 Collector
Crown Ave                  North of Santa Ynez Way               Residential        2     12,600     7,200 0.57    B
                                                                 Collector
Cornishon Ave              South of Foothill Blvd                Residential        2     12,600     4,600 0.37    A
                                                                 Collector
Highland Dr                East of Chevy Chase Dr                Residential        2     12,600     6,700 0.53    A
                                                                 Collector
Hillard Ave                North of Foothill Blvd                Residential        2     12,600     4,600 0.37    A
                                                                 Collector
La Cañada Blvd             North of Fairview Dr                  Residential        2     12,600     4,400 0.35    A
                                                                 Collector
Ocean View Blvd            North of Foothill Blvd                Residential        2     12,600     8,600 0.68    B
                                                                 Collector
1
  Volume-to-capacity ratio
Bold indicates location with significant project impact based on Los Angeles County Congestion Management Program
(CMP) threshold of significance.
6.7                Planned Improvements
6.7.1              City of La Cañada Flintridge Capital
                   Improvement Program
                   The City’s Capital Improvement Program (CIP), which outlines the City's
                   infrastructure needs for the future, contains a list of municipal projects scheduled
                   to receive funding and be constructed within a 5-year period. The CIP includes
                   all capital projects planned within the City, their funding sources, and their
                   schedule of implementation, including those that implement the General Plan.
6.7.2              Foothill Boulevard Districts
                   In 1991, the City prepared and approved the Foothill Boulevard Master Plan
                   (FBMP) to guide future development of Foothill Boulevard and to provide
General Plan—January 2013                                                                                           6-19

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 6. Circulation Element
                 recommendations for identified issues that were considered impediments to
                 revitalization. The vision described in the FBMP was to preserve and enhance a
                 small-scale pedestrian-oriented atmosphere with a village character, while
                 enhancing economic vitality, use, and circulation efficiency.
                 The FBMP identified five districts along the entire length of Foothill Boulevard
                 within the City, each with its own mix of uses and unique characteristics, and
                 provided policy direction for future development and redevelopment within
                 those districts. The Foothill Boulevard Districts are included in the Circulation
                 Element because they incorporate public improvements to support the land use
                 policies for each district and the overall vision for Foothill Boulevard. Four of
                 the five original districts include
                 West Gateway, The Link, Old
                 Town, and Michigan Hill Districts.
                 The adopted DVSP, described
                 below, implements the fifth district,
                 called the Downtown District.
                 Figure CE-6, Foothill Districts,
                 displays the boundaries of the five
                 districts on Foothill Boulevard.
                 Goal 5 and its associated objectives
                 and policies provide policy                      Foothill Boulevard in The Link District
                 direction for implementation of
                 improvements within the districts and along the length of Foothill Boulevard.
6.7.2.1          Downtown Village Specific Plan
                 The DVSP incorporates and supports many of the goals, policies, and design
                 principles of the Foothill Boulevard Master Plan. The City’s Design Options
                 Manual and Community Planned Development (CPD) Ordinance also contain
                 many elements of the Foothill Boulevard Master Plan. The DVSP, which was
                 adopted in 2000, identifies several transportation-related improvements to better
                 serve downtown land uses (existing and proposed) and improve local access and
                 circulation. The new North Road and associated north–south connecting streets
                 would allow for additional local streets to provide alternate routes and relief to
                 Foothill Boulevard. The DVSP retains the current number of lanes on Foothill
                 Boulevard, both at mid-block locations and at intersections. Some of the key
                 improvements outlined in the DVSP include the following:
General Plan—January 2013                                                                                 6-20

                                                                                                                                                                                         We
                                                                                                                                                                                           st
                                                                                                                                                                                                Ga
K: \ IRVINE \ GIS \ PROJECTS \ CITY_OF_LA_CANADA_FLINTRDIGE \ 00096_07 \ MAPDOC \ CIRCULATION_ELEMENT\ FIGCE_6_FOOTHILL_DISTRICTS.MXD 19542 (01-03-13)
                                                                                                                                                                                                     tew
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Dis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      tric
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Th
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e   Lin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           kD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ist
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ric
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Old
                                                                                                                                                                City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                                                  Dis Tow
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tric n
                                                                                                                                                         Land Use Designation                                                                                                        t
                                                                                                                                                                Commercial/Office (max of 0.5 FAR)
                                                                                                                                                                Downtown Village Specific Plan
                                                                                                                                                                Hillside Residential (max of 1 du/10 ac)
                                                                                                                                                                Estate Residential (max of 1 du/ac)                                                                                       Do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            wn
                                                                                                                                                                Very Low Density Residential (up to 2 du/ac)                                                                                     tow
                                                                                                                                                                Low Density Residential (up to 4 du/ac)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       nD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ist
                                                                                                                                                                Medium Density Residential (up to 8.7 du/ac)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ric
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      t
                                                                                                                                                                High Density Residential (up to 30 du/ac)
                                                                                                                                                                Institutional
                                                                                                                                                                Public
                                                                                                                                                                Open Space
                                                                                                                                                                Parks and Recreation
                                                                                                                                                                Mixed Use (up to 30 du/ac)
                                                                                                                                                         Districts                                                                                                                                                        Mi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ig
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ±
                                                                                                                                                                Michigan Hill District
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Dis an H
                                                                                                                                                                Old Town District                                                                                                                                               tric ill
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    t
                                                                                                                                                                The Downtown District
                                                                                                                                                                The Link District
                                                                                                                                                                West Gateway District                                            0   1,000   2,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Feet
                                                                                                                                                    Source : City of La Canada Flintridge, May 10, 2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Figure CE-6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Foothill Districts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           City of La Cañada Flintridge


City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                   Chapter 6. Circulation Element
                         Retain Foothill Boulevard as a four-lane roadway throughout the
                          downtown area.
                         Create a new roadway (the North Road) north of Foothill Boulevard
                          between Angeles Crest Highway and Oakwood Avenue with an optional
                          future extension to Rinetti Lane.
                         Extend the local downtown street grid to improve connections between
                          Foothill Boulevard and the North Road.
                         Implement various improvements at specific locations. Some of these
                          improvements are described in greater detail below.
                 Town Center Drive (The North Road)
                 The North Road, now named Town Center Drive, is a new collector street with
                 one lane in each direction and a striped center two-way left-turn lane and/or
                 median. The North Road has one striped bicycle lane in each direction. As
                 conceived in the DVSP, the North Road is intended as alternative access for the
                 general public to the businesses along Foothill Boulevard.
                 The first segment of North Road, connecting Angeles Crest Highway to
                 approximately Beulah Drive south of the I-210 Freeway, was recently
                 constructed.
                 Angeles Crest Highway/Chevy Chase Drive at Foothill
                 Boulevard
                 The intersections of Angeles Crest Highway and Chevy Chase Drive with
                 Foothill Boulevard are
                 currently offset. While the
                 DVSP contemplated the
                 realignment of these two
                 intersections to eliminate
                 the offset, the City
                 completed a project in 2008
                 that signalized the Chevy
                 Chase intersection and
                 operates the two signals as
                 one intersection with full
                                                    Eastbound on Foothill Boulevard at Chevy Chase Drive and
                 coordination between the                           Angeles Crest Highway
                 two. The City recognizes
                 that the closely spaced traffic signals have resulted in less-than-satisfactory
                 operation and will continue to pursue optimal signal timing and configuration
                 to reduce driver delay. As the Town Center and Downtown Village
                 areas develop further, it will be important to monitor congestion along Foothill
General Plan—January 2013                                                                                  6-21

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                            Chapter 6. Circulation Element
                   Boulevard, evaluate alternatives, and make intersection improvements when
                   volumes increase. Developers should be responsible for their share of needed
                   traffic signal improvements along Foothill Boulevard.
6.7.3              Bikeways
                   The RTIP identified funding in 2006 for a Class II bike lane to be established
                   along Foothill Boulevard through the City, but this project has yet to be
                   implemented. A Class II bikeway is planned and funded by Prop C funds on
                   Foothill Boulevard and Alta Canyada Road to connect an existing bike lane at the
                   westerly city limits with the Red Route bikeway at Verdugo Boulevard. This
                   2-mile segment, in combination with the Red Route Bikeway, will provide a
                   continuous east–west corridor to connect the City with Pasadena’s bikeway
                   system on the east to Los Angeles County and Glendale’s bikeways on the west.
                   In 2010, the City pursued and was awarded a Metro Call for Projects Grant in the
                   amount of $2,038,067 to construct a new greenbelt along the south side of
                   Foothill Boulevard between Leata Lane and the Glendale Freeway (SR-2) ramps
                   located at Hillard Avenue. Approximately 0.5 mile of Class I “Bike Path” and
                   1.5 miles of Class II “Bike Lane” will be built to connect existing bike route
                   networks in La Crescenta, Montrose (Glendale), and Pasadena. Wider pedestrian
                   paths, landscape buffers, and pedestrian level lighting alongside the bike path as
                   well as an enhanced bus stop will also be constructed.
6.7.4              SR-710 Transportation Improvement Options3
                   The Long Beach Freeway (I-710) currently terminates 6 miles south of the
                   I-210/SR-134 Freeway interchange in Pasadena, at Valley Boulevard just north of
                   the San Bernardino Freeway (I-10) in Alhambra. Numerous studies over the past
                   40 years have been undertaken to extend the I-710 northward. One proposal is to
                   link the north end to the I-210/SR-134 Freeway interchange by a tunnel under
                   South Pasadena to minimize environmental impacts.
                   Any northward extension of the I-710 Freeway would be a state route, and
                   therefore the extension would be designated as the SR-710. The extension would
                   divert traffic away from the downtown Los Angeles freeways toward the new
                   SR-710 Freeway and the I-210/SR-134 Freeway interchange. It is also expected
                   that a large volume of truck traffic will use the new SR-710 Freeway given that
                   the existing I-710 Freeway, with which the SR-710 Freeway would connect, is a
                   major truck corridor.
3
  Subsequent to approval of the 2012 RTP, the description “SR-710 Transportation Improvement Options” was changed by
SCAG staff, without approval, to “SR-710 North Extension” and “SR-710 North Extension (tunnel) (alignment TBD).
 General Plan—January 2013                                                                                           6-22

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                               Chapter 6. Circulation Element
                 The City has been and continues to be very involved in the opposition of the
                 tunnel as a transportation alternative to resolve regional congestion. The I-710
                 Missing Link Truck Study, prepared for the SCAG (2009), showed that the
                 following conditions would occur if the tunnel were built:
                         75 percent of local surface streets would still be gridlocked, operating
                          over capacity with severe congestion, with at least 12 arterial streets
                          experiencing higher traffic volumes solely due to the tunnel;
                         the tunnel would cause significant detrimental traffic and truck impacts
                          on the I-210 Freeway throughout the cities of Glendale, Pasadena, and La
                          Cañada Flintridge and the community of La Crescenta;
                         because portions of the I-210 Freeway are projected to operate at LOS F,
                          traffic will be forced onto local streets; and
                         the construction of the tunnel would make overall driving conditions
                          slightly worse regionally.
                 Additionally, based on a variety studies, including the “Children’s Health
                 Study” (ARB 2004), due to the lack of substantive reduction of gridlock (as found
                 by other studies), most of the residents south of the tunnel would continue to be
                 impacted by respiratory problems associated with pollution. Also, with the
                 increase in traffic, the residents adjacent to the I-210 Freeway would experience
                 an increase in respiratory problems, particularly affecting the lungs of children.
                 The health risks associated with the I-210 Freeway emissions are also described
                 in Section 8.3.4.1 of the Air Quality Element. Section 7.3.2.1 of the Noise Element
                 discusses the existing noise impacts on the City that result from existing traffic
                 on the I-210 Freeway, much of which currently exceeds the noise abatement
                 criteria established by the Federal Highway Administration, Caltrans, and Metro,
                 and which would increase if the tunnel were constructed. Also, the cost of the
                 tunnel is estimated in the billions of dollars. Because there is little, if any, benefit
                 to the region and detriment to the City of La Cañada Flintridge, the City Council,
                 pursuant to Resolution No. 10-12, remains opposed to the tunnel and calls upon
                 Metro and Caltrans to find new and effective alternatives to resolve the regional
                 congestion.
6.7.5            Public Facilities
                 In addition to the circulation infrastructure, the Circulation Element also
                 addresses other public infrastructure and utilities that support the existing and
                 planned land uses and development in the City necessary for implementation of
                 the General Plan, such as storm drain facilities, the wastewater collection and
                 transmission system, and the water supply and distribution system.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                             6-23

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                              Chapter 6. Circulation Element
6.7.5.1          Storm Drain Facilities
                 Existing drainage facilities were originally constructed by either the Los Angeles
                 County Flood Control District (LACFCD) or the Los Angeles County
                 Department of Public Works (LACDPW). After the City incorporated in 1976,
                 the LACFCD continued to own and operate its facilities because LACFCD is
                 responsible for flood control. The ownership and operation of the LACDPW
                 drainage facilities became the responsibility of the City.
                 In addition to its storm drain and channel facilities, the LACDPW also owns and
                 operates eight (8) debris basins within the City: Mullaly, Pickens, Halls Canyon,
                 Winery Canyon, Hay Canyon, Big Briar, Gould Upper, and Gould Canyon.
                 The City has regular Capital Improvement Program (CIP) projects to maintain
                 and upgrade its drainage facilities. The City also reviews new development to
                 ensure no drainage problems are created.
6.7.5.2          Wastewater Collection and Transmission
                 The City is included within two Los Angeles County Sanitation Districts
                 (LACSD): District 28 (generally north of Foothill Boulevard) and District 34
                 (generally south of Foothill Boulevard). Prior to the establishment of public
                 sewer assessment districts, the City was served primarily by private septic
                 sewage disposal systems (also known as onsite wastewater treatment systems or
                 OWTSs). However, there existed limited public sewer systems. The La Cañada
                 Country Club and approximately 400 associated dwelling units are served by the
                 Water Reclamation Plant (WRP) Outfall within District 28. The westerly portion
                 of the City is served by the Crescenta Valley Water District (CVWD). Some
                 properties located adjacent to the City of Pasadena boundary have access to the
                 Pasadena sewer system.
                 In April 1997, the LACSD completed the Foothill Boulevard Main Trunk Sewer
                 enabling the commercial establishment on Foothill Boulevard to have access to a
                 public sewer system.
                 In 1998, the first Assessment District (AD 98-1) was formed allowing for the
                 construction of a public sewer system. The boundaries of AD 98-1 consist
                 generally of the southerly boundary of the LCCC to the north, Foothill Boulevard
                 to the south, Gould Avenue to the west, and the east City Limit to the east (not
                 including the Jet Propulsion Laboratories (JPL). The construction of AD 98-1 was
                 completed in 1998.
                 In 2002, the second Assessment District (AD 02-1) was established. The
                 boundaries of AD 02-1 consist generally of the north City Limit to the north,
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            6-24

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                              Chapter 6. Circulation Element
                 Foothill Boulevard to the south, La Cañada Boulevard to the west, and Gould
                 Avenue to the east. The construction of AD 02-1 was completed in 2005.
                 In 2004, the third Assessment District (AD 04-1) was established. AD 04-1 is
                 divided into two areas: A and B. The boundaries of Area A consist generally of
                 the north City Limit to the north, Foothill Boulevard to the south, Ocean View
                 Boulevard to the west, and Palm Drive to the east. The boundaries of Area B
                 consist generally of the north City Limit to the north, Foothill Boulevard to the
                 south, Palm Drive to the west, and La Cañada Boulevard to the east. The
                 construction of AD 04-1 was completed in 2008.
                 AD 98-1, AD 02-1, and AD 04-1 (Area B) are all served by District 28 of the
                 LACSD. Because of existing topography, AD 04-1 (Area A) is served by the City
                 of Los Angeles via conveyance through CVWD sewer facilities.
                 Between 2005 and 2009, several types of sewer systems were proposed to the
                 residents of the Flintridge area (south of Foothill Boulevard) to complete the
                 public sewer system for the remainder of the City. Based on several City-
                 sponsored studies, it was determined at that time that the cost of any public
                 sewer system in the Flintridge area would be substantially more costly on a “per
                 household” basis than the public sewer systems previously constructed in other
                 areas of the City. Despite this increased cost, prior to the economic recession of
                 2008, there was considerable interest among the residents of Flintridge to form
                 assessment districts for the construction of a public sewer system. At that time,
                 the Flintridge area was generally divided into three geographic districts: District
                 4 (generally between Berkshire Avenue and Foothill Boulevard with deeper
                 bedrock for gravity sewers), District 5 (generally between Berkshire and south to
                 Glendale with shallower bedrock), and District 6 (generally west of District 4
                 between Foothill Boulevard and I-210). In District 5, based on studies and
                 surveys of the residents, a Low Pressure System (LPS) was proposed as the
                 public sewer system. In 2009, ballots were issued to the residents of District 5 for
                 the formation of Sewer Assessment District AD 09-1 for the construction of the
                 LPS system. However, by 2009 the effects of the 2008 recession had impacted
                 public sentiment for the expenditure of funds for a public sewer system, and
                 there was a majority protest against the formation of that Sewer Assessment
                 District. While no assessment ballots were issued for Districts 4 or 6, resident
                 surveys conducted post-recession established that a majority of residents in
                 District 4 would not have supported a public sewer assessment primarily due to
                 the high costs involved. Currently, there are no plans for a public sewer system
                 in the Flintridge area.
                 Due to the high cost of public sewers in the Flintridge area and the current
                 economic environment, the existence of residential OWTSs will continue in the
                 Flintridge area for the foreseeable future. The City embraces its responsibility as
                 the Qualifying Local Agency under the California Water Code regarding the
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            6-25

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                               Chapter 6. Circulation Element
                 regulation of OWTSs within the City. The City’s regulatory role is important to
                 the community for multiple reasons. For public health reasons, the City desires
                 to protect against the illicit discharge of liquid wastes into the public drainage
                 facilities. The City’s regulatory role, however, is also important to ensure that
                 residents with properly functioning OWTSs are not burdened by overregulation
                 or unreasonable restrictions on the use and enjoyment of their property just
                 because their properties are serviced by an OWTS instead of a public sewer
                 system. It is the policy of the City to remain the agency responsible for the
                 implementation and enforcement of applicable local code requirements with
                 respect to OWTSs and to carefully monitor the activities of any agency (e.g., the
                 Los Angeles County Health and/or Building Department) to which the City
                 delegates any such responsibilities to ensure that the residents are treated in a
                 fair and reasonable manner in conjunction with applicable regulations.
6.7.5.3          Water Supply and Distribution
                 The City does not own or operate any water company; instead, it is served by
                 four (4) water companies: CVWD, La Cañada Irrigation District (LCID), Mesa
                 Crest Water Company (MCWC), and Valley Water Company (VWC). The
                 CVWD obtains a portion of its water from the local wells in the Verdugo Basin
                 and the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power (LADWP). LCID and
                 VWC obtain a portion of their water from the Monk Hill portion of the Raymond
                 Basin. The Raymond Basin has an area of approximately 40 square miles
                 bounded by the San Gabriel Mountains to the north, the San Rafael Hills to the
                 west, and the Raymond Fault on the south and east. The majority of the City is
                 located within the basin’s boundaries.
                 All four of the water purveyors purchase imported water supplies through the
                 Foothill Municipal Water District (FMWD), a member agency of the
                 Metropolitan Water District (MWD) of Southern California. FMWD is a water
                 wholesaler and its only source of water is through MWD’s Weymouth Plant in
                 La Verne. CVWD gets 40 percent of its water from FMWD. LCID gets 90 percent
                 of its water from FMWD. MCWC gets 100 percent of its water from FMWD.
                 VWC gets 75 percent of its water from FMWD.
                 CVWD serves the western portion of the City. LCID serves the central and
                 northern portions of the City. MCWC serves the northeasterly portion of the
                 City. VWC serves the central and southern portions of the City.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                             6-26

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                Chapter 6. Circulation Element
6.8              Goals, Objectives, and Policies
                 The goals, objectives, and policies in the Circulation Element establish the policy
                 foundation to guide future circulation- and transportation-related decision
                 making to achieve the community’s Vision 2030.
                 CE GOAL 1: Maintain a safe, multi-modal, efficient, economical, and
                 aesthetically pleasing circulation system providing for the circulation of
                 people, goods, and services to serve the existing and future needs of
                 the City of La Cañada Flintridge.
                 CE Objective 1.1: Assure that local and regional traffic demands are met in a
                 way that is consistent with and preserves the City’s character as reflected in
                 Vision 2030.
                       CE Policy 1.1.1: Establish and maintain a circulation network that supports
                       the Land Use Element of the General Plan.
                       CE Policy 1.1.2: Coordinate improvements to the City’s circulation system
                       with appropriate local, county, regional, State, and federal transportation
                       plans and programs.
                       CE Policy 1.1.3: Develop a “Complete Streets” Plan in the City, which is
                       designed and operated to enable safe and convenient access for all users of
                       all ages and abilities, including pedestrians, bicyclists, motorists, transit
                       riders, and equestrians.
                       CE Policy 1.1.4: Participate in transportation planning efforts that involve
                       other governmental agencies, mandated programs, and regulations in order
                       to minimize potential environmental impacts related to transportation in
                       and around the City.
                       CE Policy 1.1.5: Oppose any SR-710 tunnel or surface freeway extension that
                       would increase traffic volumes on the I-210 Freeway through La Cañada
                       Flintridge due to the air quality, noise, and traffic congestion impacts on the
                       community that such alternatives would create. Encourage the
                       development of multi-modal transportation alternatives in lieu of a direct
                       connection between the SR-710 and I-210 freeways that address regional
                       transportation needs without significantly impacting the City.
                 CE Objective 1.2: Establish and periodically evaluate a Level of Service (LOS)
                 impact standard by which to evaluate new developments and substantial
                 redevelopments for their potential impacts on and contribution to the City’s
                 congestion management concerns.
                       CE Policy 1.2.1: The City Council may adopt, based on the recommendations
                       of the City Engineer, a threshold of significance for traffic growth impacts on
                       City roadways and intersections.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                              6-27

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 6. Circulation Element
                       CE Policy 1.2.2: Require new developments to conform to LOS standards
                       and project impact criteria of the City of La Cañada Flintridge and other
                       mandated programs. This includes mitigation of traffic impacts to the
                       surrounding street system.
                       CE Policy 1.2.3: Pursue right-of-way acquisition to meet the City's adopted
                       standards. In non-residential areas, density bonuses may be considered in
                       conjunction with right-of-way dedication. Right-of-way upgrades will serve
                       to benefit not only vehicles, but all forms of transportation. Although
                       dedication of right-of-way is anticipated to be the primary means to
                       upgrade right-of-way widths, the City may consider alternatives to right-of-
                       way acquisition, such as easements, alternate routes, and designated access
                       roads.
                       CE Policy 1.2.4: In order to maintain the residential character of its streets,
                       the City may allow flexibility to the Standard Street Sections (Figure CE-2) in
                       consideration of available right-of-way, the context of the roadway in
                       comparison to its surrounding land uses, and impacts or benefits of multiple
                       modes of transportation.
                 CE Objective 1.3: Enhance community character by maintaining aesthetically-
                 pleasing streets with low traffic volumes.
                       CE Policy 1.3.1: Encourage the development of aesthetic streetscapes that are
                       consistent with the low-density, residential character of the community to
                       promote a positive City image and provide visual relief.
                       CE Policy 1.3.2: Installation of street lights in previously unlit areas may be
                       initiated at the request of homeowners by a petition to the City, with
                       approvals to be determined by staff based on criteria to be established in
                       advance by the City Council, such as where lighting is warranted for safety
                       reasons. Appeals of staff determinations shall be referred to the appropriate
                       Commission for consideration. The City's determination shall provide for
                       the mitigation of lighting impacts if necessary.
                       CE Policy 1.3.3: Encourage developments that contribute to balanced land
                       uses and that serve to reduce overall trip lengths (e.g., jobs and housing
                       balance, locating retail in closer proximity to residents and patrons).
                       CE Policy 1.3.4: Ensure that effective Transportation Demand Management
                       (TDM) measures and programs are being implemented within the City.
                 Objective 1.4: Evaluate funding options and prioritization of capital
                 improvements that support transit and non-motorized transportation to reduce
                 VMT and GHG emissions, while maintaining economic vitality and
                 sustainability.
                       CE Policy 1.4.1: Before funding transportation improvements that increase
                       roadway capacity and vehicle miles travelled (VMT), evaluate the feasibility
                       and effectiveness of funding projects that support alternative modes of
General Plan—January 2013                                                                               6-28

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                Chapter 6. Circulation Element
                       transportation and reduce VMT, including transit services and
                       infrastructure, and bicycle, trails, and pedestrian facilities.
                       CE Policy 1.4.2: The City may require that when Proposition A funds are
                       traded, congestion management credit commensurate with the level of
                       funds traded will be given to the City.
                 CE GOAL 2: Facilitate alternatives to automobile travel, including public
                 transportation, bicycling, ridesharing, walking, and equestrians, that
                 support land use plans, meet transportation needs, and reduce vehicle-
                 related and GHG emissions.
                 CE Objective 2.1: Promote transit-supportive uses where appropriate.
                       CE Policy 2.1.1: Ensure that new mixed use, commercial, and multiple-
                       family residential developments incorporate project design features that
                       promote the use of alternative modes of transportation, such as proximity to
                       transit, pedestrian and bicycle facilities, preferential parking for low-/no-
                       emission vehicles, etc.
                       CE Policy 2.1.2: Provide and coordinate the provision of pedestrian and
                       bicycling enhancements, such as sheltered benches and bike racks, along
                       major roadways and within the DVSP.
                       CE Policy 2.1.3: Continue to provide information about transportation
                       issues, projects, and processes to community members and other
                       stakeholders, especially to those traditionally underserved by transportation
                       services.
                 CE Objective 2.2: Continue to improve transit service in the City to achieve trip
                 reductions, improve air quality and reduce GHG emissions, and facilitate
                 pedestrian and non-motorized travel.
                       CE Policy 2.2.1: Encourage the use of transit along Foothill Boulevard and
                       specifically to and from the DVSP by enhancing the LCF shuttle service.
                       Work to increase shuttle frequency and service hours.
                       CE Policy 2.2.2: Work with Metro and all other transit providers serving the
                       City to respond to increases in demand for transit.
                       CE Policy 2.2.3: Work with Metro and Pasadena ARTS to enhance transit
                       connections to the Metro system.
                       CE Policy 2.2.4: Work with regional and local transit providers to enhance
                       customer service and system ease-of-use by supporting development
                       features such as:
                          a. a Regional Pass system to reduce the number of different passes and
                              tickets required of system users;
                          b.   “Smart Bus” technology, using global positioning satellite (GPS) and
                              electronic displays at transit stops, to provide customers with “real-
General Plan—January 2013                                                                              6-29

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                              Chapter 6. Circulation Element
                              time” arrival and departure time information (and to allow the system
                              operator to respond more quickly and effectively to disruptions in
                              service); and
                          c. a regional on-line trip planning program.
                       CE Policy 2.2.5: Upgrade and maintain the transit system infrastructure to
                       enhance public use, including:
                          a. ensuring transit stops are safe, convenient, clean and efficient;
                          b. ensuring transit stops have clearly marked street-level designation
                              and are accessible;
                          c. ensuring transit stops are safe, sheltered, benches are clean, and
                              lighting is adequate; and
                          d. placing transit stops along transit corridors within mixed-use or
                              transit-oriented development areas at intervals of three to four blocks,
                              or no less than one-half mile.
                       CE Policy 2.2.6: Work with regional and local transit providers to create an
                       interconnected transportation system that encourages a shift in travel from
                       private passenger vehicles to alternative modes, including public transit,
                       ride sharing, carsharing, bicycling, and walking.
                 CE GOAL 3: Provide and maintain public infrastructure and utilities that
                 support existing and planned land uses and development in a cost-
                 effective and responsible manner.
                 CE Objective 3.1: Continue to improve and expand public infrastructure and
                 utilities in the City as determined necessary.
                       CE Policy 3.1.1: Determine public infrastructure and utility needs to
                       implement the General Plan and prioritize them through the City’s CIP.
                       CE Policy 3.1.2: Evaluate existing public infrastructure and utilities to
                       determine facilities and identify ongoing maintenance and/or replacement
                       needs, and prioritize and implement them through the City’s CIP.
                       CE Policy 3.1.3: Require new development to install curbs and gutters,
                       including all land divisions and substantial redevelopment of properties
                       other than single-family residences where feasible and appropriate.
                       CE Policy 3.1.4: Implement policies for the preservation of natural
                       conditions leading to retention of stormwater where it occurs.
                 CE Objective 3.2: Work closely with local water companies and districts and
                 sewer districts in determining and meeting community needs for water, sewer,
                 and stormwater service.
                       CE Policy 3.2.1: Continue to promote the opportunity for the construction of
                       public sewers, where determined feasible.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            6-30

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                              Chapter 6. Circulation Element
                       CE Policy 3.2.2: Work closely with solid waste disposal companies in
                       providing trash pick-up services, and reduce the per capita production of
                       solid waste as defined in the City's Source Reduction and Recycling
                       Element.
                       CE Policy 3.2.3: Work closely with the Los Angeles County Flood Control
                       District in determining and meeting community needs for flood control
                       facilities and maintenance.
                       CE Policy 3.2.4: Improve the existing storm drainage system by correcting
                       identified deficiencies, where feasible and appropriate. Require new
                       developments to upgrade storm drains to handle the increased runoffs
                       generated from a development site.
                       CE Policy 3.2.5: Develop and implement a public education program that
                       identifies the health hazards and penalties for improper disposal of
                       graywater to assure the City's compliance with the requirements of the
                       California Plumbing Code, the Clean Water Act, and the National Pollution
                       Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) statutes.
                 CE Objective 3.3: Work closely with telecommunication and energy companies
                 in determining and meeting the community’s needs.
                       CE Policy 3.3.1: Encourage providers of cable television, broadband Internet,
                       and other communication services consult with the City and with affected
                       property owners before placing physical equipment, except cables, on
                       telecommunications company infrastructure within the City.
                       CE Policy 3.3.2: Establish a communications protocol so that City officials
                       and staff are apprised of all requests by telecommunication companies for
                       the location of communication towers and monopoles on public and private
                       properties.
                       CE Policy 3.3.3: Work closely with telecommunication companies to ensure
                       the adequate provision of personal wireless service signal in the City on
                       public or private property.
                       CE Policy 3.3.4: Encourage energy providers to develop a more energy
                       efficient infrastructure, including solar power, LED lighting, time-of-day
                       usage, equipment replacement, and other energy-reducing programs.
                 CE GOAL 4: Maintain and enhance accessibility to public facilities and
                 services for persons with special mobility needs, emergency services,
                 commercial deliveries, and other users.
                 CE Objective 4.1: Enhance the walkability of the City.
                       CE Policy 4.1.1: Pursue the development of sidewalks and/or ADA-
                       compliant “walkable paths” in the vicinity of schools to provide adequate
                       pedestrian access. The location of the sidewalks and/or ADA-compliant
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            6-31

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                Chapter 6. Circulation Element
                       “walkable paths” will include consideration of the Suggested Routes to
                       School Plans and connection to present or future bus or shuttle service in the
                       area.
                       CE Policy 4.1.2: Provide sidewalk access from residential to commercial
                       areas per the Downtown Village Specific Plan (DVSP) and increase the
                       safety and attractiveness of such areas for pedestrians. Establish priorities
                       for installation and identify funding and developer improvement
                       opportunities to assure implementation of these sidewalk access plans.
                       CE Policy 4.1.3: Recommend sidewalk and/or ADA-compliant “walkable
                       paths” in new development areas where public safety objectives will be
                       served, at the discretion of the Planning Commission. Similar
                       recommendations for public safety within existing developments should
                       continue to be reviewed by the Public Works and Traffic Commission.
                       CE Policy 4.1.4: Encourage and recommend commercial, residential, and
                       mixed-used developments to enhance walkability through pedestrian-
                       friendly site and access design.
                       CE Policy 4.1.5: Identify additional safe and convenient locations for
                       pedestrians to cross Foothill Boulevard, including consideration of mid-
                       block crosswalks, and improve their visibility.
                       CE Policy 4.1.6: Undertake an evaluation of existing and proposed
                       pedestrian facilities to improve access and linkages.
                 CE Objective 4.2: Ensure the accessibility and safety of all vehicle facilities in
                 the City.
                       CE Policy 4.2.1: Take advantage of opportunities to control vehicle speeds
                       through sound engineering practices, based on the particular conditions of a
                       given area. Seek to keep apprised of new technologies, which then can be
                       considered for implementation.
                       CE Policy 4.2.2: Maintain clear roadsides for safe vehicular, emergency
                       vehicle, pedestrian, bicycle, and equestrian travel. Property owners shall be
                       required to clear from their properties, debris, litter, brush, weeds, and low
                       overhanging branches that intrude onto the adjacent rights-of-way.
                       CE Policy 4.2.3: Coordinate with Caltrans to improve public notification
                       during freeway incidents in order to alleviate potential congestion on City
                       streets.
                       CE Policy 4.2.4: Continue to work with Caltrans and State officials to
                       enforce the prohibition of commercial trucks with three or more axles or
                       over 4½ tons from using Angeles Crest Highway through the City and
                       pursue and maintain runaway vehicle preventative measures.
                       CE Policy 4.2.5: Investigate and adopt strategies to discourage the use of
                       local roads by through truck traffic.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                              6-32

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                              Chapter 6. Circulation Element
                       CE Policy 4.2.6: Establish ordinances or land use permit conditions limiting
                       the hours when deliveries can be made in off-peak hours in high traffic
                       areas.
                       CE Policy 4.2.7: Investigate and adopt strategies to improve vehicular
                       circulation around public and private schools and school-owned facilities
                       located within the City.
                       CE Policy 4.2.8: Develop and implement a citywide program that
                       encourages safe driving habits, including outreach to teens and senior
                       citizens.
                 CE GOAL 5: Enhance the aesthetics, economic vitality, and circulation
                 efficiency of Foothill Boulevard.
                 CE Objective 5.1: Enhance the appearance and use of Foothill Boulevard
                 through a series of distinctive districts that incorporate public improvements
                 to support the land use policies for each district and the overall vision for
                 Foothill Boulevard.
                       CE Policy 5.1.1: West Gateway. Recognize the Ocean View at Foothill
                       Boulevard intersection as a major entry for the City, and plan for the
                       development of a significant entry statement there. Such entry statement
                       could include landscaping and parkway enhancements, and may require the
                       acquisition of additional public right-of-way at this intersection. Pursue the
                       implementation of landscaping and parkway enhancements for Foothill
                       Boulevard and the unsightly drainage facilities in West Gateway. Either
                       separately or in conjunction with the bikeway and pedestrian plan, the City
                       should work to redesign Foothill Boulevard and implement traffic-calming
                       measures.
                       CE Policy 5.1.2: The Link. Pursue the implementation of a linear park
                       extending from the YMCA west to the commercial district, using excess
                       right-of-way on the south side of the street and screening the high retaining
                       wall. Also pursue the creation of a multi-use pedestrian/bike parkway
                       along the south side of Foothill Boulevard between Mayor’s Discovery Park
                       and the YMCA, with possible further extension to the west. Either
                       separately or in conjunction with the bikeway and pedestrian plan, the City
                       should work to redesign Foothill Boulevard and implement traffic-calming
                       measures, including a center median on Foothill Boulevard in the Walls area
                       and landscaping.
                       CE Policy 5.1.3: Old Town. Pursue parkway landscaping improvements that
                       encourage pedestrian use and reduced traffic speeds while maintaining
                       adequate emergency vehicle access.
                       CE Policy 5.1.4: DVSP—Foothill Boulevard Improvements. Pursue parkway
                       improvements to provide visual enhancement to Foothill Boulevard as well
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            6-33

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 6. Circulation Element
                       as the Angeles Crest at Foothill Boulevard intersection. Pursue
                       opportunities for improved access to off-street parking in the western
                       portion of the DVSP by: working with property owners and developers to
                       encourage reciprocal parking arrangements and removal of barriers to
                       reciprocal access to such parking; revising the Zoning Code to permit
                       removal of such barriers to encourage access to off-street parking; and
                       investigating opportunities for development of additional publicly owned or
                       leased parking. Continue pursuing streetscape enhancements according to
                       the DVSP.
                       CE Policy 5.1.5: Michigan Hill. Establish a program for sidewalk, guardrail,
                       trash receptacle, and landscaping improvements for this district; and
                       continue to pursue long-term funding opportunities for the undergrounding
                       of overhead utilities in this area. Continue to improve bus stop facilities in
                       this area, installing bus shelters where feasible and appropriate.
                 CE Objective 5.2: Enhance traffic flow along Foothill Boulevard.
                       CE Policy 5.2.1: Extend the North Road from its current terminus to Rinetti
                       Lane to provide parallel capacity to Foothill Boulevard.
                       CE Policy 5.2.2: Develop an integrated intersection and traffic signal
                       improvement plan for Foothill Boulevard that balances the need between
                       progressive traffic movements, at reasonable speeds, with the need for safe
                       and convenient pedestrian crossings. Require developers to contribute their
                       fair share to these planned improvements to maintain and improve traffic
                       conditions at acceptable levels.
                       CE Policy 5.2.3: Evaluate the need for additional signals, and consider
                       alternatives to additional traffic signals, at cross streets to Foothill Boulevard
                       that facilitate pedestrian access to the Boulevard and enhance the levels of
                       service at these intersections. Any new signals shall be incorporated into the
                       integrated signal synchronization program so as not to conflict with the
                       objectives of congestion management and speed control.
                       CE Policy 5.2.4: At locations where trails cross Foothill Boulevard, maintain
                       signage and ensure that safety measures include horse crossing capabilities.
                       CE Policy 5.2.5: Make improvements to key intersections along Foothill
                       Boulevard, such as Angeles Crest Highway and Ocean View Boulevard, as
                       right-of-way becomes available.
                       CE Policy 5.2.6: Investigate and adopt strategies to discourage the use of
                       Foothill Boulevard by regional through traffic.
                       CE Policy 5.2.7: Pursue consolidation of closely intersecting streets in
                       connection with new development.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                               6-34

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                             Chapter 6. Circulation Element
                 CE Objective 5.3: Enhance parking efficiency and utilization along Foothill
                 Boulevard to promote the City’s commercial vitality.
                       CE Policy 5.3.1: Pursue the recommendations of the Comprehensive Parking
                       Strategy Report, including short-term and long-term strategies and code
                       changes to enhance parking availability. Recommendations include:
                          a. adding signage and improving the appearance of the public parking
                               lot across from City Hall;
                          b. adding signage for the Farmer’s Market on Foothill Boulevard;
                          c. reducing the length of bus stops;
                          d. improving curb markings, limiting parking to 2 hours along Foothill
                               Boulevard during peak usage periods;
                          e. simplifying parking requirements in the Code;
                          f.   developing a streamlined process for shared parking between
                               businesses in order to optimize parking availability and minimize
                               curb cuts for entry ways to parking lots;
                          g. studying the possibility of reverse angled parking in the Old Town
                               area; and
                          h. establishing agreements between owners of neighboring properties to
                               share parking.
                       CE Policy 5.3.2: Investigate and consider adopting curb parking time limits
                       along Foothill Boulevard during peak usage periods in areas with
                       insufficient parking supply when feasible and appropriate for the adjacent
                       land uses.
                 CE GOAL 6: Promote active (non-motorized) transportation.
                 CE Objective 6.1: Support bicycle use as a mode of transportation by providing
                 a comprehensive network of bikeways and enhancing infrastructure to
                 accommodate bicycles and riders.
                       CE Policy 6.1.1: Adopt a Bicycle Transportation Plan that shows access to
                       primary destinations for commuting, schools, and recreational activities.
                       The Bicycle Transportation Plan as shown in Figure CE-5 shall form the
                       basis for initiating bikeway developments, and shall be amended by
                       separate resolution of the City Council as additional routes, trails, and
                       facilities are deemed appropriate.
                       CE Policy 6.1.2: Encourage developments and improvements which facilitate
                       the implementation of high quality, desirable bicycle routes. Such
                       improvements shall begin with implementation of the routes as Class III as
                       soon as possible on the adopted Bicycle Transportation Plan, where these
                       routes can safely be established without mitigation of traffic conflicts or road
                       hazards.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                           6-35

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                Chapter 6. Circulation Element
                       CE Policy 6.1.3: Pursue funding opportunities to upgrade routes to Class I
                       and II bicycle routes that meet or exceed established standards. First
                       priority for upgrade or improvements shall be given to those routes that
                       serve commuting and school access needs in order to improve the
                       opportunities for bicycling as a viable transportation alternative.
                       CE Policy 6.1.4: Encourage existing public and private developments and
                       destinations to incorporate adequate, convenient, and secure bicycle-related
                       support facilities to strengthen the City's policy to improve bicycling as a
                       viable transportation alternative, such as:
                          a. construction of weatherproof bicycle facilities where feasible, and at a
                              minimum, bicycle racks or covered, secure parking near the building
                              entrances; and
                          b. provision and maintenance of changing rooms, lockers, and showers
                              at large employers or employment centers.
                       CE Policy 6.1.5: Link the City’s bicycle network to the regional system to
                       ensure connectivity to adjacent jurisdictions.
                       CE Policy 6.1.6: Improve bicycle access to schools within the City, including
                       pursuing Safe Routes to School funding for planned bikeways and other
                       bike facilities near schools, or other grants.
                       CE Policy 6.1.7: Assist in the development and delivery of specific bicycle
                       safety programs that will serve to meet the goal of providing a safe, efficient
                       transportation system. Such programs should include public education on
                       safety and rules of the road, appropriate signage, and information regarding
                       proper sharing of roadways and trails by a variety of users.
                 CE Objective 6.2: Preserve, improve, expand, and complete the trails system
                 and promote safe, coordinated, and comprehensive trail systems for hikers,
                 bicyclists, and equestrians.
                       CE Policy 6.2.1: Maintain and expand the trails system due to its importance
                       as a component of the City’s commitment to the increase of non-motorized
                       mobility and reduction of dependence on automobiles for local trips.
                       CE Policy 6.2.2: Preserve, improve, and expand the trails system in
                       conjunction with the goals, objectives, and policies within the Open Space
                       and Recreation Element of the General Plan.
                       CE Policy 6.2.3: Utilize the Trails Master Plan as the implementing
                       document for the General Plan regarding trails and trail-related issues.
                       CE Policy 6.2.4: Maintain and update the Trails Map as the Trails Master
                       Plan is implemented, and make it available for public reference and use.
                       Amend the Trails Map by a separate resolution of the City Council as
                       additional routes, trails, and facilities are deemed appropriate. Amendment
                       of either the Trails Master Plan or Trails Map will not require amendment of
General Plan—January 2013                                                                              6-36

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                               Chapter 6. Circulation Element
                       the General Plan unless the changes would create inconsistency with the
                       General Plan’s goals, objectives, and policies.
                       CE Policy 6.2.5: Seek to gain easements from roadways to trails to improve
                       accessibility of the trail system.
                       CE Policy 6.2.6: Coordinate the provision of equestrian circulation and
                       safety enhancements, such as equestrian accessible cross walk buttons,
                       traffic buffers, visible and horse-friendly cross walk markings and materials,
                       and warnings before and after trail crossings.
                 CE Objective 6.3: Pursue the integration of the non-motorized transportation
                 system.
                       CE Policy 6.3.1: Pursue the creation of linkages between any new bikeways
                       and the City’s trails system shown in Figure CE-4.
                       CE Policy 6.3.2: Enhance the trail crossings to improve safety and visibility,
                       including provision of markings on the street to alert motorists of horses
                       crossing, and provide regular cleanup in order to clear foliage.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                             6-37

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                     Chapter 6. Circulation Element
                             This page intentionally left blank.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                   6-38

   Chapter 7
Noise Elem ent

                                                               7.0
                                                                   NOISE ELEMENT
7.1            Introduction
               The quality of life in a city can be affected by the level of noise experienced by
               those who live, work, and recreate there. The Noise Element of the City’s
               General Plan is intended to identify noise-sensitive land uses and noise sources,
               define areas of noise impacts, and establish policies and programs to protect the
               community from excessive noise and to reduce negative impacts from those
               noise sources.
7.2            Noise Terminology
               Noise is generally defined as unwanted sound. Sound is technically described in
               terms of the loudness (amplitude) and frequency (pitch) of the sound. The
               standard unit of measurement for sound is the decibel (dB). Because humans do
               not perceive all frequencies equally well, measured sound levels at certain
               frequencies are weighted to correspond to the sensitivity of the human ear. This
               frequency weighting is known as A-weighting, and sound levels that are
               adjusted in this way are given in units of A-weighted decibels (dBA). Table NE-1
               describes typical A-weighted noise levels for various noise sources.
               Noise in our daily environment fluctuates over time. Some fluctuations are
               minor, while some are substantial. Some noise levels occur in regular patterns,
               while others are random. Some noise levels fluctuate rapidly, while others
               fluctuate slowly. Some noise levels vary widely, while others are relatively
               constant. Various noise descriptors, which are described below, have been
               developed to describe time-varying noise levels.
               Equivalent Sound Level (Leq): Leq represents an average of the sound energy
               occurring over a specified period. In effect, Leq is the steady-state sound level
               that, in a stated period, would contain the same acoustical energy as the time-
               varying sound that actually occurs during the same period. The 1-hour A-
General Plan—January 2013                                                                         7-1

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                   Chapter 7. Noise Element
                 weighted equivalent sound level (Leq[h]) is the energy average of the A-weighted
                 sound levels occurring during a 1-hour period. It is the basis for the noise
                 abatement criteria (NAC) used by Caltrans and the Federal Highway
                 Administration (FHWA).
                 Table NE-1. Typical A-Weighted Noise Levels
                                                      Noise Level
                 Common Outdoor Activities              (dBA)                Common Indoor Activities
                                                         110                          Rock band, concert
                 Jet fly-over at 1,000 ft
                                                         100
                 Gas lawn mower at 3 ft
                                                          90
                 Diesel truck at 50 ft at 50 mph                                      Food blender at 3 ft
                                                          80                      Garbage disposal at 3 ft
                 Noisy urban area, daytime
                 Gas lawn mower, 100 ft                   70                      Vacuum cleaner at 10 ft
                 Commercial area                                                    Normal speech at 3 ft
                 Heavy traffic at 300 ft                  60
                                                                                    Large business office
                 Quiet urban daytime                      50                       Dishwasher next room
                 Quiet urban night-time                   40              Theater, large conference room
                                                                                            (background)
                 Quiet suburban night-time
                                                          30                                      Library
                 Quiet rural night-time                                                 Bedroom at night
                                                          20
                                                                               Broadcast/recording studio
                                                          10
                 Lowest threshold of human hearing         0           Lowest threshold of human hearing
                 Source: Caltrans 2008
                 Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL): CNEL is an average sound level
                 during a 24-hour day. CNEL is a noise measurement scale that accounts for
                 noise source, distance, single event duration, single event occurrence, frequency,
                 and time of day. Human reaction to sound between 7:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. is
                 as if the sound were actually 5 dBA higher than if it occurred between 7:00 a.m.
                 and 7:00 p.m. From 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., humans perceive sound as if it were
                 10 dBA higher due to the lower background level. Hence, the CNEL is obtained
General Plan—January 2013                                                                             7-2

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                      Chapter 7. Noise Element
                 by adding an additional 5 dBA to sound levels in the evening, between 7:00 p.m.
                 and 10:00 p.m., and 10 dBA to sound levels in the night before 7:00 a.m. and after
                 10:00 p.m. Because CNEL accounts for human sensitivity to sound, the CNEL
                 24-hour figure is always a higher number than the actual 24-hour average.
                 Day-Night Level (Ldn): Ldn is also an average sound level during a 24-hour day.
                 The difference between CNEL and Ldn is that CNEL considers the 24-hour day
                 divided into three periods, while Ldn uses two periods. Ldn is obtained by adding
                 an additional 10 dBA to sound levels in the evening from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
                 The two measurements are very close and are generally accepted as equivalent in
                 community noise studies. Ldn is the measure used by the U. S. Environmental
                 Protection Agency for a community noise descriptor, while CNEL is commonly
                 used in California.
                 The nature of decibel scales is such that individual decibel ratings for different
                 noise sources cannot be added directly to produce the sound level for the
                 combined noise source. Instead, the combined noise level produced by multiple
                 noise sources is calculated using logarithmic summation. For example, if one
                 bulldozer produces a noise level of 80 dBA, two bulldozers would generate a
                 combined noise level of 83 dBA. For another example, assume that a house is
                 located at the intersection of two streets. If the traffic on the heavily traveled
                 street (by itself) generated 60 dBA and the traffic on the lightly traveled street (by
                 itself) generated 50 dBA, the combined noise level caused by traffic on both
                 streets would be 60.4 dBA.
                 People generally perceive a 10-dBA increase in a noise source as a doubling of
                 loudness. For example, an average person would perceive a 70 dBA sound level
                 as being twice as loud as a 60 dBA sound. People generally cannot detect
                 differences of 1 to 2 dBA between noise levels of a similar nature (e.g., an
                 increase in traffic noise compared to existing traffic noise). However, under ideal
                 listening conditions, some people can detect differences of 2 or 3 dBA. Under
                 normal listening conditions, most people would likely perceive a 5 dBA change
                 in sounds of a similar nature. Note that when the new sound is of a different
                 nature than the background sound (e.g., backup alarms compared to quiet
                 residential sounds), most people can detect changes as low as 1 dBA.
                 When distance is the only factor considered, sound levels from isolated point
                 sources of noise typically decrease by about 6 dBA for every doubling of distance
                 from the noise source. When the noise source is a continuous line (e.g., vehicle
                 traffic on a highway), sound levels decrease by about 3 dBA for every doubling
                 of distance. In traffic studies, an attenuation rate of 4.5 dBA per doubling of
                 distance is often used when the roadway is at ground level and the intervening
                 ground is effective in absorbing sound (e.g., ground vegetation, scattered trees,
                 and clumps of bushes). When the roadway is elevated, 3 dBA of noise
                 attenuation per doubling of distance is used because the sound-absorbing effects
                 of the intervening ground are limited.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                              7-3

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                    Chapter 7. Noise Element
                 Noise levels can also be affected by several factors other than the distance from
                 the noise source. Topographic features and structural barriers that absorb,
                 reflect, or scatter sound waves can affect the reduction of noise levels.
                 Atmospheric conditions (e.g., wind speed and direction, humidity levels, and
                 temperatures) can also affect the degree to which sound is attenuated over
                 distance. As a result, the existing noise environment can be highly variable
                 depending on local conditions.
                 Noise-sensitive land uses are generally defined as locations where the presence
                 of noise could adversely affect the use of land. These typically include
                 residences, schools, hospitals, libraries, golf courses, and passive recreation sites.
7.3              Setting
                 Predominant land uses in La Cañada Flintridge include varying densities of
                 residential development (primarily low-density single-family), varying
                 intensities and types of businesses and commercial development (primarily low-
                 scale retail, service, and office),
                 public and private schools and
                 academies, churches, government
                 facilities, open space, trails,
                 recreation venues, and the NASA Jet
                 Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). Traffic
                 noise from the Interstate (I) 210
                 Freeway, which traverses the City,
                 has the largest noise impact on the
                 community, although the State
                 Route (SR) 2 Freeway and Foothill Boulevard also contribute to the noise
                 environment of La Cañada Flintridge.
                 The locations, types, and densities and intensities of land uses, in conjunction
                 with noise from transportation-related and other noise sources, create the
                 ambient noise conditions, or setting, of La Cañada Flintridge. Noise-sensitive
                 receivers within the City include existing residential land uses located
                 throughout the City; schools such as Palm Crest Elementary, Flintridge
                 Montessori, and the Foothill School; and other noise-sensitive land uses such as
                 libraries and recreation areas. Existing Noise Conditions
                 The following section provides an overview of existing and future noise levels
                 and descriptions of major noise sources located within the City. These noise
                 conditions form the basis for goals, objectives, policies, and programs to mitigate
                 undesirable levels of noise. Noise sources are categorized and described as
                 transportation related and non-transportation related.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            7-4

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                           Chapter 7. Noise Element
7.3.1             Existing Conditions
                  Existing noise conditions within La Cañada Flintridge are characteristic of most
                  any city. Noise sources include transportation noise sources, such as vehicles on
                  local roadways and freeways, and aircraft flyovers. Community noise sources,
                  such as landscaping activities, car alarms, barking dogs, and others, occur
                  throughout the City. Specific noise sources are discussed in more detail below.
                  Existing noise levels at representative locations throughout the City were
                  quantified on November 11, 2009. Table NE-2, below, shows noise data
                  gathered. Figure NE-1 shows the location of noise measurements taken in the
                  City.
Table NE-2. Typical A-Weighted Noise Levels in Representative Locations in La Cañada Flintridge
                                                                                 Measurement Results (dBA)
Site     Measurement Start             Duration
ID       Location        Time1          (mm:ss) Noise Sources                Leq Lmax Lmin L90     L50   L10
ST-1     626 Foothill    8:45 a.m.       15:00      Traffic along Foothill  63.8 79.5 50.4 53.4 59.7 66.6
         Boulevard                                  Boulevard
ST-2     140 Foothill    9:30 a.m.       15:00      Traffic along Foothill  59.3 73.1 50.3 53.8 57.2 62.2
         Boulevard                                  Boulevard, children
                                                    playing, landscaping
                                                    activities
ST-3     4310 Chevy      10:30 a.m.      15:00      Traffic along Chevy     65.4 86.0 42.5 52.1 58.1 67.6
         Chase Drive                                Chase Drive and
                                                    Descanso Drive,
                                                    periodic dog barking
ST-4     265 Berkshire   11:05 a.m.      15:00      Traffic along I-210     63.2 72.6 52.4 60.6 62.4 65.1
         Place
ST-5     4625 Oak        12:45 p.m.      15:00      Traffic along I-210     51.9 69.6 46.1 47.2 49.4 53.6
         Grove Drive                                and Oak Grove Drive
ST-6     1010 Salisbury 1:20 p.m.        15:00      Traffic along I-210     62.4 74.8 57.8 60.3 61.8 63.3
         Court
ST-7     Glenola Park    2:00 p.m.       15:00      Traffic along Angeles 58.6 72.4 40.5 44.8 55.1 61.5
                                                    Crest Highway,
                                                    construction across the
                                                    street
ST-8     5025 Palm       2:45 p.m.       15:00      Limited traffic, with   51.6 71.2 40.2 41.4 43.3 54.4
         Crest Drive                                traffic on I-210
                                                    slightly audible
1
  Measurements taken November 11, 2009, by ICF International noise staff.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                                   7-5

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                            Chapter 7. Noise Element
7.3.2            Projected Transportation-Related Noise Sources
                 Traffic noise was evaluated using the FHWA Highway Traffic Noise Prediction
                 Model (Federal Highway Administration FHWA-RD-77-108, 1978) and traffic
                 data located in the Project Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA). The model uses the
                 number of daily vehicles (average daily traffic [ADT]), vehicle speed, the
                 percentage of traffic from medium and heavy trucks, and the day, evening, and
                 night distribution for the calculation of predicted traffic noise levels. The I-210
                 and SR-2 freeways were analyzed based on the percentage for trucks (both
                 medium and heavy) provided by the Caltrans website. All other roadways were
                 assumed to have three percent trucks (volumes are based on the FHWA Traffic
                 Noise Model [TNM] lookup tables).
7.3.2.1          Freeways
                 The primary source of noise in La Cañada Flintridge is from roadway traffic on
                 the I-210 and SR-2 freeways, which traverse the City. Variables such as traffic
                 volume, traffic flow, speed of traffic, road surface, and type of traffic (e.g., tractor
                 trailers versus passenger vehicles) affect noise levels from these roadways within
                 the City. Average daily traffic (ADT) on I-210 through La Cañada Flintridge
                 varies from 107,000 to 121,000 vehicles. On SR-2, ADT south of I-210 is 110,000
                 vehicles; north of I-210 (Angeles Crest Highway), ADT drops to 12,800 vehicles.
                 When the segment of I-210 through the La Cañada Flintridge was constructed in
                 the 1970s, it divided existing residential neighborhoods. As a result, many
                 homes within the City abut the I-210 right-of-way and are impacted by
                 unacceptable levels of noise.
                 The City initiated a process,
                 at the request of local
                 residents, to evaluate I-210
                 noise impacts. Noise
                 measurements were
                 conducted adjacent to I-210
                 through La Cañada
                 Flintridge as part of the
                 Caltrans Noise Barrier Scope
                 Summary Report (NBSSR)
                 (Parsons Transportation
                                                          Residential street divided by construction of I-210
                 Group, Inc. 2007). According
                 to the NBSSR, existing peak-hour noise levels measured at land uses adjacent to
                 the I-210 right-of-way ranged from 59 to 81 dBA (Leq). The study found that
                 existing freeway traffic noise levels in many locations along the freeway exceed
                 the noise abatement criteria established by FHWA, Caltrans, and the Los Angeles
                 Metropolitan Transportation Authority (Metro).
General Plan—January 2013                                                                                     7-6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Legend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 City of La Cañada Flintridge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Noise Measurement Locations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         HW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                ST-8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ST-7
                                                                                                                                                      FO
                                                                                                                                                         O   THI
                                                                                                                                                                 LL
                                                                                                                                                                    B   LVD
                                                                                                                                                                                        RAMP                  ST-6
                                                                                                                                                                                               VERDUGO BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GOULD AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ST-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ST-3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ST-5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              I2
k:\irvine\gis\projects\city_of_la_canada_flintrdige\00096_07\mapdoc\general_plan\2010dec\figne_1_noise_locations.mxd SM (12-16-10)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BER                                                               ST-2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  KSH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E PL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EV                                                                  K       SH IR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Y                                                             BER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AS                                                                   ST-4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           DR                                                                           K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    R                                   GR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A ND D                                                   OV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HIGHL                                                          E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             DR
                                                                                                                                      0       1,000      2,000                4,000
                                                                                                                                                                                 Feet
                                                                                                                                  Source : ESRI USA Imagery (5/2006; 0.5m)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NE-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Noise Measurement Locations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           La Cañada Flintridge General Plan Program EIR


City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                                         Chapter 7. Noise Element
                   Ambient noise measurements that were taken for the General Plan Update
                   include two locations along the I-210 Freeway to characterize existing noise
                   levels. Sensitive receiver locations ST-4 and ST-6 were measured at 63 and
                   62 dBA Leq when rounded to the nearest whole number. The I-210 Freeway was
                   the dominant noise source at each of these locations.
                   Figures NE-2 and NE-3 show the existing and future 60 and 65 dBA CNEL
                   contours for SR-2 and I-210 throughout the City. Table NE-3 shows the distances
                   from the centerline of these two noise sources to existing and future 60 and
                   65 dBA CNEL contours. Noise contours for the I-210 and SR-2 freeways were
                   calculated based on the 2008 total vehicles and the percentage of trucks (both
                   medium and heavy) provided by the Caltrans web site. Future volumes were
                   based on a two percent growth factor.
    Table NE-3. Existing (2008) and Future (2030) 60 and 65 dBA CNEL contours for I-210 and SR-2
                                                                                            Distance to
                                       Distance to Existing      Distance to 2030        Existing 65 dBA      Distance to 2030
                                         60 dBA CNEL              60 dBA CNEL             CNEL Contour         65 dBA CNEL
     Roadway Segment                     Contour (Feet)           Contour (Feet)               (Feet)         Contour (Feet)
     SR 2          At I-210
                   interchange                > 1,0001                > 1,0002                  643                  771
     SR 2          At Foothill
                   Boulevard                    110                      134                     65                   80
     I-210         Throughout
                   the City                     702                      860                    414                  510
     1
       The future noise contours for I-210 do not include the potential extension of the I-710 Freeway. The inclusion of the
     proposed project could increase traffic volumes on I-210 and increase the distance to the 60 and 65 dBA CNEL contours.
     2
       The TNM lookup tables do not calculate beyond 1,000 feet; therefore, the distance of the 60 dBA CNEL contour is not
     quantified beyond this distance.
                   According to Metro guidelines, noise abatement measures in the form of retrofit
                   soundwalls will be considered when the existing peak-hour average traffic noise
                   levels are 67 dBA or higher. These soundwalls are considered “Metro
                   Qualified.” Where the existing peak-hour average traffic noise levels are less
                   than 67 dBA, soundwalls are considered “Metro Non-Qualified” and should be
                   funded from sources other than Metro.
                   The NBSSR concluded that approximately 3.3 miles of soundwall would need to
                   be constructed on the westbound side of I-210, ranging in height from 9.8 to
                   16.1 feet, while approximately 2.0 miles of soundwall would need to be
                   constructed on the eastbound side, ranging from 4.6 to 16.1 feet high. The
                   majority of these soundwalls are considered “Metro Qualified.” All portions of
                   the soundwalls would be constructed within the Caltrans right-of-way.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                                                    7-7

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                          Chapter 7. Noise Element
                 Construction of the proposed soundwalls would provide at least a 5 dB
                 reduction in traffic noise levels.
                 Total cost for the “Metro Qualified” soundwalls would be approximately
                 $34 million (in 2007 dollars). The City is seeking funding for the “Metro
                 Qualified” soundwalls from a variety of sources, including Metro, federal
                 discretionary, and State funds. As of the adoption date of this update to the
                 General Plan, the timing of construction of needed soundwalls has not been
                 established; however, some funding has been identified. Construction of the
                 soundwalls will continue to be the City’s highest priority regarding noise
                 mitigation in the planning period.
7.3.2.2          Primary Arterials and Major Local Streets
                 Noise from primary and secondary arterial streets also can contribute to the
                 noise environment, often substantially. The short-term noise measurements that
                 were conducted on representative roadways located with the City on November
                 11, 2009, indicate that noise levels ranged from 52 dBA Leq up to 65 dBA Leq.
                 Table NE-2 shows the representative noise levels at each measurement location.
                 Table NE-4 shows the
                 distance to the 60 and 65 dBA
                 CNEL contours for modeled
                 roadways within the City.
                 Traffic volumes for local
                 roadways were taken from
                 the traffic impact analysis
                 prepared for the General Plan
                 update. Figures NE-2 and
                 NE-3 show the existing and
                 future 60 and 65 dBA CNEL
                 contours for some of the                                Foothill Boulevard
                 major thoroughfares
                 throughout the City. All local roadways analyzed were assumed to have three
                 percent trucks (volumes are based on the FHWA TNM lookup tables).
                 Foothill Boulevard, which is one of three primary roadways in La Cañada
                 Flintridge, is the only regional arterial; it is also the primary commercial
                 thoroughfare. ADT on Foothill Boulevard is approximately 23,000 vehicles.
                 Noise modeling was conducted for the La Cañada Flintridge Town Center
                 Project (EIP Associates 2006), which is located on Foothill Boulevard east of
                 Angeles Crest Highway. The modeled existing noise levels at a distance of
                 100 feet from the applicable roadway centerline varied from approximately
                 49 dBA CNEL on Foothill Boulevard at Bel Air Drive and south of Bel Air Drive,
                 to 65 dBA CNEL at numerous locations along the I-210 Freeway and along
                 Foothill Boulevard from Chevy Chase Drive to Foothill Boulevard. Traffic noise
General Plan—January 2013                                                                                  7-8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Legend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    City of La Cañada Flintridge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Existing 60dBA CNEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Existing 65dBA CNEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E      HW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Y2
                                                                                                                                                                                     FO
                                                                                                                                                                                        O   TH
                                                                                                                                                                                               ILL
                                                                                                                                                                                                   B   LVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                             RAMP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VERDUGO BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GOULD AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BERK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SH IR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CH                                     E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    EV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Y                                                    I 210
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AS
k:\irvine\gis\projects\city_of_la_canada_flintrdige\00096_07\mapdoc\general_plan\2010dec\figne_2_existing_dba_contours.mxd SM (12-16-10)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DR                                                    OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   D   DR                GR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LA N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                HIGH                                         OV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  R
                                                                                                                                            0      1,000   2,000             4,000
                                                                                                                                                                                   Feet
                                                                                                                                        Source : ESRI USA Imagery (5/2006; 0.5m)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NE-2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Existing 60 and 65 dBA CNEL Contours
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   La Cañada Flintridge General Plan Program EIR


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Legend
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  City of La Cañada Flintridge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Future 60dBA CNEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Future 65dBA CNEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E      HW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Y2
                                                                                                                                                                                   FO
                                                                                                                                                                                      O   TH
                                                                                                                                                                                             ILL
                                                                                                                                                                                                 B   LVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                           RAMP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VERDUGO BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GOULD AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BERK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SH IR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CH                                     E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  EV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Y                                                    I 210
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AS
k:\irvine\gis\projects\city_of_la_canada_flintrdige\00096_07\mapdoc\general_plan\2010dec\figne_3_future_dba_contours.mxd SM (12-16-10)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DR                                                    OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D   DR                GR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LA N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HIGH                                         OV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                R
                                                                                                                                          0      1,000   2,000             4,000
                                                                                                                                                                                 Feet
                                                                                                                                      Source : ESRI USA Imagery (5/2006; 0.5m)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NE-3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Future 60 and 65 dBA CNEL Contours
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 La Cañada Flintridge General Plan Program EIR


City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                     Chapter 7. Noise Element
                 on Foothill Boulevard currently does not exceed acceptable noise levels for
                 existing or future uses along the corridor (Table NE-2); however, the presence of
                 residential neighborhoods directly adjacent to the corridor poses an issue that the
                 City will address during the planning period.
                 Because Foothill Boulevard is a regional arterial street, the City cannot restrict
                 potential increases of through-traffic that could occur during the planning
                 period. However, it can continue to work with neighboring jurisdictions
                 through the regional councils of governments to monitor and address future
                 traffic levels. The transportation demand management measures identified in
                 Chapter 6, Circulation Element, and Chapter 8, Air Quality Element, including
                 increased use of transit and other techniques, can help to maintain or even
                 reduce levels of traffic on Foothill Boulevard and other major roadways.
                 Angeles Crest Highway and Verdugo Boulevard are the other two primary
                 roadways, with approximate ADTs of 16,900 and 15,800 vehicles, respectively.
                 Noise levels along portions of Angeles Crest Highway near Foothill Boulevard
                 and the I-210 Freeway could meet or exceed 65 dBA CNEL; however, based on
                 short-term ambient noise measurements conducted at Glenola Park (ST-7), noise
                 levels would not likely exceed 65 dBA CNEL for this stretch of Angeles Crest
                 Highway. Other roadways modeled (with existing or future traffic volumes) are
                 not expected to exceed 65 dBA CNEL.
                 In addition to noise from passenger vehicles, transit buses and trucks also can
                 contribute to roadway noise and vibration. Transit services in La Cañada
                 Flintridge operate along the entire length of Foothill Boulevard, along Verdugo
                 Boulevard, and on Oak Grove Drive (which serves JPL).
                 Traffic on local residential streets is relatively low and does not contribute
                 significantly to excessive noise levels. However, noise and vibration associated
                 with delivery and refuse trucks can cause periodic disturbances.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                             7-9

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                   Chapter 7. Noise Element
    Table NE-4. Existing (2008) and Future (2030) 60 and 65 dBA CNEL Contours for Selected
    Roadways
                                          Distance to     Distance to   Distance to        Distance to
                                        Existing 60 dBA  2030 60 dBA Existing 65 dBA      2030 65 dBA
                                        CNEL Contour        CNEL       CNEL Contour          CNEL
     Roadway              Segment            (Feet)     Contour (Feet)    (Feet)         Contour (Feet)
     Alta Canyada     North of Foothill         --             --            --                 --
     Road             Boulevard
     Angeles Crest    North of Foothill        388            311           140                107
     Highway          Boulevard
     Angeles Crest    North of Bay             111            389           35                 140
     Highway          Tree Road
     Berkshire        East of                   40             50            --                 --
     Avenue           Commonwealth
                      Avenue
     Chevy Chase      South of                  48             51            --                 --
     Drive            Berkshire
                      Avenue
     Chevy Chase      South of Foothill         35             44            --                 --
     Drive            Boulevard
     Chevy Chase      Between                   --             --            --                 --
     Drive            Emerald Isle and
                      Sussex
     Commonwealth South of Foothill             --             --            --                 --
     Avenue           Boulevard
     Cornishon        South of Foothill         35             44            --                 --
     Avenue           Boulevard
     Crown Avenue     North of Santa            36             49            --                 --
                      Ynez Way
     Descanso Drive West of Chevy               95            126            --                 40
                      Chase Drive
     Foothill         East of Ocean            268            304           89                 103
     Boulevard        View Boulevard
     Foothill         East of Hillard          267            299           89                 101
     Boulevard        Avenue
     Foothill         East of Verdugo          291            352           98                 123
     Boulevard        Boulevard
     Foothill         East of Gould            287            106           96                  --
     Boulevard        Avenue
     Foothill         Between La               251            294           83                 99
     Boulevard        Crescenta and
                      Rosemont
General Plan—January 2013                                                                          7-10

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                   Chapter 7. Noise Element
                                          Distance to     Distance to   Distance to        Distance to
                                        Existing 60 dBA  2030 60 dBA Existing 65 dBA      2030 65 dBA
                                        CNEL Contour        CNEL       CNEL Contour          CNEL
     Roadway              Segment            (Feet)     Contour (Feet)    (Feet)         Contour (Feet)
     Gould Avenue     North of I-210            40             52            --                 --
                      Westbound
                      Ramp
     Highland Drive East of Chevy               --             61            --                 --
                      Chase Drive
     Hillard Avenue   North of Foothill         35             45            --                 --
                      Boulevard
     Honolulu         Between Sunset           180            183           57                 58
     Avenue           and Wickham
     La Cañada        North of                  --             --            --                 --
     Boulevard        Fairview Drive
     Lida Street      Between                   --             --            --                 --
                      Figueroa and Art
                      Center Driveway
     Linda Vista      Between                   44             55            --                 --
     Avenue           Inverness and I-
                      210
     Montrose         Between Mira             175            179           56                 57
     Avenue           Vista Avenue
                      and Waltonia
                      Drive
     Oak Grove        South of Foothill        159            139           51                 45
     Drive            Boulevard
     Oak Grove        West of Windsor           66            226            --                72
     Drive            Avenue
     Ocean View       North of Foothill         67             80            --                 --
     Boulevard        Boulevard
     Ocean View       Between Barton           227            233           72                 75
     Boulevard        Lane and I-210
     Verdugo          East of Alta             103            120            --                37
     Boulevard        Canyada Road
     Verdugo          Between Park             184            195           58                 61
     Boulevard        Place and
                      Lanterman Lane
     Verdugo          South of La              137            157           43                 50
     Boulevard        Crescenta
                      Avenue
General Plan—January 2013                                                                          7-11

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                    Chapter 7. Noise Element
7.3.2.3          Aircraft
                 The Burbank–Bob Hope Airport is approximately 8 miles west of La Cañada
                 Flintridge and separated by mountains. The nearest public-use airport is
                 Whiteman Airport, which is located approximately 12 miles west-northwest and
                 is also separated from the City by mountains. Although La Cañada Flintridge
                 experiences aircraft flyovers typical of a city located near a major metropolitan
                 region, airport noise does not represent a significant part of its noise
                 environment.
                 La Cañada Flintridge also experiences periodic noise from helicopters. One of
                 the County of Los Angeles Fire Department’s ten training camps, Camp 2
                 Regional Training Center, is located immediately south of JPL, just south of the
                 City boundary off Oak Grove Drive. Camp 2 is a helicopter standby location
                 during the fire season, with a crew of fire fighters. Helicopters also fly to and
                 from JPL periodically. The Verdugo Hills Hospital, which is located in Glendale
                 directly adjacent to the City’s southwest boundary, also has a private helipad on-
                 site for transport of trauma patients. In general, the helicopter flights are not
                 regular and the noise associated with them is infrequent and not a significant
                 source of noise within the City. The exception would be during major fire events
                 when the Camp 2 fire crew would be responding.
7.3.3            Non-Transportation Noise Sources
                 There are a variety of non-transportation noise sources within La Cañada
                 Flintridge, both stationary and periodic. Although commercial establishments
                 within the City are predominantly low scale and
                 low intensity, they can produce unwanted sources
                 of noise. These noise sources include periodic
                 loading and unloading operations, restaurants and
                 live music venues, use of pneumatic auto repair
                 tools, and use of mechanical equipment. Other
                 land uses in the City can be sources of noise,
                 including schools, parks, and other active
                 recreation venues. Typically, the sources of noise
                 associated with these uses are most intrusive into
                 residential areas that are directly adjacent to the
                 specific uses.
                                                                             Example of “nuisance noise”
                 Periodic noise also can be disruptive to the City’s
                 quiet residential neighborhoods. These noise sources include use of landscaping
                 maintenance equipment, construction noise, barking dogs, and loud music. This
                 type of “nuisance noise” is especially annoying when it occurs in the early
                 morning or late night hours.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                             7-12

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                   Chapter 7. Noise Element
7.4              Planning to Address Noise
                 La Cañada Flintridge will continue to be a community that retains its quiet,
                 small-town feeling and predominantly single-family residential character with a
                 limited amount of local-serving commercial development. The Land Use
                 Element does not propose changes to land use designations that would increase
                 exposure of people to sources of noise. Therefore, implementation of the General
                 Plan during the planning period will focus on three main efforts: 1) maintaining
                 areas deemed currently acceptable in terms of noise exposure; 2) mitigating
                 impacts from existing sources of noise on existing sensitive land uses; and 3)
                 implementing planning policies and zoning to ensure that new development
                 both is protected from unwarranted noise and does not contribute to
                 unacceptable levels of noise within the community.
7.4.1            Land Use Compatibility and Noise
                 Table NE-5 below provides guidance for the acceptability of certain types of
                 development within specific CNEL noise contours; this guidance will serve as
                 criteria for assessing the compatibility of proposed land uses in corresponding
                 land use designations. Table NE-5 depicts “clearly acceptable,” “normally
                 acceptable,” “normally unacceptable,” and “clearly unacceptable” exterior noise
                 levels for those uses and land use designations. The primary purpose of the
                 noise/land use compatibility matrix is to identify potential conflicts between
                 proposed land uses and the noise environment. The City will utilize it as part of
                 the criteria for assessing the compatibility of proposed development. The matrix
                 is usually used at the General Plan or zoning levels of approval, as well as for
                 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) analysis.
                 Table NE-6 provides the interior and exterior noise guidelines for various types
                 of uses and developments. The noise guidelines will function as City policy for
                 new land uses and acceptable noise levels for development of new land uses. In
                 addition, the provisions of the State of California Noise Insulation Standards
                 (California Code of Regulations, Title 24) will be enforced to specify that the
                 indoor noise levels for multi-family residential living spaces shall not exceed
                 45 dB CNEL (or Ldn) due to the combined effect of all noise sources. The State
                 requires implementation of this indoor standard when the outdoor noise levels
                 exceed 60 dB CNEL (or Ldn). Title 24 requires that this standard be applied to all
                 new hotels, motels, and apartment houses and dwellings other than detached
                 single-family dwellings. As a matter of policy, the City also will apply this
                 standard to new single-family developments, mixed-use developments, and
                 condominium conversions, where feasible.
                 An acoustical analysis, prepared by a qualified acoustical engineer, should be
                 required in instances where noise-sensitive uses are proposed in noise-impacted
General Plan—January 2013                                                                          7-13

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                              Chapter 7. Noise Element
                  areas. The acoustical analysis will verify that the structure has been designed,
                  and/or mitigation measures have been proposed, to limit noise to the prescribed
                  maximum allowable levels for interiors and exteriors.
Table NE-5. Noise and Land Use Compatibility Matrix
Land Use                                                                        Day-Night Noise Level (Ldn)
Designations                 Uses                                           <55    60     65    70     75   80>
Hillside, Estate, Very Low Single-Family, Duplex, Accessory               A      A     B      C     C     D     D
Density, Low Density,        Living Units
Medium Density Residential
Medium-High, High            Multiple-Family, Senior Housing              A      A     B      B     C     D     D
Density Residential
Commercial/Office, Mixed Commercial, Retail, Bank, Restaurant,            A      A     A      A     B     B     C
Use 1 (DVSP), Mixed Use 2 Business Professional, Movie Theatre,
(DVSP), Mixed Use (New), Mixed Use (Commercial/Residential)
Mixed Use Overlay (New)
Commercial/Office            Auditorium, Concert Hall                     B      B     C      C    D      D     D
Institutional, Public        Schools, Libraries, Churches, Nursing        A      A     B      C     C     D     D
                             Homes, Hospitals, Medical Offices,
                             Museums, Other Public
Parks and Recreation         Parks, Riding Clubs, Community               A      A     A      B     C     D     D
                             Centers, Swimming Pools, Tennis
                             Courts, Ball Fields
Open Space                   Golf Courses, Botanical Gardens, Low-        A      A     A      A     B     C     C
                             Intensity Public Recreation Uses, Trails,
                             Public and Private Natural Open Space
                             Areas
Interpretation
Zone A                       Specified land use is satisfactory, based on the assumption that any buildings
Clearly Acceptable           involved are of normal conventional construction without any special noise insulation
                             requirements.
Zone B                       New construction or development should be undertaken only after detailed analysis
Normally Acceptable          of the noise reduction requirements are made and needed noise insulation features in
                             the design are determined. Conventional construction, with closed windows and
                             fresh air supply systems or air conditioning, will normally suffice.
Zone C                       New construction or development should generally be discouraged. If new
Normally Unacceptable        construction or development does proceed, a detailed analysis of noise reduction
                             requirements must be made and needed noise insulation features included in the
                             design.
Zone D                       New construction or development should generally not be undertaken.
Clearly Unacceptable
General Plan—January 2013                                                                                     7-14

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                                       Chapter 7. Noise Element
Table NE-6. Interior and Exterior Noise Guidelines
                                                                                                 Maximum Noise Level
                                                                                                  (Ldn or CNEL, dBA)
                                                                                               Interior1,
                                                                                                   2
 Land Use                                                                                                       Exterior
 Residential—Single-family, multi-family, duplex                                                  45                653
 Residential—Nursing homes, hospitals                                                             45               653
 Private offices, church sanctuaries, libraries, board rooms, conference rooms,                   45                 –
 theaters, auditoriums, concert halls, meeting halls, etc.
 Schools                                                                                          45                674
 General offices, reception, clerical, etc.                                                       50                 –
 Bank lobby, retail store, etc.                                                                   55                 –
 Manufacturing, kitchen, warehousing, etc.                                                        65                 –
 Parks, playgrounds, etc.                                                                          –               654
 Golf courses, outdoor spectator sports, amusement parks, etc.                                     –                704
 Notes:
 1
   Noise standard with windows closed. Mechanical ventilation will be provided per Unified Building Code requirements to
 provide a habitable environment.
 2
   Indoor environment excluding bathrooms, toilets, closets, and corridors.
 3
   Outdoor environment limited to rear yard of single-family homes, multi-family patios and balconies (with a depth of 6 feet
 or more), and common recreation areas.
 4
   Outdoor environment limited to playground areas, picnic areas, and other areas of frequent human use.
                   The City currently does not have a comprehensive noise ordinance, although
                   several individual ordinances place restrictions on specific types of noise, such as
                   time restrictions placed on construction activities, barking dogs, and noise
                   related to landscaping activities. During the 2030 planning period the City will
                   develop and adopt a noise ordinance to address excessive noise sources (e.g., leaf
                   blowers, construction noise) and nuisance noise in excess of that which is
                   appropriate to residential living (e.g., loud parties, loud stereos, barking dogs).
                   The noise ordinance also will codify application of the guidelines previously
                   discussed.
7.4.2              Mitigation of Existing Noise Sources
                   Excessive noise from I-210 is the City’s major noise impact. During the planning
                   period, the City will pursue funding for and construction of soundwalls, as
                   identified in the NBSSR, to reduce the impact of freeway noise on noise-sensitive
                   uses adjacent to the I-210 Freeway. In certain areas, however, construction of
                   soundwalls will not reduce noise levels to those that are at or below the noise
General Plan—January 2013                                                                                                  7-15

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                    Chapter 7. Noise Element
                 abatement criteria established by FHWA, Caltrans, and Metro. The City will
                 support efforts of residents and owners of other noise-sensitive uses to reduce
                 the impact of excessive noise levels along the freeways and Foothill Boulevard.
7.4.3            Land Use Planning to Address Noise
                 Since the last update of the Noise Element and as a part of the current update,
                 the City has added several Mixed Use designations to its land use map: two in
                 the City of La Cañada Flintridge Downtown Village Specific Plan (DVSP), adopted in
                 2000, and one as a part of this update to the General Plan, which applies to larger
                 commercial properties on Foothill and Verdugo Boulevards. The City is nearly
                 built out, so significant amounts of new development are not expected during
                 the planning period. Other than infill development on existing residentially
                 designated and zoned land, new residential development will be limited to
                 senior housing and multi-family residential development within the Mixed Use
                 land use and zoning designations.
                 Implementation of the DVSP and the Land Use and Circulation Elements will
                 maintain the single-family character of the community and enhance the existing
                 pedestrian-oriented, low scale village atmosphere along Foothill Boulevard.
                 During the 2030 planning period, the City will develop and implement planning
                 policies, guidelines, and standards that minimize human exposure to excessive
                 noise, with special emphasis on protecting residential neighborhoods from
                 intrusive noise.
                 Mixed-use development, which in this case means office, retail, and/or other
                 commercial uses combined with residential, poses unique challenges regarding
                 noise, as certain commercial uses (e.g., restaurants and live music venues) may
                 be located in proximity to residential units. Through the discretionary review
                 process, the City will ensure that noise from the commercial portions of mixed-
                 use developments is not transferred to the residential units.
7.5              Goals, Objectives, and Policies
                 The following goals, objectives, and policies of the Noise Element, when coupled
                 with those in the Land Use and Circulation Elements, are intended to protect
                 residents from unwarranted and offensive noise and prevent its intrusion into
                 residential neighborhoods.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                           7-16

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                      Chapter 7. Noise Element
                 NE GOAL 1: Protect people who live, work, and recreate in the City from
                 excessive transportation noise.
                 NE Objective 1.1: Utilize noise control measures to reduce the impact from
                 roadway noise sources.
                       NE Policy 1.1.1: Pursue all reasonable steps to encourage Metro and other
                       relevant agencies to install noise attenuation features (i.e., berms,
                       soundwalls, rubberized pavement, or a combination thereof) along freeways
                       and freeway approaches in areas adjoining residences and other noise-
                       sensitive uses where noise levels exceed 67 dBA (Leq), as recommended in
                       the NBSSR.
                       NE Policy 1.1.2: Ensure that new soundwalls are consistent with the existing
                       vegetation and foliage, which are a hallmark of the City’s character.
                       NE Policy 1.1.3: Support the efforts of residents and owners of other noise-
                       sensitive uses to reduce the impact of excessive noise levels along the
                       freeways and Foothill Boulevard.
                       NE Policy 1.1.4: Discourage new noise-sensitive land uses from locating, and
                       existing noise-sensitive land uses from expanding, in areas adjacent to
                       roadways where noise levels are 65 dB CNEL or above.
                       NE Policy 1.1.5: Require developers to implement noise abatement that
                       meets Caltrans’ acoustical criteria or other standards established by the City,
                       if new developments cause increases in traffic volumes that result in
                       roadway noise levels greater than 65 dB CNEL at sensitive receptors.
                 NE Objective 1.2: Cooperate and coordinate with local, regional, and State
                 agencies to minimize the impact of transportation-related noise.
                       NE Policy 1.2.1: Continue to work with Caltrans and Metro to monitor the
                       freeway noise levels and update the NBSSR, as necessary.
                       NE Policy 1.2.2: Work with appropriate public agencies to develop and
                       implement programs to abate transportation noise.
                       NE Policy 1.2.3: Work with transit providers to minimize noise associated
                       with transit operations.
                       NE Policy 1.2.4: Oppose any SR-710 tunnel or surface freeway extension that
                       would increase traffic volumes on the I-210 Freeway through La Cañada
                       Flintridge due to the air quality, noise, and traffic congestion impacts to the
                       community that such alternatives would create. Encourage the
                       development of multi-modal transportation alternatives in lieu of a direct
                       connection between the SR-710 and I-210 Freeways that address regional
                       transportation needs without significantly impacting the City.
                       NE Policy 1.2.5: Monitor proposed changes to the Airport Land Use Plan for
                       the Burbank–Bob Hope Airport and oppose changes that would negatively
                       affect La Cañada Flintridge.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                             7-17

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                     Chapter 7. Noise Element
                 NE GOAL 2: Protect people who live, work, and recreate in the City from
                 unwarranted and excessive levels of non-transportation noise.
                 NE Objective 2.1: Develop methods and measures to mitigate excessive non-
                 transportation noise.
                       NE Policy 2.1.1: Develop and implement a Noise Ordinance to be
                       incorporated into the La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code. The Noise
                       Ordinance should address excessive noise sources and nuisance noise in
                       excess of that which is appropriate to residential living, including mitigation
                       of excessive noise arising from commercial uses or the support of
                       commercial uses next to or near residential or other noise-sensitive uses.
                       NE Policy 2.1.2: Encourage that new equipment and vehicles purchased by
                       the City comply with noise performance standards consistent with available
                       noise reduction technology.
                       NE Policy 2.1.3: Encourage local businesses and employers to mitigate
                       excessive noise generated by their operations voluntarily through outreach
                       and education.
                 NE Objective 2.2: Promote land use planning policies, guidelines, and
                 standards that minimize human exposure to excessive noise, with special
                 emphasis on protecting residential neighborhoods and other sensitive noise
                 receptors from intrusive noise.
                       NE Policy 2.2.1: Adopt and apply the Noise and Land Use Compatibility
                       Matrix and the Interior and Exterior Noise Guidelines as guidelines to
                       establish acceptable noise standards for various uses throughout the City, to
                       avoid noise and land use conflicts, and to mitigate unacceptable levels of
                       noise on new and existing development.
                       NE Policy 2.2.2: Require new development to minimize noise impacts on
                       adjacent uses through site and building design, setbacks, berms,
                       landscaping, and/or other noise abatement techniques.
                       NE Policy 2.2.3: Apply California Administrative Code Title 24 noise
                       insulation standards to the construction of multi-family housing, residential
                       portions of mixed-use development, new single-family developments, and
                       conversion of existing apartments into condominiums.
                       NE Policy 2.2.4: Require mixed-use developments to control the levels of
                       noise generated by commercial uses from affecting residential uses.
                       NE Policy 2.2.5: Require that an acoustical analysis be prepared by a
                       qualified acoustical engineer in instances where noise-sensitive uses are
                       proposed in noise-impacted areas. The recommendations of the acoustical
                       analysis to mitigate noise will be considered during deliberations on the
                       project.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            7-18

         Chapter 8
Air Quality Elem ent

                                                                8.0
                                                     AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
8.1            Introduction
               The Air Quality Element is an optional element of the General Plan as
               authorized by Section 65303 of the Government Code. The overall goal of this
               element is for La Cañada Flintridge, as a city within the South Coast Air Basin
               (Basin), to assist other governmental agencies in the attainment of healthful air
               for La Cañada Flintridge and other Basin residents, including those sensitive to
               air pollution.
               The intent of the Air Quality Element is to recognize and consider the
               relationship between land use, transportation, air quality, and other City policies
               in La Cañada Flintridge's planning efforts; to identify ways in which the City can
               reduce its emissions of air pollutants through various policies and programs; to
               assist the City and region to meet ambient air quality standards set by the
               U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the California Air Resources
               Board (ARB); and to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.
               This chapter of the General Plan summarizes local and regional air quality
               conditions, sources of air pollution, health risks, and global warming and climate
               change. Summaries of pertinent technical information regarding each of these topics
               are provided in the Air Quality Element for general information and to provide a
               context for the goals, objectives, and policies. Additional information is included in
               the City of La Cañada Flintridge Greenhouse Gas Inventory (December 2009).
8.2            Setting
               La Cañada Flintridge is located within the South Coast Air Basin (Basin), an
               approximately 6,745 square mile area that is bounded by the Pacific Ocean to
               the west and the San Gabriel, San Bernardino, and San Jacinto Mountains to the
               north and east. The Basin includes all of Orange County and the nondesert
               portions of Los Angeles, Riverside, and San Bernardino Counties, in addition to
General Plan—January 2013                                                                          8-1

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                               Chapter 8. Air Quality Element
                 the San Gorgonio Pass area in Riverside County. Its terrain and geographical
                 location—a coastal plain with connecting broad valleys and low hills—
                 determine the distinctive climate of the Basin.
8.3              Existing Air Quality
8.3.1            Climate and Topography
                 The southern California region lies in the semi-permanent high-pressure zone of
                 the eastern Pacific. As a result, the climate is mild, tempered by cool sea breezes.
                 The usually mild climatological pattern is interrupted infrequently by periods of
                 extremely hot weather, winter storms, or Santa Ana winds. Low temperature
                 inversion, light winds, shallow vertical mixing, and extensive sunlight, in
                 conjunction with topographical features such as adjacent mountain ranges that
                 hinder dispersion of air pollutants, combine to create degraded air quality,
                 especially in inland valleys of the Basin.
                 The extent and severity of the air pollution problem in the Basin is a function of
                 the area’s natural physical characteristics (weather and topography), as well as
                 human-made influences (development patterns and lifestyle). Factors such as
                 wind, sunlight, temperature, humidity, rainfall, and topography all affect the
                 accumulation and dispersion of pollutants throughout the Basin, making it an
                 area of high pollution potential. Pollutant concentrations in the Basin vary with
                 location, season, and time of day. Ozone concentrations, for example, tend to be
                 lower along the coast, higher in the near inland valleys, and lower in the far
                 inland areas of the Basin and adjacent desert. The greatest air pollution impacts
                 throughout the Basin occur from June through September.
8.3.2            Ambient Air Quality Standards and Status
                 The federal Clean Air Act (CAA) establishes federal air quality standards known
                 as National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) for certain pollutants, and
                 specifies future dates for achieving compliance. The CAA also mandates that
                 states submit and implement a State Implementation Plan (SIP) for local areas not
                 meeting these standards. The Basin fails to meet national attainment status for
                 ozone (O3), inhalable particulate matter (PM10), fine particulate matter (PM2.5), and
                 carbon monoxide (CO); therefore, it is considered a federal non-attainment area for
                 these pollutants. It meets the national attainment status for sulfur dioxide (SO2),
                 and is considered in “primary maintenance” for nitrogen dioxide (NO2).
                 The California Clean Air Act (CCAA) requires all areas of the State to achieve and
                 maintain the California Ambient Air Quality Standards (CAAQS) by the earliest
                 practical date. The CAAQS incorporate additional standards for most of the criteria
General Plan—January 2013                                                                             8-2

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                  Chapter 8. Air Quality Element
                 pollutants and have set standards for other pollutants recognized by the State. In
                 general, the California health standards are more health protective than the
                 corresponding NAAQS. The Basin fails to meet State attainment status for O3, PM10,
                 and PM2.5. The Basin meets State attainment status for CO, sulfates, hydrogen
                 sulfide, and vinyl chloride, but does not meet the State standard for visibility.
                 Since La Cañada Flintridge is located within the Basin, it is in an area designated
                 as a non-attainment area for certain pollutants that are regulated under both the
                 CAA and CCAA, as noted above. The South Coast Air Quality Management
                 District (SCAQMD) is responsible for monitoring air quality and preparing
                 attainment plans, known as Air Quality Management Plans (AQMPs), aimed at
                 achieving State and federal air pollution standards.
8.3.3            Local Area Air Quality Conditions
8.3.3.1          Existing Pollutant Levels at Nearby Monitoring Stations
                 SCAQMD has divided the Basin into 14 air monitoring areas and maintains a
                 network of air quality monitoring stations located throughout the Basin. La
                 Cañada Flintridge is located in the West San Gabriel Valley Monitoring Area,
                 which is served by the Pasadena Monitoring Station, located approximately 5
                 miles south of the City.
                 Criteria pollutants
                 monitored at this station
                 include O3, CO, NO2, and
                 PM2.5. Monitoring data for
                 the period between 2002
                 and 2006 shows the
                 following pollutant trends.
                 Ozone concentrations have
                 stabilized somewhat in the
                 past 5 years compared to
                 the large reduction that
                 occurred from 1990 to 2000.                  Air Monitoring Station in Pasadena
                 The State 1-hour ozone
                 standard was exceeded 23 times in 2002 and 26 times in 2006. The national
                 8-hour ozone standard was exceeded 10 times in 2002 and seven times in 2006.
                 Carbon monoxide concentrations are low and show a steady drop from 2002 to
                 2006. PM2.5 concentrations are affected by meteorology and show great
                 variability during the 5-year span. The national 24-hour PM2.5 standard was
                 exceeded 1 day in 2003, but was not exceeded during the other 4 years. The State
                 annual PM2.5 standard has been exceeded at least once per year.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                                8-3

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                               Chapter 8. Air Quality Element
8.3.3.2          Local Sources of Air Pollution
                 Although the City’s local air quality conditions are affected by sources outside
                 the immediate area, local sources contribute significantly to the quality of air in
                 the City. In La Cañada Flintridge, pollution generated from mobile sources
                 includes exhaust and road dust from traffic on Interstate (I) 210 Freeway, State
                 Route (SR) 2 Freeway, and Angeles Crest Highway—which are the major
                 sources—and traffic on local streets. (See Section 8.3.4.1 below regarding the
                 health risks associated with freeway emissions.)
                 Stationary sources of pollution generated by those living and working within the
                 City include: fugitive dust from construction activity, grading, and erosion from
                 unvegetated and unpaved areas; chemicals from local businesses, such as
                 automobile repair businesses, dry cleaners, and other businesses that use chemicals;
                 and pollution generated from commercial and residential use of natural gas.
8.3.4            Health Risks
8.3.4.1          Health Risks Associated with Freeway Emissions
                 I-210 is a regional east–west limited-access freeway that traverses the entire City;
                 it generates an average daily traffic (ADT) volume of 107,000 to 121,000 vehicles.
                 SR-2 is a regional north–south limited-access freeway that extends from I-210 in
                 the City of Glendale south to Los Angeles; it generates an ADT volume of 110,000
                 vehicles per day south of I-210, and 12,800 north of I-210 (Caltrans 2006). The
                 Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority (Metro) is currently
                 proposing an extension of the Long Beach Freeway (I-710) via a tunnel under
                 South Pasadena to connect to the I-210 Freeway. The increase in automobile and
                 truck traffic on I-210 resulting from the proposed I-710 extension would increase
                 the exposure of La Cañada Flintridge and other surrounding communities to
                 higher vehicular pollutant levels.
                 Recent air pollution studies indicate that residents living close to areas of high
                 traffic counts and the associated traffic emissions, such as CO, ultra-fine
                 particulates, and black carbon (soot), may be subject to adverse health effects
                 beyond those associated with regional air pollution in urban areas (California Air
                 Resources Board 2000 and 2005, Wilhelm et al. 2003, Kim et al. 2004, Zhu et al.
                 2002). There are three carcinogenic toxic air contaminants that constitute the
                 majority of the known health risks from motor vehicle traffic: diesel particulate
                 matter (DPM) from trucks and benzene and 1,3-butadiene from passenger
                 vehicles. On a typical urban freeway (truck traffic of 10,000 to 20,000 per day),
                 DPM represents about 70 percent of the potential cancer risk from the vehicular
                 traffic.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                             8-4

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                               Chapter 8. Air Quality Element
                 The ARB’s Diesel Risk Reduction Plan shows that cancer risk associated with
                 elevated levels of DPM decreases by approximately 70 percent at a distance of
                 150 meters (492 feet) from the edge of the roadway. Consequently, the ARB
                 recommended as an advisory measure a minimum 500-foot distance for the
                 siting of new sensitive land uses (including residences) near freeways. However,
                 the ARB recognizes that physical separation of the receptors from the pollutant
                 sources is not always reasonable or feasible. For example, a sequence of land use
                 decisions in urban areas allowed freeway construction through existing
                 neighborhoods, such as in La Cañada Flintridge when I-210 was built.
                 According to ARB cancer inhalation risk data, the City is within a cancer risk
                 zone of approximately 250 to 500 in one million (ARB 2006). This is largely due
                 to DPM emissions from I-210 as it traverses La Cañada Flintridge. In
                 comparison, the average cancer risk in the Basin is 1,400 per million.
8.3.4.2          Sensitive Receptors and Locations
                 Some people are particularly sensitive to certain pollutants. These people
                 include those with respiratory illnesses or impaired lung function because of
                 other illnesses, the elderly, and children. Facilities and structures where these
                 people live or spend considerable amounts of time are known as sensitive
                 receptors. Chapter 4 of the SCAQMD Air Quality Analysis Guidance Handbook
                 (South Coast Air Quality Management District 1993) defines land uses
                 considered to be sensitive receptors as long-term health care facilities,
                 rehabilitation centers, convalescent centers, retirement homes, residences,
                 schools, playgrounds, child care centers, and athletic facilities.
8.3.5            Global Warming/Climate Change
                 The temperature on Earth is regulated by a system commonly known as the
                 “greenhouse effect,” which is responsible for providing temperatures and
                 climates that support life. “Global warming,” simply defined, is the
                 increase in the average surface temperature of the earth. Global warming is
                 thought to be the result of an enhanced greenhouse effect, which is an
                 increase in the concentration of GHGs in the atmosphere that results in an
                 increase in the amount of heat-reflecting potential of the atmosphere,
                 leading to an increase in the planet’s average temperature and a change in
                 climate. GHGs are both naturally occurring and anthropogenic (human-
                 made). Human-produced GHGs considered by many scientists to be
                 responsible for increasing the greenhouse effect and contributing to global
                 warming include: carbon dioxide (CO2 ), methane (CH4 ), near-surface ozone
                 (O3 ), nitrous oxide (N2 O), and chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs). Common
                 sources of human-produced GHGs include burning fossil fuels, especially
General Plan—January 2013                                                                             8-5

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                              Chapter 8. Air Quality Element
                 coal and petroleum, and deforestation. In California, the transportation
                 sector is the largest contributor to GHG emissions (38%), followed by
                 production of electricity (23%), industry (20%), and commercial and
                 residential uses (9%) (ARB Greenhouse Gas Inventory).
8.3.5.1          State Regulatory Response to Global Warming/Climate
                 Change
                 Although global warming and climate change are still being debated in some
                 quarters, the State of California considers them to be serious threats and has
                 taken an aggressive stance to address global climate change through the
                 adoption of legislation and policies aimed at reducing Statewide emissions, the
                 most relevant of which are summarized below.
                         Executive Order S-3-05, signed by Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger,
                          establishes GHG emission reduction targets for State agencies as follows:
                          by 2010, reduce GHG emissions to 2000 levels; by 2020, reduce GHG
                          emissions to 1990 levels; and by 2050, reduce GHG emissions to
                          80 percent below 1990 levels.
                         Assembly Bill (AB) 32, the “Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006,”
                          states that global warming poses a serious threat to the public health,
                          environment, economic well-being, and natural resources of California
                          and requires that the State’s global warming emissions be reduced to 1990
                          levels by the year 2020. This is roughly equivalent to a reduction in
                          emissions to 15 percent below current levels.
                         SB 97 (2007) required the Office of Planning and Research (OPR) to
                          prepare amendments to the CEQA Guidelines to submit to the California
                          Resources Agency regarding feasible mitigation of GHGs or the effects of
                          GHG emissions. These amendments were adopted in the spring of 2010.
                         SB 375 (2008) calls for coordinated land use and transportation planning
                          as a means to address climate change by adding consideration of GHG
                          emissions from automobiles and light trucks and linking regional
                          transportation plans (RTPs) to infill development and housing. Pursuant
                          to SB 375, the Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG)
                          adopted a Sustainable Communities Strategy (SCS) as part of the
                          2012–2035 RTP. The SCS demonstrates how the region will meet GHG
                          emissions targets set forth by the ARB. The SCS places an emphasis on
                          future land use patterns that focus new housing and development near
                          transit.
                 There are many plans, regulations, rules, and other actions that have been or are
                 in the process of being developed at the State and regional levels to implement
                 California’s global warming/climate change legislation. While the largest
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            8-6

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                               Chapter 8. Air Quality Element
                 potential GHG emissions reductions are dependent on State actions, local
                 governments will play a significant role in GHG reduction strategies and will be
                 required to take actions to meet the mandatory reduction goals. The Climate
                 Change Scoping Plan (December 2008), prepared by the ARB pursuant to AB 32,
                 notes that in some cases, local governments have exclusive authority over
                 emission sources through their processes, policies, and ordinances.
8.3.5.2          City Inventory of GHG Emissions
                 To gain an understanding of the overall GHG emissions profile for La Cañada
                 Flintridge in response the State’s reduction mandates, the City prepared a 2007
                 GHG inventory for both the City’s municipal operations (“government
                 inventory”) and citywide activities (“community inventory”). The two 2007
                 inventories are based on actual 2007 activity data and emission factors.
                 The City also prepared 1990 and 2020 estimates of emissions for both
                 government operations and community activities to support the development of
                 a GHG reduction policy. The 1990 emissions estimate is based on the 2007
                 inventory, as well as historical population, activity, and growth information. The
                 2020 emissions projection represents “business as usual” (BAU) emissions
                 associated with the City in 2020. The inventories define a baseline emissions
                 level from which La Cañada Flintridge can begin to quantify emission reduction
                 efforts to comply with AB 32 goals. Figures AQE-1 and AQE-2 summarize the
                 sources of GHG emissions from citywide activities and municipal operations.
                 (Please refer to the City of La Cañada Flintridge Greenhouse Gas Inventory for
                 additional information.)
                 Figure AQE-1. La Cañada Flintridge 2007 Community Inventory
General Plan—January 2013                                                                             8-7

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 8. Air Quality Element
                 Figure AQE-2. La Cañada Flintridge 2007 Government Inventory
8.4              Planning to Address Air Pollution and GHG
                 Emissions
                 Over the past 30 years, substantial progress has been made in reducing air
                 pollution levels in southern California. However, the Basin still exceeds national
                 and State attainment standards for many air pollutants. Since the last update of
                 the City’s General Plan, the State has adopted legislation that also mandates
                 reduction of GHG emissions to 1990 levels. Although air quality and global
                 warming/climate change are issues that are beyond the control of any individual
                 entity to solve, cities have a role and responsibility in helping to improve their
                 region’s air quality and reduce GHG emissions. They also have a role in
                 mitigating actions that contribute to air pollution impacts on those who live,
                 work, and recreate within their respective jurisdictions.
                 One of the most effective mechanisms available to cities for encouraging land use
                 compatibility and the reduction or avoidance of cumulative air pollution impacts
                 is through the General Plan. The City’s plan to address air pollution and global
                 warming/climate change is summarized below and described further in Section
                 8.5, Goals, Objectives, and Policies. In addition, policies have been incorporated
                 into other General Plan elements to work collectively to support land use,
                 circulation, and other decisions to improve air quality for residents and the
                 greater community and reduce GHG emissions.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                               8-8

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                              Chapter 8. Air Quality Element
8.4.1            The Air Pollution and GHG Emission Reduction Plan
                 Vehicles are the largest source of air pollution and GHG emissions in the City
                 and State. Development patterns have an impact on the degree to which people
                 must use passenger vehicles to carry out the activities in their daily lives, such as
                 shopping, running other errands, going to entertainment venues, and getting to
                 and from work. Policies and programs that foster sustainable, compact, multi-
                 modal oriented development can reduce the need for vehicles, which in turn can
                 improve air quality and reduce GHG emissions. Although La Cañada Flintridge
                 is nearly built out, the City will encourage new development to incorporate
                 sustainable development principles when properties are redeveloped and when
                 infill development is constructed during this planning period. These principles
                 are consistent with the City of La Cañada Flintridge Downtown Village Specific Plan
                 (DVSP), which was adopted in 2000. The sustainable development principles
                 that are promoted in this General Plan update include:
                         multi-modal (pedestrian, transit, and bicycle-oriented) design;
                         mixed use development (a mix of compatible land uses within the same
                          development or near each other);
                         location of senior and other higher density residential housing within
                          walking distance of retail, commercial, and other convenience uses, as
                          well as transit stops; and
                         a human scale of development that is oriented toward pedestrians and
                          those utilizing alternative methods of transportation.
                 An efficient circulation infrastructure can reduce air pollution and GHG
                 emissions and facilitate the sustainable development principles described above.
                 During this planning period the City will implement infrastructure
                 improvements, plans, and techniques that promote the efficient use of the street
                 system and support multi-modal transportation options. The City will support
                 various efforts to reduce the use of vehicles and their associated polluting air
                 emissions by promoting the use of alternative modes of transportation,
                 encouraging employers to implement transportation demand management
                 strategies, and working with local and regional partners to expand existing
                 and/or develop new transit services.
                 The City also will support and implement other types of policies, plans,
                 programs, activities, and regulations to reduce air pollution and to reduce GHG
                 emissions to 1990 levels, pursuant to AB 32, and will encourage local employers
                 and businesses to do the same. These efforts include: preparing and
                 implementing a Climate Action Plan for both community activities and
                 municipal operations, updating the City’s Greenhouse Gas Inventory, minimizing
                 fugitive dust, promoting energy conservation and increased energy efficiency,
                 promoting waste reduction and recycling, applying new emission control
                 policies, and using renewable resources.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            8-9

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                              Chapter 8. Air Quality Element
                 As noted earlier, improving air quality in the Basin is beyond the ability of any
                 individual city’s ability. Therefore, the City will coordinate and cooperate with
                 local, regional, and State agencies to improve air quality and reduce GHG
                 emissions and the associated health and environmental risks. These efforts will
                 include:
                         monitoring research, monitoring and implementing legislation and
                          regulations regarding air quality and global warming/climate change;
                         developing and implementing effective mitigation measures to improve
                          air quality and reduce GHG emissions that do not unduly impact
                          businesses and employers;
                         monitoring air quality impacts of the local freeways on sensitive
                          receptors; and
                         continuing to lobby in opposition to the I-710 Freeway extension.
                 The City also will undertake communication, outreach, and education programs
                 to increase the public’s awareness of air quality and GHG emissions issues and
                 how their actions can affect air quality.
8.5              Goals, Objectives, and Policies
                 The goals, objectives, and policies in the Air Quality Element promote
                 appropriate land use and circulation infrastructure planning and
                 implementation, air pollution and GHG emission reductions, reduction in the
                 use of vehicles and encouragement of alternative transportation options,
                 interagency cooperation and coordination, public education and outreach, and
                 continued monitoring of research and changes in regulations to improve air
                 quality within the Basin and the City and reduce the health risk to the
                 community.
                 AQ GOAL 1: Improve air quality and reduce GHG emissions locally and
                 within the Basin through implementation of land use planning and
                 circulation infrastructure policies and programs that foster sustainable,
                 compact, multi-modal oriented development.
                 AQ Objective 1.1: Promote land use planning that provides for efficient
                 distribution of land uses and development regulations to achieve reductions in
                 vehicular trips.
                       AQ Policy 1.1.1: Implement the DVSP to preserve and enhance a small-scale
                       pedestrian-oriented atmosphere with a village character.
                       AQ Policy 1.1.2: Implement pedestrian and transit-oriented development
                       guidelines and standards proposed in the Land Use Element (see Land Use
                       Element Goals 2 and 3 and supporting objectives and policies) to reduce
General Plan—January 2013                                                                           8-10

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                Chapter 8. Air Quality Element
                       reliance on passenger vehicles, such as proximity to transit, pedestrian and
                       bicycle facilities, preferential parking for low- /zero-emission vehicles and
                       car- and van-poolers, and energy-conserving buildings.
                       AQ Policy 1.1.3: Promote commercial/residential mixed use at appropriate
                       locations along Foothill Boulevard, as per the DVSP and new mixed use
                       land use designations in the Land Use Element.
                       AQ Policy 1.1.4: Promote senior and multi-family housing within walking
                       distance of retail and commercial services.
                       AQ Policy 1.1.5: Preserve open space within the City to minimize sprawl
                       and provide GHG “sinks” (natural or human-made reservoirs that absorb
                       and store more GHG from the atmosphere than they release).
                       AQ Policy 1.1.6: Ensure that new developments implement air quality
                       mitigation measures, such as ventilation systems, adequate buffers, and
                       other pollution reduction measures and carbon sequestration sinks,
                       especially those that are located near existing sensitive receptors.
                       AQ Policy 1.1.7: Discourage the location of new, or expansion of existing,
                       sensitive receptor land uses adjacent to I-210.
                       AQ Policy 1.1.8: Encourage site plan designs to provide appropriate set-
                       backs from I-210 and SR-2.
                       AQ Policy 1.1.9: Encourage a variety of businesses to locate in the City,
                       including commercial/professional office uses and “clean,” high-technology
                       businesses that provide high-skill/high-wage job opportunities.
                       AQ Policy 1.1.10: Encourage telecommuting options with new and existing
                       employers through project review and incentives, as appropriate.
                 AQ Objective 1.2: Reduce air pollution and GHG emissions by proper
                 planning for, and implementation of, the City’s circulation infrastructure.
                       AQ Policy 1.2.1: Implement traffic calming techniques and changes to
                       sidewalk and roadway configurations within the DVSP, and implement
                       them along other parts of Foothill Boulevard, to reduce the speed of traffic
                       along Foothill Boulevard, to increase pedestrian crossing opportunities on
                       Foothill Boulevard, and to increase the ease and convenience of crossing the
                       roadway by reducing the walking distance across the streets.
                       AQ Policy 1.2.2: Expand the use of traffic calming techniques and changes to
                       sidewalk and roadway configurations identified in the DVSP along other
                       parts of Foothill Boulevard to enhance a pedestrian-oriented environment.
                       AQ Policy 1.2.3: Promote efficient use of the street system by making
                       improvements, such as coordination of signal time and other intersection
                       improvements, to improve circulation patterns and flow of traffic in the
                       City.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                             8-11

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                Chapter 8. Air Quality Element
                       AQ Policy 1.2.4: Implement the Bicycle Transportation Plan to support and
                       encourage bicycle use as an alternative to passenger vehicle transportation.
                       AQ Policy 1.2.5: Implement the recommendations of the Parking Study for
                       the DVSP to locate parking appropriately to encourage pedestrian
                       movement.
                 AQ GOAL 2: Improve air quality and reduce GHG emissions locally and
                 within the Basin by reducing use of passenger vehicles.
                 AQ Objective 2.1: Reduce the amount of vehicular emissions by promoting
                 alternative modes of transportation and transportation demand management
                 strategies.
                       AQ Policy 2.1.1: Pursue opportunities to establish a pilot program for an
                       integrated shuttle system to serve school trips and other community needs
                       with a system of vans or small buses.
                       AQ Policy 2.1.2: Evaluate expansion of local and regional transit services to
                       reduce dependence on passenger vehicles.
                       AQ Policy 2.1.3: Enhance connections to the Metro Gold Line.
                       AQ Policy 2.1.4: Promote programs that require special event centers, such
                       as Descanso Gardens and Lanterman Auditorium, to provide transit
                       inducements to their patrons for overall trip reductions.
                       AQ Policy 2.1.5: Encourage the use of alternative transportation modes such
                       as bicycles for school and employment-related trips.
                 AQ Objective 2.2: Encourage local employers and businesses to implement
                 policies and programs that reduce their employees’ dependence on single-
                 passenger vehicles for travel to and from work.
                       AQ Policy 2.2.1: Continue to cooperate with the La Cañada Unified School
                       District to explore opportunities for establishing trip-reduction programs
                       and guidelines for schools. These programs may include evaluating the
                       potential use of Prop-A funds for establishing bus service and trip-reduction
                       programs for the school district or school-oriented trips, such as after-school
                       programs for youth; and/or establishing fixed-route bus routes to serve
                       school sites and residential areas by the City and/or the school district.
                       AQ Policy 2.2.2: Encourage employers and businesses to implement
                       transportation demand management strategies, such as telecommuting,
                       ridesharing, work schedule changes (including flex time, compressed work
                       week, staggered work schedule, etc.), and employer-based transportation
                       programs (including employer-subsidized bus passes, guaranteed ride
                       home programs, and vanpool programs).
General Plan—January 2013                                                                             8-12

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                               Chapter 8. Air Quality Element
                       AQ Policy 2.2.3: Support voluntary, employer-based trip reduction
                       programs, including:
                          a. providing assistance to regional and local ridesharing organizations;
                          b. advocating for legislation to maintain and expand incentives for
                               employer ridesharing programs;
                          c. requiring the development of Transportation Management
                               Associations for large employers and commercial complexes; and
                          d. providing public recognition of effective programs through awards,
                               top ten lists, and other mechanisms.
                 AQ GOAL 3: Reduce air pollution and GHG emissions through
                 conservation activities, policies and programs, regulations, and use of
                 technology.
                 AQ Objective 3.1: Reduce the amount of fugitive dust emitted into the
                 atmosphere.
                       AQ Policy 3.1.1: Develop and implement plans to minimize dust from areas
                       within the City that are prone to soil erosion from wind.
                       AQ Policy 3.1.2: Require stabilization of land disturbed as a result of
                       construction projects, including short-term methods during construction
                       (e.g., watering active construction areas, covering open stockpiles, applying
                       non-toxic soil stabilizers on unpaved access roads and temporary parking
                       areas) and permanent methods post-construction (e.g., vegetation or
                       revegetation, installation of hardscape, etc.).
                 AQ Objective 3.2: Reduce air pollution and GHG emissions generated by local
                 employers and businesses through policies that assist them in meeting
                 regulations while cultivating a positive business climate.
                       AQ Policy 3.2.1: Review all air quality regulations to determine whether
                       such regulations have the potential to adversely affect the predominantly
                       small local businesses.
                       AQ Policy 3.2.2: Refer businesses to sources of assistance for compliance
                       with air quality requirements, including utility companies and SCAQMD.
                       AQ Policy 3.2.3: Promote an employee work force for local employers that
                       draws from local residents.
                 AQ Objective 3.3: Reduce air pollution and GHG emissions through new
                 emission control technologies, increased energy efficiency, and use of
                 renewable energy.
                       AQ Policy 3.3.1: Support and promote the use of low- and zero-emission
                       vehicles (LEV and ZEV), and alternative fuels, and other measures to
                       directly reduce emissions from motor vehicles, including:
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            8-13

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 8. Air Quality Element
                          a. developing the necessary infrastructure to encourage the use of low-
                              and zero-emissions vehicles and clean alternative fuels, such as
                              development of electric vehicle charging facilities and conveniently
                              located alternative fueling stations;
                          b. encouraging new construction to include vehicle access to properly
                              wired outdoor receptacles to accommodate ZEV and/or plug in
                              electric hybrids (PHEV); and
                          c. encouraging employers and businesses that have fleet vehicles to
                              purchase vehicles that achieve the lowest emissions possible, using a
                              mix of alternate fuels, partial zero emissions vehicle (PZEV) or better
                              fleet mixes.
                       AQ Policy 3.3.2: Develop and implement a plan to reduce gasoline fuel
                       consumption in each of four light-duty vehicle categories by no less than 5
                       percent, relative to fleet size, by 2012 (using 2006 as a baseline).
                       AQ Policy 3.3.3: Continue to implement the 20% Renewable Energy Goal,
                       which established the goal for adding at least 20 percent of renewable
                       energy (including photovoltaic solar panels, solar thermal water heating
                       panels, wind generators, and other renewable technologies) for the City
                       government operations by 2017.
                       AQ Policy 3.3.4: Develop and adopt an Urban Heat Island Mitigation policy
                       or program that includes the use of alternative materials for roads and
                       roofing, the planting of shade trees over parking lots on public and private
                       property, and other land use techniques to combat urban heat island effects.
                       AQ Policy 3.3.5: Continue to implement the City’s Preservation, Protection,
                       and Removal of Trees Ordinance (Chapter 4.26 of the La Cañada Flintridge
                       Municipal Code [LCFMC]).
                 AQ Objective 3.4: Reduce air pollution and GHG emissions through energy
                 conservation.
                       AQ Policy 3.4.1: Conduct energy audits at municipal facilities to identify
                       areas where energy efficiency can be increased, and encourage owners
                       and/or operators of other facilities to do the same.
                       AQ Policy 3.4.2: Purchase energy efficient products that either meet Energy
                       Star® specifications or are in the upper 25 percent of energy efficiency
                       standards, and encourage residents and businesses to do the same.
                 AQ Objective 3.5: Reduce air pollution and GHG emissions through waste
                 reduction, diversion of solid waste from landfill operations, and recycling.
                       AQ Policy 3.5.1: Continue to participate in enhancement and expansion of
                       the existing area-wide hazardous waste collection programs.
                       AQ Policy 3.5.2: Maintain efforts to reduce municipal use of hazardous
                       materials and ozone-depleting compounds.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                              8-14

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                              Chapter 8. Air Quality Element
                       AQ Policy 3.5.3: Continue the City’s mandatory green waste collection and
                       recycling program for all single-family residences.
                       AQ Policy 3.5.4: Consider adopting a mandatory green waste collection
                       program for multi-family residences and commercial operations.
                        AQ Policy 3.5.5: Adopt a recycling program for multi-family residences and
                       commercial operations pursuant to the Mandatory Commercial Recycling
                       Measure being developed pursuant to the Scoping Plan adopted by the ARB
                       to implement the AB 32.
                       AQ Policy 3.5.6: Continue to implement the City’s Recycling and Diversion
                       of Construction and Demolition Debris Ordinance (Chapter 9.14 of the
                       LCFMC) to reduce the amount of GHG emissions associated with the
                       disposal of solid waste into landfills.
                       AQ Policy 3.5.7: Promote diversion of reusable furniture, appliances,
                       building materials, clothing, household and other items to local reuse
                       enterprises such as thrift stores, Habitat for Humanity ReStore, Goodwill,
                       Salvation Army, and the California Materials Exchange (CalMAX).
                       AQ Policy 3.5.8: Encourage the community to produce less waste by
                       reducing, reusing, and recycling and to purchase reusable and recyclable
                       products and products made from recycled materials.
                       AQ Policy 3.5.9: Consider adopting a program to increase asphalt recycling
                       and the use of recycled asphalt and cement, including:
                          a. requiring recycled asphalt pavement (RAP) for streets and roads;
                          b. requiring RAP for community and commercial parking lots, where
                              feasible;
                          c. encouraging schools and public agencies to use RAP for parking lots;
                          d. for City-sponsored projects, requiring 100 percent in-place recycling
                              of recovered asphalt concrete and Portland cement, where feasible;
                              and
                          e. considering modification of the City’s Construction and Demolition
                              Debris Ordinance to increase the minimum diversion rate for asphalt
                              and concrete.
                       AQ Policy 3.5.10: Continue to work closely with solid waste disposal
                       companies in providing trash pick-up services, and reduce the per capita
                       production of solid waste as defined in the City's Source Reduction and
                       Recycling Element.
                       AQ Policy 3.5.11: Continue to comply with the Integrated Waste
                       Management Act by maintaining and implementing an up-to-date Source
                       Reduction and Recycling Element and Non-Disposal Facility Element.
                       AQ Policy 3.5.12: Seek public input in the development of solid waste
                       management programs as needed.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                           8-15

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 8. Air Quality Element
                 AQ GOAL 4: Reduce GHG emissions from all activities within the City
                 boundaries to support the State’s efforts under AB 32 and to mitigate the
                 impact of climate change.
                 AQ Objective 4.1: By 2020, reduce GHG emissions from within the City’s
                 boundaries to a level 15 percent less than the level that would otherwise occur
                 if all activities continued under a “business as usual” scenario.
                       AQ Policy 4.1.1: Prepare a Community Climate Action Plan (CCAP), in
                       collaboration with the stakeholders from the community at large, which will
                       include measures to incentivize and support reductions in GHG emissions
                       from community activities, and which will seek to reduce emissions by at
                       least 15 percent by 2020 compared to the 2007 baseline community
                       emissions inventory (including any reductions required by the ARB under
                       AB 32).
                       AQ Policy 4.1.2: Establish a Municipal Climate Action Plan (MCAP), which
                       will include measures to reduce GHG emissions from municipal activities
                       by at least 15 percent by 2020 compared to the 2007 baseline municipal
                       emissions inventory (including any reductions required by the ARB under
                       AB 32).
                       AQ Policy 4.1.3: Update the City’s GHG emissions inventories, which
                       include emissions from all sectors within the City, as necessary to
                       incorporate improved methods, better data, and more accurate tools and
                       methods, and to assess progress.
                 AQ GOAL 5: Reduce GHG emissions from municipal (City-owned) facilities
                 and operations, and by purchasing goods and services that embody or
                 create fewer GHG emissions.
                 AQ Objective 5.1: Enhance the energy efficiency of City facilities.
                       AQ Policy 5.1.1: Prepare and implement a comprehensive plan to improve
                       energy efficiency of municipal facilities, including:
                          a. conducting energy audits for all municipal facilities;
                          b. retrofitting facilities for energy efficiency where feasible and when
                              remodeling or replacing components, including increasing insulation,
                              and installing green or reflective roofs and low-emissive window
                              glass;
                          c. implementing an energy tracking and management system;
                          d. installing energy-efficient exit signs, street signs, and traffic lighting;
                          e. installing energy-efficient lighting retrofits and occupancy sensors,
                              and instituting a “lights out at night” policy;
                          f.  retrofitting heating and cooling systems to optimize efficiency (e.g.,
                              replace chillers, boilers, fans, pumps, belts, etc.);
General Plan—January 2013                                                                              8-16

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                               Chapter 8. Air Quality Element
                          g. installing Energy Star appliances and energy-efficient vending
                             machines;
                          h. improving efficiency of water pumping and use at municipal
                             facilities, including a schedule to replace or retrofit system
                             components with high-efficiency units (i.e., ultra-low-flow toilets,
                             fixtures, etc.);
                          i. providing chilled, filtered water at water fountains and taps in lieu of
                             bottled water;
                          j. installing a central irrigation control system and time its operation for
                             off-peak use; and
                          k. adopting an accelerated replacement schedule for energy inefficient
                             systems and components.
                       AQ Policy 5.1.2: Require that any newly constructed, purchased, or leased
                       municipal space meet one or more of the following minimum standards as
                       appropriate, including:
                          a. requiring buildings to meet LEED criteria established by the U.S.
                             Green Building Council;
                          b. incorporating passive solar design features in new buildings,
                             including daylighting and passive solar heating;
                          c. retrofitting existing buildings to meet standards under Title 24 of the
                             California Building Energy Code, or to achieve a higher performance
                             standard as established by the City/County; and
                          d. retrofitting existing buildings to decrease heat gain from non-roof
                             impervious surfaces with cool paving, landscaping, and other
                             techniques.
                       AQ Policy 5.1.3: Ensure that staff receives appropriate training and support
                       to implement objectives and policies to reduce GHG emissions, including:
                          a. providing energy efficiency training to design, engineering, building
                             operations, and maintenance staff; and
                          b. providing information on energy use and management, including
                             data from the tracking and management system, to managers and
                             others making decisions that influence energy use.
                       AQ Policy 5.1.4: Create a Capital Reinvestment Fund to provide capital for
                       future energy efficiency improvements from ongoing energy efficiency
                       savings.
                 AQ Objective 5.2: Implement measures to reduce City employee vehicle trips
                 and to mitigate emissions impacts from municipal travel.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            8-17

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                               Chapter 8. Air Quality Element
                       AQ Policy 5.2.1: Implement a program to reduce vehicle trips by City
                       employees, including:
                          a. providing incentives and infrastructure for vanpooling and
                              carpooling, such as pool vehicles, preferred parking, and a website or
                              bulletin board to facilitate ride-sharing;
                          b. providing subsidized passes for mass transit;
                          c. offering compressed work hours, off-peak work hours, and
                              telecommuting, where appropriate; and
                          d. offering a guaranteed ride home for employees who use alternative
                              modes of transportation to commute.
                 AQ Objective 5.3: Manage the City’s stock of vegetation to reduce GHG
                 emissions.
                       AQ Policy 5.3.1: Conduct a comprehensive inventory and analysis of the
                       urban forest, and conduct tree maintenance consistent with best
                       management practices.
                       AQ Policy 5.3.2: Evaluate existing landscaping and options to convert
                       reflective and impervious surfaces to landscaping, and install or replace
                       vegetation with drought-tolerant, low-maintenance native species or edible
                       landscaping that can also provide shade and reduce heat-island effects.
                 AQ Objective 5.4: Use the City’s purchasing power to promote reductions in
                 GHG emissions by the suppliers of its goods and services.
                       AQ Policy 5.4.1: Adopt purchasing practices and standards to support
                       reductions in GHG emissions, including preferences for energy-efficient
                       office equipment and the use of recycled materials and manufacturers that
                       have implemented green management practices.
                       AQ Policy 5.4.2: Establish bidding standards and contracting practices that
                       encourage GHG emissions reductions, including preferences or points for
                       the use of low or zero emission vehicles and equipment, recycled materials,
                       and provider implementation of other green management practices.
                 AQ Objective 5.5: Implement measures to reduce municipal waste generation.
                       AQ Policy 5.5.1: Audit facilities to identify opportunities to reduce waste
                       generation, increase material recovery, and increase beneficial use of organic
                       material. Where practical, implement the recommendations of the audits.
                 AQ GOAL 6: Improve air quality and reduce GHG emissions and the health
                 risks associated with air pollution through regional coordination,
                 cooperation, advocacy, public education, and monitoring of air quality
                 conditions, legislation, and policies.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            8-18

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                Chapter 8. Air Quality Element
                 AQ Objective 6.1: Work with local, regional, and State agencies to reduce
                 vehicular and GHG emissions from freeways.
                      AQ Policy 6.1.1: Continue to oppose the extension of the I-710 Freeway due
                      to the increase in automobile and truck traffic on the I-210 Freeway that
                      would result from the proposed extension, and the negative health risks the
                      extension poses for La Cañada Flintridge and surrounding communities due
                      to higher vehicular pollutant levels.
                      AQ Policy 6.1.2: Continue to monitor air quality impacts on the health of the
                      City from vehicular emissions associated with freeway traffic.
                      AQ Policy 6.1.3: Work with regional agencies to develop or expand
                      ridesharing programs, facilities, various modes of public transit, and Park-
                      and-Ride facilities.
                       AQ Policy 6.1.4: Coordinate with local and regional transportation agencies
                       and cities to plan and construct new multi-modal transportation facilities on
                       the basis of this General Plan that are consistent throughout the neighboring
                       jurisdictions.
                 AQ Objective 6.2: Stay current regarding research and regulations related to air
                 quality and GHG emissions reductions.
                       AQ Policy 6.2.1: Monitor changes in State regulations related to air quality
                       and climate change, including implementation of AB 32 and SB 375, and
                       develop policies and programs and update local regulations as appropriate.
                       AQ Policy 6.2.2: Evaluate and disclose in CEQA documents the contribution
                       new projects could have on climate change and require mitigation measures
                       as appropriate.
                 AQ Objective 6.3: Coordinate with local, regional, and State agencies to
                 develop and/or implement effective mitigation measures to improve air
                 quality and reduce GHG emissions to implement State and federal laws.
                       AQ Policy 6.3.1: Continue to participate in the Arroyo-Verdugo Subregional
                       Council of Governments to coordinate infrastructure policies and programs
                       with adjacent and nearby cities to develop a needed area-wide
                       transportation infrastructure.
                       AQ Policy 6.3.2: Utilize Proposition A (½-cent sales tax) funds in concert
                       with other cities to maximize air quality goals for developing local
                       transportation programs that may include bicycle facilities, a school bus
                       program, and/or shuttle service or community bus program.
                       AQ Policy 6.3.3: Ensure that new and innovative air quality and GHG
                       emissions reduction policies established by any jurisdiction are
                       communicated to other jurisdictions through the Arroyo-Verdugo
                       Subregional Council of Governments, San Gabriel Valley Council of
                       Governments (SGVCOG), and other area-wide task forces.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                             8-19

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                               Chapter 8. Air Quality Element
                      AQ Policy 6.3.4: Cooperate with other jurisdictions in the Arroyo-Verdugo
                      Subregion and SGVCOG to further the strategies outlined in the SGVCOG
                      Air Quality Plan and/or in the development of a regional or subregional
                      sustainable communities strategy (SCS) for the RTP.
                      AQ Policy 6.3.5: Encourage the County of Los Angeles to establish programs
                      that support the Arroyo-Verdugo Subregion and SGVCOG air quality
                      policies and apply such policies to the unincorporated pockets within the
                      Arroyo-Verdugo Subregion and the SGVCOG for consistency with local
                      programs.
                      AQ Policy 6.3.6: Monitor the SCAQMD and the ARB in their development of
                      improved ambient air quality and GHG monitoring capabilities and
                      establishment of standards, thresholds, and rules to address, and where
                      necessary mitigate, the air quality impacts of new development.
                      AQ Policy 6.3.7: Identify and pursue funding opportunities to develop and
                      implement mitigation activities.
                 AQ Objective 6.4: Increase public awareness of air quality and climate change
                 issues through public outreach and education, including publicizing the
                 importance of reducing GHG emissions and steps community members can
                 take to reduce their individual impacts.
                       AQ Policy 6.4.1: Promote programs that educate the public about regional
                       and local air quality issues, opportunities, and solutions.
                       AQ Policy 6.4.2: Facilitate public compliance with regional air quality
                       regulation through improved public education programs and curricula.
                       AQ Policy 6.4.3: Encourage greater public participation in voluntary efforts
                       to reduce air pollution and GHG emissions through local public education
                       programs, speaker’s bureaus, and other measures.
General Plan—January 2013                                                                            8-20



                                                             9.0
                                                          HOUSING ELEMENT
9.1            Introduction
9.1.1          Setting
               Encompassing approximately 8.6 square miles, the City of La Cañada Flintridge
               is an attractive, suburban community situated at the base of the San Gabriel
               Mountains, 18 miles northeast of downtown Los Angeles. Located along the
               210 Freeway (I-210) and Angeles Crest Highway, the community is bordered by
               the Angeles National Forest to the north and the nearby cities of Pasadena to the
               east, Glendale to the south, and the unincorporated County communities of La
               Crescenta and Montrose on the west. Characterized by semi-rural
               neighborhoods, carefully maintained homes, and a strong commitment by
               residents to educational and volunteer activities, La Cañada Flintridge is home to
               approximately 20,246 residents. Although not incorporated until 1976, the
               community was largely established by this time as two distinct residential
               communities of La Cañada and Flintridge. These areas experienced the majority
               of development before the 1960s, with the subdivision of ranchland to create
               large lot estate and single-family homes in the early part of the century. Rapid
               development that characterized much of the surrounding region was largely
               precluded in La Cañada Flintridge due to the area’s steeply sloping hillsides and
               limited water and sewer infrastructure.
               Today the community is largely built-out, with only 106 net new units added
               since 2000. While housing stock is relatively stable, the City has experienced
               changes in its population, which impacts housing needs. For example, the City
               has seen a dramatic increase in its Asian population, growing from 21 percent to
               26 percent between 2000 and 2010.
               The age distribution in the community has also shifted over the period. Between
               2000 and 2010, the median age in the community increased from 42.1 to 45.9
               years. In 2010 seniors accounted for 16 percent of the population, with this
General Plan— February 2014                                                                    9-1

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                  Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 proportion increasing between 2000 and 2010 as persons in their 50s and early
                 60s aged in place. The City currently lacks housing options tailored for seniors.
                 La Cañada Flintridge’s excellent schools, attractive neighborhoods, and high
                 quality homes are attributes that attract many potential homebuyers and renters,
                 resulting in a housing market in high demand. Home prices in La Cañada
                 Flintridge are significantly higher than those in most surrounding communities,
                 with the median sales price in 2012 for a single-family home nearing $1.2 million.
                 In contrast, apartment rental rates are fairly reasonable ($1,650 per month for a
                 two-bedroom apartment), although limited in supply and vacancy. In addition,
                 land, environmental, and infrastructure constraints combine to keep land prices
                 high. Due to these constraints, recent housing growth has primarily occurred
                 through limited single-family infill development and the construction of second
                 dwelling units on single-family parcels.
                 The City’s 2013-2021 Housing Element will address the community’s regional
                 share of housing growth through a variety of means, including mixed use and
                 senior housing in the downtown area and other sites along Foothill Boulevard
                 and Verdugo Boulevard, single-family infill, and provisions for second units.
9.1.2            Role of the Housing Element
                 The California State Legislature has identified the attainment of a decent home
                 and suitable living environment for every Californian as the state’s major
                 housing goal. Recognizing the important role of local planning programs in
                 pursuit of this goal, the state law requires each jurisdiction to periodically
                 prepare a housing element as part of its comprehensive general plan. Section
                 65583 of the Government Code sets forth the specific components to be contained
                 in a housing element. This 2013-2021 La Cañada Flintridge Housing Element is
                 prepared in compliance with state law and covers the period of October 15, 2013
                 through October 15, 2021.
                 This Housing Element identifies strategies and programs that focus on:
                         conserving and improving existing affordable housing,
                         providing adequate housing sites,
                         assisting in the development of affordable housing,
                         removing governmental and other constraints to housing development,
                          and
                         promoting equal housing opportunities.
                 The La Cañada Flintridge Housing Element consists of the following major
                 components:
General Plan—February 2014                                                                           9-2

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 9. Housing Element
                         an analysis of the City’s demographic and housing characteristics and
                          trends;
                         a review of potential market, governmental, and infrastructure
                          constraints to meeting La Cañada Flintridge’s identified housing needs;
                         an evaluation of land, financial, and administrative resources available to
                          address the City’s housing goals; and
                         the Housing Plan, which addresses the City’s identified housing needs,
                          including housing goals, policies, and programs.
9.1.3            Data Sources
                 In preparing the Housing Element, various sources of information were
                 consulted. The 2000 and 2010 Census provide the basis for population and
                 household characteristics. Several other sources of information were used to
                 supplement and provide reliable updates to the 2000 and 2010 Census:
                         2009-2011 American Community Survey (ACS).
                         2013 State Department of Finance estimates
                         2012 Bureau of Labor Statistics
                         Housing market information, such as home sales, rents, and vacancies,
                          was updated by surveys of apartment complexes, Los Angeles
                          Times/Dataquick information, and review of building permit data.
                         Lending patterns for 2012 home purchase and home improvement loans
                          were provided through the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA)
                          database.
9.1.4            Relationship to Other General Plan Elements
                 The La Cañada Flintridge General Plan was adopted in 2013 and consists of eight
                 elements: 1) Land Use; 2) Open Space and Recreation; 3) Conservation; 4) Safety;
                 5) Circulation; 6) Noise; 7) Air Quality; and 8) Housing.
                 This Housing Element builds upon the other General Plan elements and is
                 consistent with the policies and proposals set forth by the plan. As the General
                 Plan is amended through time, the City will review the Housing Element for
                 internal consistency and make revisions as appropriate. Pursuant to State law,
                 the Safety Element has incorporated discussions on flood hazards and policies on
                 flood management.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                          9-3

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                   Chapter 9. Housing Element
9.1.5            Public Participation
                 Opportunities for residents to provide input on housing issues and recommend
                 strategies are critical to the development of appropriate and effective programs
                 to address the housing needs of La Cañada Flintridge. The City encourages and
                 solicits the participation of its residents and other local agencies in the process of
                 identifying housing and community development needs. The residents of La
                 Cañada Flintridge were provided with opportunities to review and comment on
                 the City’s proposed Housing Element and recommend programs before
                 adoption.
9.1.5.1          Community Workshop
                 A Housing Element community workshop was conducted on October 30, 2013
                 specifically for receiving public input regarding the update of the City’s Housing
                 Element as well as actions to implement commitments contained in the previous
                 Housing Element for the 2008-2014 planning period. This workshop was
                 advertised via display ad in the local paper and posted on the City’s website and
                 at City Hall. Special notices were also sent to community stakeholders and
                 developers.
                 The community meeting on October 30, 2013 was attended by two housing
                 developers, who discussed issues including site acquisition, permitted densities,
                 parking requirements, and the project approval process.
9.1.5.2          Public Hearings
                 The City conducted a public hearing before the Planning Commission on
                 November 26 and December 10, 2013 to review the Draft Housing Element as
                 well as proposed zoning amendments to facilitate a variety of housing options in
                 the City, including transitional housing, supportive housing, emergency shelters,
                 single-room occupancy housing, high-density multi-family housing, and mixed
                 use development.
                 On January 21, 2014, the City Council conducted public hearings to receive
                 comments on the Housing Element and proposed zoning amendments. The
                 hearings were open for February 3 and February 10, 2014 to provide additional
                 opportunities for input. On February 10, 2014, the City Council adopted the
                 2013-2021 Housing Element and the proposed zoning amendments.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                            9-4

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 9. Housing Element
9.2              Needs Assessment
                 In order to ascertain the specific housing needs of present and future residents of
                 La Cañada Flintridge, an assessment of the community’s demographic and
                 housing characteristics is required. The following Needs Assessment provides
                 an overview of the City’s population, a description of household and housing
                 stock characteristics, and an analysis of the City’s regional housing needs. This
                 assessment serves as a foundation from which future housing objectives and
                 recommendations may be developed.
9.2.1            Population Characteristics and Trends
                 Population trends, age, ethnicity, income, employment, housing and household
                 information, and special needs all play a factor in assessing future housing need
                 and the types and distribution of other land uses. The information and
                 projections provided by the sources noted previously are presented below to aid
                 in evaluating historical demographic and housing trends and identifying
                 anticipated future trends.
9.2.1.1          Population Growth Trends
                 Prior to incorporation in 1976, the La Cañada Flintridge area was already fully
                 developed and well established as two County areas: La Cañada to the north and
                 Flintridge to the south. In the 1920s, developers began to subdivide the land and
                 attract buyers. The largest subdivisions included Alta Canyada, developed by
                 Edwin T. Earl (inventor of the refrigerated fruit railroad car); Descanso/Central
                 La Cañada, carved out of the Lanterman family holdings; and Flintridge, laid out
                 by U.S. Senator Frank P. Flint.
                 During the regional building boom years of the late 1940s and early 1950s,
                 limited new growth in La Cañada Flintridge was the result of insufficient water
                 supply and water rights, which translated into Los Angeles County’s 1948
                 Zoning Code provisions. Although the Foothill Municipal Water District was
                 annexed to the Los Angeles Metropolitan Water District in 1953, major land
                 development patterns were already established in the City by this time. Further
                 growth in the region through the 1950s and 1960s was frequently driven by the
                 accessibility of freeways; however, in La Cañada Flintridge, the Glendale
                 Freeway (SR-2) and the I-210 were not completed through the City until the early
                 1970s.
                 Today, La Cañada Flintridge’s adopted policy is to retain the community’s
                 natural and semi-rural character. In addition, the presence of environmental and
                 infrastructure constraints (e.g., hillside topography, wildfire hazards, lack of
                 sanitary sewers) on much of the remaining vacant land in the City precludes
                 extensive development. In contrast to the populations of the County and
General Plan—February 2014                                                                          9-5

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                   Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 surrounding communities, which grew significantly between 1980 and 1990, the
                 City’s population declined by 3.8 percent (from 20,153 to 19,378) during those 10
                 years.
                 La Cañada Flintridge again experienced a slight increase in growth from 1990 to
                 2000. Between 2000 and 2010, however, population in the City decreased by
                 approximately 0.4 percent and is currently at 20,246, according to the 2010
                 Census and shown on Table HE-1.
                 Table HE-1. Regional Population Growth
                                                                              Change
                 City                               2000           2010    (2000–2010)
                 Los Angeles                     3,694,820     3,792,621 97801       2.7%
                 Glendale                         194,973       191,719  -3254      -1.7%
                 Pasadena                         133,936       137,122  3186        2.4%
                 La Cañada Flintridge              20,318        20,246   -72       -0.4%
                 Sources: Bureau of the Census, 2000 and 2010.
9.2.1.2          Age Characteristics
                 Demand for housing is often affected by the age composition of a community.
                 Different age groups demand certain types of housing that correspond to
                 different circumstances and ability to afford housing. Traditionally, young
                 adults prefer affordable apartments, condominiums, and small single-family
                 units. Middle aged adults typically prefer larger homes as they raise families.
                 As circumstances change and children leave home, older adults often trade in
                 their larger homes for smaller, moderately priced condominiums and smaller
                 single-family units. As seniors continue to age, many require housing with
                 supportive services to assist in activities of daily living.
                 Table HE-2 illustrates the City population by age group. As shown, the largest
                 age groups in 2000 and 2010 include residents that are in the 0 to 14 and 45 to 54
                 ranges, with the smallest age group as the 21 to 24 range. This suggests that the
                 City contains a considerable young family population. However, the 0 to 14 age
                 group is declining. Also notable is the steady increase in the senior population,
                 which has incrementally risen since 1990. As such, the City is experiencing an
                 aging population as the number of families with young children decreases and
                 the number of senior households increases.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                            9-6

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                                   Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 Table HE-2. Age Characteristics and Trends
                                         1990                          2000                            20101
                 Age
                 Group          Number         Percent      Number           Percent          Number           Percent
                 0–14             3,906          18.8         4,835           23.8              3,965            19.6
                 15–20            1,592           9.6         1,838            9.0              1,852             9.1
                 21–24             682            3.5          417             2.1               861              4.3
                 25–34            1,735           9.0          972             4.8              1,021             5.0
                 35–44            3,410          17.6         3,279           16.1              2,136            10.6
                 45–54            3,216          16.6         3,795           18.7              4,039            19.9
                 55–64            2,219          11.5         2,340           11.5              3,185            15.7
                 65–74            1,657           8.6         1,498            7.4              1,695             8.4
                 75–84             783            4.0         1,016            5.0              1,068             5.3
                 85+               178            0.9          328             1.6               424              2.1
                 Total           19,378         100.0        20,318           100.0            20,246            100.0
                 Under 65        16,760          86.5        17,476           86.0             17,059            84.3
                 Over 65         2,618             13.5       2,842             14.0            3,187               15.7
                 1
                   The 2010 Census age groups for young adults are slightly different than provided in 1990 and 2000. In
                 2010, the age brackets are 15-19 and 20-24 (a shift of one year between the two groups).
                 Sources: Bureau of the Census, 1990, 2000, and 2010.
9.2.1.3          Race and Ethnicity
                 Shifts in the ethnic and racial composition of a community’s population can have
                 important implications for the nature and extent of housing needs. The size and
                 type of housing preferred and neighborhood preferences often vary by cultural
                 backgrounds.
                 Table HE-3 shows that the City’s primary ethnicities are persons of White and
                 Asian origins. Combined, the White and Asian populations account for over
                 90 percent of the City population. According to the 2010 Census, persons who
                 categorized themselves as Hispanic represent nearly 6 percent of La Cañada
                 Flintridge’s population, compared to nearly 48 percent of the population in Los
                 Angeles County as a whole.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                                               9-7

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 Table HE-3. Race and Ethnicity
                                                                              Los Angeles
                                                       La Cañada Flintridge     County
                  Category                         Number            Percent    Percent
                  Not of Hispanic Origin
                     White                           13,094            64.7       27.8
                     Black                             101              0.5        8.3
                     American Indian                    4               0.0        0.2
                     Asian                            5,181            25.6       13.5
                     Native Hawaiian/Other              54              0.2        0.5
                     Two or More Races                 545              2.7        2.0
                  Hispanic Origin                     1,267             6.3       47.7
                  Total                              20,246           100.0      100.0
                  Source: Bureau of the Census, 2010.
9.2.2            Employment Trends and Projections
9.2.2.1          Occupations
                 According to the 2009-2011 American Community Survey (ACS) (Table HE-4),
                 the largest employment sectors were:
                         Professional/Scientific/Management;
                         Education/Health/Social Services; and
                         Information/Finance/ Insurance/Real Estate.
                 Jobs in these fields often require specialized knowledge and, in many cases,
                 advanced degrees. Some examples may include lawyers, engineers, accountants,
                 and research and development professionals.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                          9-8

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                               Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 Table HE-4. Employment by Industry
                  Industry                                                 Number          Percent
                  Farming/Fishing/Forestry                                     0              0.0
                  Construction/Manufacturing                                 814              9.1
                  Wholesale/Retail Trade                                    1,150            12.9
                  Transportation/Warehousing/Utilities                        79              0.9
                  Information/Finance/Insurance/Real Estate                 1,839            20.6
                  Professional/Scientific/Management                        2,060           23.1
                  Education/Health/Social Services                          1,886            21.1
                  Art/Entertainment/Recreation/Accommodation/Food Service    477              5.4
                  Other Services                                             341              3.8
                  Public Administration                                      275              3.1
                  Total Employed                                            8,921           100.0
                  Source: American Community Survey, 2009-2011 Estimates
9.2.2.2          Occupational Wages
                 Wages reported by the California Department of Employment Development
                 show that the average salary in the Los Angeles Metropolitan area was $52,754 in
                 2013 (see Table HE-5). Of the employed residents in La Cañada Flintridge,
                 nearly one quarter worked in the education, health, and social services
                 industries. The average salaries for these occupations ranged from $60,169 for
                 education down to $51,479 for social service occupations. Health care
                 practitioners earned an average of $86,329, while healthcare support services
                 employees earned an average salary of $31,084.
                 Approximately 20 percent of the population worked in the professional,
                 scientific, and management industries. These are higher paying industries with
                 salaries averaging $124,197 for management and $76,860 for all science
                 occupations. Professional occupations include legal, medical, and architecture
                 and engineering professions, which earned average salaries ranging from $92,882
                 to $125,853.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                        9-9

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                              Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 Table HE-5. Occupational Wages, Los Angeles–Long Beach Metropolitan
                 Statistical Area
                 Occupations                                                     Average Salary
                 Legal                                                                 $125,853
                 Management                                                            $124,197
                 Architecture and engineering                                            $92,882
                 Art, design entertainment, sports, and media                            $89,122
                 Healthcare practitioners and technical                                  $86,329
                 Computer and mathematical                                               $85,861
                 Life, physical, and social science                                      $76,860
                 Business and financial                                                  $75,680
                 Education, training, and library                                        $60,169
                 Construction and extraction                                             $54,607
                 Mean                                                                    $52,754
                 Community and social service                                            $51,479
                 Protective service                                                      $49,962
                 Installation, maintenance, and repair                                   $49,161
                 Sales                                                                   $40,728
                 Office and administrative support                                       $38,043
                 Transportation and material moving                                      $34,294
                 Production                                                              $32,222
                 Healthcare support                                                      $31,084
                 Personal care and service                                               $28,022
                 Farming, fishing, and forestry                                          $27,243
                 Buildings and grounds cleaning and maintenance                          $26,986
                 Food preparation                                                        $22,011
                 Source: California Department of Employment Development Statistics, 2013 1st Quarter.
9.2.3            Household Characteristics
9.2.3.1          Household Trends
                 Households are constantly changing form. Even in periods of static population
                 growth, household characteristics are subject to change as adult children leave
                 home, divorces occur, and the population ages. As of the 2010 Census, there
                 were a total of 6,849 households in the City, an increase of only 0.4 percent. As
                 shown in Table HE-6, between the years of 1990 and 2000 the City increased by
                 129 households, which represents an increase of approximately 2 percent.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                                      9-10

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                  Chapter 9. Housing Element
                   The number of households in Los Angeles County has been increasing at a stable
                   and higher rate than the City’s number of households since 1990. Between 1990
                   and 2000, households increased by nearly 5 percent. However, the County has
                   also shown a slowdown in household growth to only 3.4 percent between 2000
                   and 2010.
                   Table HE-6. Household Trends
                                                                                 Simple Annual
         Year                   Number                  Change   % Change          % Change
         City of La Cañada Flintridge
         1990                    6,694                     –         –                  –
         2000                    6,823                    129       1.9                0.2
         2010                    6,849                    26        0.4               0.04
         Los Angeles County
         1990                  2,989,552                   –         –                  –
         2000                  3,133,744                144,222     4.8                0.5
         2010                  3,241,204                107,460     3.4                0.3
         Sources: Bureau of the Census, 1990, 2000, and 2010.
9.2.3.2            Household Size
                   The size of households influences housing needs. A substantial change over time
                   in average household size may indicate a change in the composition of a
                   community. In a city with a growing number of elderly households, the average
                   household size will decrease over time, while in another community a growing
                   household size will indicate a trend toward larger families.
                   As shown in Table HE-7, households containing two persons represented the
                   largest single share of households in the City (33% of owner-households and 22%
                   of renter-households) in 2010, followed by four-person households (23% of both
                   owner- and renter-households). Household size trends combined with the City’s
                   age trends (primarily 0 to 13 and 35 to 54 age ranges) indicate that in addition to
                   young family-households, there are a considerable number of households where
                   children have left home. The average household size in La Cañada Flintridge is
                   comparable to the average in Los Angeles County but larger than most
                   surrounding communities (Table HE-8).
General Plan—February 2014                                                                          9-11

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                  Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 Table HE-7. Household Size
                  Household Size                    Owner-Households     Renter-Households
                  (Persons)                    Number           Percent Number       Percent
                  1                               781             12.8    143          19.6
                  2                              1,999            32.7    162          22.2
                  3                              1,183            19.3    147          20.2
                  4                              1,380            22.5    164          22.5
                  5                               549             9.0     84           11.5
                  6                               173             2.8     22           3.0
                  7+                              55              0.9      7           1.0
                  Total                          6,120           100.0    729         100.0
                  Avg. Household Size                      3.16                 2.81
                  Sources: Bureau of the Census, 2010.
                 Table HE-8. Average Household Size
                                                       2010
                 Jurisdiction
                                            Average Household Size
                 La Cañada Flintridge                  2.95
                 Burbank                               2.45
                 Pasadena                              2.42
                 South Pasadena                        2.43
                 Glendale                              2.63
                 Los Angeles County                    2.98
                 Sources: Bureau of the Census, 2010.
9.2.3.3          Household Income
                 Household income is an important factor that affects housing opportunity in a
                 community. It determines a household’s ability to balance housing costs with
                 other basic necessities, such as food and clothing. Income levels can vary
                 significantly among households and family type, tenure, location, race, and
                 ethnicity.
                 Household income data for La Cañada Flintridge’s is available from the
                 American Community Survey (2009-2011 estimates). Figure HE-1 shows that La
                 Cañada Flintridge’s median household income is significantly higher than the
                 median incomes of all neighboring communities. It is twice as much as the
                 second highest community of South Pasadena and well above the Los Angeles
General Plan—February 2014                                                                          9-12

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                    Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 County median income of $54,630 per household for the same period. Between
                 2009 and 2011, almost 36 percent of City households were estimated to have
                 incomes of $200,000 or more, constituting the largest income group in the
                 community (Table HE-9).
             Figure HE-1.          Median Household Income Comparison
               $160,000
                               $145,217
               $140,000
               $120,000
               $100,000
                                             $80,748
                $80,000                                               $68,403     $65,443
                $60,000                                   $51,747
                $40,000
                $20,000
                      $-
                             La Canada        South      Glendale   Pasadena      Burbank
                              Flintridge   Pasadena
             Source: Bureau of the Census, American Community Survey (2009-20011 Estimates).
                 Table HE-9. Household Income
                                                   2009-20011
                      Income Range
                                             Number        Percent
                     Less than $10,000         22              0.3
                    $10,000 to $14,999          23             0.3
                    $15,000 to $24,999         200             3.0
                    $25,000 to $34,999         298             4.4
                    $35,000 to $49,999         427             6.3
                    $50,000 to $74,999         678           10.0
                    $75,000 to $99,999         416             6.2
                   $100,000 to $149,999       1,414          20.9
                   $150,000 to $199,999        867           12.8
                     $200,000 or more         2,406          35.6
                  Total                       6,751         100.0
                  Median Income                     $145,217
                  Source: 2009-2011 American Community Survey.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                            9-13

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                      Chapter 9. Housing Element
9.2.3.4          Households by Income Group
                 For purposes of the Housing Element, the State of California has established five
                 income groups based on income limits provided by the Department of Housing
                 and Community Development (HCD). The established standard income groups
                 are generally defined as:
                           extremely low income: households earning less than 30 percent of the
                            Area Median Income (AMI) of the County of Los Angeles;
                           very low income: households earning between 31 and 50 percent of the
                            AMI;
                           low income: households earning between 50 percent and 80 percent of
                            the AMI;
                           moderate income: households earning between 81 percent and
                            120 percent of the AMI; and
                           above moderate income: households earning over 120 percent of the
                            AMI.
                 For a household of four in Los Angeles County, the AMI for 2013 was $64,800.
                 Table HE-10 is based on the estimated household income for 2005-2009. The
                 proportions of extremely low, very low, and low income groups comprised
                 about 13 percent of City households. Approximately 79 percent of households in
                 the City are classified as above moderate income.
Table HE-10. Households by Income Groups
Income Group                     % of County Median           Income Range ($)1       % of Households2
Extremely low                        Less Than 30              $17,950–$27,650                3.6
Very low                                 31–50                 $29,900–$46,150                3.3
Low                                     51– 80                 $47,850–$73,800                6.6
Moderate                                81–120                 $54,450–$83,950                7.7
Above moderate                           >120                       >$83,950                  78.8
Notes:
1. Income range based on 1 to 5 person households for 2013.
2. Income distribution is based on SCAG 2005-2009 American Community Survey data.
Sources: SCAG Income Distribution (2005-2009); HCD Income Limits (2013).
General Plan—February 2014                                                                              9-14

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                   Chapter 9. Housing Element
9.2.3.5          Tenure
                 Household tenure, or the ratio between owner- and renter-households, can be
                 influenced by many factors, such as: housing cost (including interest rates,
                 economics, land supply, and development constraints), housing availability,
                 income, employment structure, and consumer preference. As shown below in
                 Table HE-11, homeowners in the City outnumber renters almost nine-to-one. In
                 comparison to the County, the City has a substantially higher proportion of
                 homeownership. In 2010, City homeownership rate (at 89%) is nearly double the
                 County rate (48%).
                 Table HE-11. Tenure Comparison
                                                         2000                     2010
                  Occupied Units              Number         Percent  Number              Percent
                  Los Angeles County
                  Owner                      1,499,694          47.9 1,544,749             47.7
                  Renter                     1,634,080          52.1 1,696,455             52.3
                  Total                      3,133,774         100.0 3,241,204             100.0
                  La Cañada Flintridge
                  Owner                         6,126           90.0   6,120               89.4
                  Renter                         680            10.0    729                10.6
                  Total                         6,806          100.0   6,849               100.0
                  Source: Bureau of the Census, 2000 and 2010.
9.2.4            Housing Problems
9.2.4.1          Overpayment
                 Overpayment is an important measure of the affordability of housing within a
                 community. Overpayment for housing is based on the total cost of housing
                 compared to a household’s ability to pay. Specifically, overpayment is defined
                 as a household paying more than 30 percent of its gross household income for
                 housing. According to the Census, housing cost is the monthly owner costs
                 (mortgages, homeowner’s association fees, utilities, taxes, and insurance) or the
                 gross rent (contract rent and utilities).
                 Table HE-12 shows that 40 percent of La Cañada Flintridge households were
                 overpaying for housing during the period 2006-2010. The percentages of lower-
                 income households that were overpaying, both renters and owners, were very
                 high: approximately 83 percent of extremely low-income households, 74 percent
                 of very-low income households, and 73 percent of low-income households.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                           9-15

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                        Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 However, 85 percent of the households in the City earned moderate or above
                 moderate incomes. Nearly one third of the households in that income category
                 were overpaying for housing costs. For many of these households, overpayment
                 is more likely a lifestyle choice than a necessity. The highest occurrence of
                 overpayment (94 percent) was among low-income renters. The overall rate of
                 overpayment among elderly homeowners (about 31 percent of all owner
                 households) was 32 percent, a rate lower than for homeowners of all ages
                 combined.
                 Table HE-12. Households Overpaying for Housing
                 Household Income                            Percent of Overpaying Households
                                                      Total Renters Total Owners Total Households
                 Extremely low income                      62.5.          88.1            85.1
                 Very low income                          70.0            76.2            74.8
                 Low income                                93.8           58.1            67.8
                 Moderate income and Above                18.7            32.4            31.5
                 Total households                         46.7            39.2            40.0
                 Source: HUD CHAS Data, 2010 (data for 2006-2010).
9.2.4.2          Overcrowding
                 Overcrowding is defined by the State as having more than one person per room
                 in a single housing unit. Generally, a room is defined as a living room, dining
                 room, bedroom, or finished recreation room. Bathrooms and kitchens are not
                 considered. In the City of La Cañada Flintridge there were a total of 79
                 overcrowded households between 2009 and 2011 (Table HE-13).
                 Table HE-13. Overcrowded Households
                  Persons per Room        Renter-Households      Owner-Households   Total Households
                  1.01-1.50                         8                    37                 45
                  1.51+                            13                    21                 34
                  Total Households                 21                    58                 79
                  Source: Bureau of the Census, 2009-2011 American Community Survey
9.2.5            Special Needs
                 Segments of the population require special housing needs. These include
                 seniors, disabled, female-headed households, large households, farmworkers,
                 and the homeless. Often, these are low income households who have limited
                 access to housing choices.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                                9-16

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                           Chapter 9. Housing Element
                   Table HE-14 shows the presence of special needs populations in La Cañada
                   Flintridge. Households with elderly members (32%) were the largest special
                   needs group in the City, followed by elderly-headed households (28%) and
                   female-headed households (16%). The specifics of special needs groups will be
                   explored in the following discussions.
Table HE-14. Special Needs Populations
                                                                                                        % of Total
                                                  # of Persons           # of               # of        Households
Special Needs Group                              or Households         Owners             Renters       or Persons
Persons 65+                                           3,187               –                  –              15.7
Elderly-headed households                             1,916          1,832 (96%)          84 (4%)           28.0
Elderly living alone                                   559            520 (93%)           39 (7%)            8.2
Disabled persons                                      1,183               –                  –              5.8
Large households                                       890            777 (87%)          113 (13%)          13.0
Female-headed households                              1,122          1,009 (90%)         203 (10%)          16.4
Female-headed households with children                 243                --                 --              3.5
Farmworkers                                             0                 –                  –              0.0
Sources: Bureau of the Census, 2010 Census and 2009-2011 American Community Survey (ACS)
9.2.5.1            Seniors
                   Seniors often age in place, living in housing that is too expensive for their fixed
                   incomes or that structurally does not accommodate their specific needs for
                   assistance. Even though seniors may have difficulty living in their own homes,
                   oftentimes they do not have the option or mobility afforded to other segments of
                   the population to relocate to a more suitable housing arrangement. They
                   commonly have to leave their home community and relocate away from family
                   and friends to find a suitable unit. The purpose of this section is to determine the
                   housing needs of the senior community, which is defined as persons aged 65 or
                   over.
                   As shown in Table HE-15, 2,618 seniors resided in the City in 1990. Between 1990
                   and 2000, the senior population increased at 0.9 percent annually. In 2000, the
                   senior population grew to 2,842, representing 14 percent of the total population.
                   As of 2010 the senior population was counted at 3,187 persons or 15.7 percent of
                   the total population.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                                   9-17

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                           Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 Table HE-15. Senior Population
                 Year           Number of Seniors         Change        % Change      Simple Annual % Change
                 1990                   2,618                 –               –                    –
                 2000                   2,842               224              8.6                  0.9
                 2010                   3,187               345             12.1                  1.2
                 Sources: Bureau of the Census, 1990, 2000, and 2010.
                 Table HE-16 shows the number of homes within the City that were headed by
                 seniors. In 2000, the number of senior households was estimated to be 1,784.
                 Between 1990 and 2000, the City’s senior households increased by nearly 13
                 percent. In 2000, seniors accounted for 26 percent of householders in the City.
                 The 2010 Census estimates that 1,916 households (28 percent) in the City were
                 headed by elderly persons. Specifically in 2010, there were 559 elderly persons
                 living alone. These trends indicate a need for different housing options for
                 seniors in the community.
                Table HE-16. Senior Household Trends
                                 Number of Senior
                   Year          Occupied Homes               Change          % Change
                   1990                 1,586                    –                 –
                   2000                 1,784                   198              12.5
                   2009-11              1,916                   132               7.4
                   Sources: Bureau of the Census, 1990 and 2000 Census, and 2009-2011
                   American Community Survey
                 In 1990, almost 5 percent of the City’s senior households were renters, as shown
                 in Table HE-17. In Los Angeles County, 32 percent of the senior households
                 rented their housing. The number of senior renters in the City decreased to
                 about 4 percent between 1990 and 2000. In 2010, slightly over 4 percent of the
                 households in the City were renters.
                 Senior homeowners are considerably more prevalent in La Cañada Flintridge
                 than renters. Senior homeowners represented 96 percent of all senior households
                 in 2010. Seniors are more inclined to be homeowners because they tend to have
                 lived in a community for an extended period of time and were able to secure
                 homeownership before the price of housing took off during the last two decades.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                                   9-18

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                            Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 Table HE-17. Senior Households by Tenure
                  Occupied                        1990                      2000                 2010
                  Households           Number         Percent      Number      Percent   Number     Percent
                  Owner                  1,511           95.4         1,637      96.1      1,832      95.6
                  Renter                  73              4.6          67         3.9        85       4.4
                  Source: Bureau of the Census, 1990, 2000, and 2010.
9.2.5.2          Disabled Persons
                 Persons with disabilities include those who are physically, mentally, and/or
                 developmentally disabled. Each type is unique and requires specific attention in
                 terms of access to housing, employment, social services, and medical services.
                 Both physical and mental disabilities can hinder access to traditional housing
                 facilities and the ability to earn adequate income. Disabled individuals have
                 particular housing needs in terms of location and design requirements. For
                 example, physically disabled individuals may require special housing design
                 features, such as wheel chair ramps, holding bars, special bathroom designs,
                 wider rooms, and other features. Similar to elderly individuals, disabled persons
                 also have special housing needs in terms of location. The disabled often need to
                 be located near public facilities and alternative transportation services.
                 The American Community Survey (ACS) estimates that 1,183 residents (5.8
                 percent of the population) in the City had one or more disabilities between 2009
                 and 2011. The majority of the City’s disabled population is comprised of seniors
                 with self-care and independent living difficulties (Table HE-18). Five residential
                 care facilities for the elderly in the City provide a total of 30 beds for elderly
                 persons with disabilities.
                 Table HE-18. Disabilities Tallied
                                                                           % with Disabilities
                Type of Disability                    Age 5–17        Age 18–64       Age 65+         Total
                Hearing                                    0.0           34.8          49.3            41.8
                Vision                                     0.0            7.1           8.4             7.4
                Cognitive                                 78.6           38.5          12.0            23.9
                Ambulatory                                29.8           34.5           5.7            15.2
                Self-Care                                 73.8            7.8          20.6            20.9
                Independent Living                         0.0           23.3          48.9            38.5
                Total Disabled Persons                     84             322           777           1,183
                Note: A person can have multiple disabilities.
                Source: Bureau of the Census, 2009-2011 American Community Survey
General Plan—February 2014                                                                                    9-19

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                    Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 A recent change in State law (SB 812 passed in November 2010) requires that the
                 Housing Element discuss the housing needs of persons with developmental
                 disabilities. As defined by federal law, “developmental disability” means a
                 severe, chronic disability of an individual that:
                         is attributable to a mental or physical impairment or combination of
                          mental and physical impairments;
                         is manifested before the individual attains age 18;
                         is likely to continue indefinitely;
                         results in substantial functional limitations in three or more of the
                          following areas of major life activity: self-care; receptive and expressive
                          language; learning; mobility; self-direction; capacity for independent
                          living; or economic self- sufficiency;
                         reflects the individual’s need for a combination and sequence of special,
                          interdisciplinary, or generic services, individualized supports, or other
                          forms of assistance that are of lifelong or extended duration and are
                          individually planned and coordinated.
                 Many developmentally disabled persons can live and work independently
                 within a conventional housing environment. More severely disabled individuals
                 require a group living environment where supervision is provided. The most
                 severely affected individuals may require an institutional environment where
                 medical attention and physical therapy are provided. Because developmental
                 disabilities exist before adulthood, the first issue in supportive housing for the
                 developmentally disabled is the transition from the person’s living situation as a
                 child to an appropriate level of independence as an adult.
                 The Census does not record developmental disabilities. The Franklin
                 Developmental Center provides services for persons with developmental
                 disabilities in La Cañada Flintridge. As of September 2013, the Center was
                 serving 113 La Cañada residents. Of these, four persons were living
                 independently but the majority of them (109 persons) were living with parents,
                 relatives, or legal guardians. Among those living with family or relatives, the
                 Center estimates that 69 were minors and 44 were adults. A portion of these
                 adult clients may desire independent living arrangements.
9.2.5.3          Large Households
                 Large households are defined as households consisting of five or more persons.
                 Generally speaking, the needs of large households are not targeted in the
                 housing market, especially in the multi-family housing market. As shown in
                 Table HE-19, 13 percent or 890 households in the City met the definition of large
                 households. The County had a larger percentage of large households at 18
                 percent.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                            9-20

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 Table HE-19. Household Size by Tenure
                       Household Size
                                                 Owner  Renter Total      Percentage
                           (Persons)
                               1                   781   143    924          13.5
                               2                  1,999  162   2,161         31.6
                               3                  1,183  147   1,330         19.4
                               4                  1,380  164   1,544         22.5
                               5                   549    84    633           9.2
                               6                   173    22    195           2.8
                              7+                    55     7     62           0.9
                             Total                6120   729   6,849        100.0
                   Source: Bureau of the Census 2010.
9.2.5.4          Single-Parent Households
                 Single-parent households are considered a special needs group due to the need
                 for reasonable day care, health care, and affordable housing. Single-parent
                 households often have lower incomes, limiting their access to available housing,
                 and are at risk of becoming homeless or additionally cost-burdened by rising
                 housing costs.
                 As shown in Table HE-20, a significant portion of single-parent households had a
                 female as the head of the household. The 2000 Census counted 3,113 family
                 households with children under 18 years of age in the City of La Cañada
                 Flintridge. Of these households, 403 or 13 percent were headed by a single
                 parent, with the majority being headed by females. In 2010, the number and
                 proportion of married couples decreased, primarily due to the decrease in
                 families with school-age children. Similarly, female-headed families with
                 children also decreased numerically and proportionately.
                 In the City of La Cañada Flintridge, 19 percent of the female-headed families
                 were living in poverty. Specifically, 28 percent of the female-headed families
                 with children were living in poverty.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                         9-21

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                     Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 Table HE-20. Households with Children
                 Household Type                                     2000                   2010
                                                            Number       Percent  Number        Percent
                 Married couple households                    5,119       75.2     5,029         73.4
                    With children under 18 years old          2,710       52.9     2,393         47.6
                    With no children                          2,409       47.1     2,636         52.4
                 Female householder*                           504          7.4     525           7.7
                    With children under 18 years old           316         62.7     243          46.3
                    With no children                           188        37.3      282          53.7
                 Male householder*                             178         2.6      214           3.1
                    With children under 18 years old            87         48.9     102          47.7
                    With no children                           91         51.1      112          52.3
                 Non-family households                        1,022       15.0     1,081         15.8
                 Total Households                             6,823       100.0    6,849         100.0
                 *No spouse present
                 Source: Bureau of the Census, 2000 and 2010.
9.2.5.5          Homeless Persons
                 Due to their transient nature, it is difficult to count the number of homeless in
                 any one area. It should also be noted that there are generally two types of
                 homeless—the "permanent homeless," who are the transient and most visible
                 homeless population, and the "temporary homeless," who are homeless usually
                 due to eviction and may stay with friends, family, or in a shelter or motel until
                 they can find a permanent residence.
                 The Los Angeles Homeless Services Authority (LAHSA) is a Joint Powers
                 Authority established in 1993 as an independent agency by the County and the
                 City of Los Angeles. As the lead agency in the Los Angeles Continuum of Care,
                 LAHSA coordinates and manages over $67 million dollars annually in federal,
                 state, County, and city funds for homeless services across Los Angeles County.
                 LAHSA also performs policy and planning research and analysis, with the goal
                 of supporting, creating, and sustaining solutions to homelessness. In 2008,
                 LAHSA conducted a survey of the homeless population in the San Gabriel
                 Valley.
                 The survey puts La Cañada Flintridge in Cluster 1, which includes the cities and
                 unincorporated areas of Altadena, East Pasadena, La Cañada Flintridge,
                 Pasadena, San Marino, Sierra Madre, and South Pasadena. Cluster 1 is estimated
                 to have a homeless population of 1,412 to 1,663 persons, representing about
General Plan—February 2014                                                                             9-22

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                                  Chapter 9. Housing Element
                   28 percent of the homeless in the San Gabriel Valley. The majority of the
                   homeless population is located in the City of Pasadena. Specifically, the survey
                   estimates only one homeless person in La Cañada Flintridge.
9.2.5.6            Special Needs Resources/Emergency Shelters
                   Given the small number of homeless persons in the City, no homeless shelters or
                   service centers are located in La Cañada Flintridge. Table HE-21 provides an
                   inventory of services and facilities located in Cluster 1 area.
Table HE-21. Inventory of Homeless Services and Facilities
Name                       Services                                                             Location
Elizabeth House            Residential shelter for pregnant women 18 and older and              760 Santa Barbara St.
                           their children. Also offers classes in parenting, health             Pasadena, CA
                           education, job skills training, and weekly counseling.
Union Station              Operates an intake center, a family center (50 beds), adult          825 E. Orange Grove
Foundation                 center (56 beds), a transitional apartment complex, and a            Blvd.
                           career development program.                                          Pasadena, CA
Beacon House               Operates the Lowe House Program with 9 beds for single               Pasadena, CA
                           homeless people,
Door of Hope               Provides financial assistance, referrals for emergency               669 Los Rables Ave.,
                           shelter, and counseling for married, two parent, homeless            Pasadena, CA 91101
                           families with children.
Hathway-Sycamores          Offers mental health support services to families and                210 S. De Lacey Ave.
                           children and operates a transitional living program with 26          Suite 110
                           beds.                                                                Pasadena, CA
Hillsides                  Youth Moving On is a 24-month transitional housing                   940 Avenue 64,
                           program for youth aging out of foster care.                          Pasadena, CA
Journey House              Transitional housing for youth aging out of foster care.             1232 N Los Robles Ave.
                                                                                                Pasadena, CA
Grandview                  Includes three sober-living facilities, two residential              1230 N. Marengo Blvd.
Foundation-                programs, and a 6-month outpatient program. Residential              Pasadena, CA 91106
Residential/Outpatient     treatment facility is available for single males age 18 and
Programs                   over and offers a drug and alcohol treatment program.
Pacific Clinics            Outpatient mental health services are available to seriously         909 S. Fair Oaks Ave.
                           ill children, youth, adults, and seniors regardless of the           Pasadena, CA 91105
                           ability to pay.
Haven House                Provides shelter, food, clothing, counseling, and advocacy           P.O. Box 50007
                           services for battered women and their children.                      Pasadena, CA 91105
Walter Hoving              Residential shelter for single women for up to 60 days.              218 South Madison Ave.,
Housing                                                                                         Pasadena, CA 91101
Source: San Gabriel Valley, Regional Homeless Services Strategy, Phase I Report, September 5, 2008.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                                            9-23

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                      Chapter 9. Housing Element
9.2.6            Housing Stock Characteristics
9.2.6.1          Housing Growth
                 La Cañada Flintridge experienced limited levels of housing growth over the past
                 decade (Table HE-22). Between 2000 and 2010, the housing stock increased by
                 100 units from 6,989 to 7,089, representing a growth of 1.4 percent. This increase
                 in the housing stock was lower than the 5.3 percent increase experienced by the
                 County, but was comparable to the increase in nearby City of South Pasadena.
                 Glendale, Pasadena, and Burbank experienced higher levels of growth.
                 Table HE-22. Housing Growth
                                                                     2000–2010
                  Jurisdiction                2000         2010    Percent Change
                  La Cañada Flintridge        6,989        7,089         1.4
                  South Pasadena             10,874       11,118         2.2
                  Pasadena                   54,132       59,551        10.0
                  Glendale                   73,713       76,269         3.5
                  Burbank                    42,847       44,309         3.4
                  Los Angeles County       3,270,906     3,445,076       5.3
                  Source: Bureau of the Census, 2000 and 2010.
9.2.6.2          Distribution of Housing Types
                 Providing for a diverse range of housing types is an important consideration in a
                 community. A diverse range of housing types helps ensure that all households
                 in a community, regardless of income level, size, age, and family type, have the
                 ability to find adequate housing that meets their needs.
                 Table HE-23 shows the composition of La Cañada Flintridge’s housing stock by
                 unit type in 2000 and 2013. Due to the limited number of new units, the
                 composition of the City’s housing stock has remained virtually unchanged over
                 the decade. Single-family detached homes comprised the majority of the
                 housing stock in La Cañada Flintridge, accounting for 93 percent of all homes in
                 2000 and 92 percent in 2013. The remaining share of homes in the City consisted
                 of multi-family units and single-family attached units , which together accounted
                 for 8 percent of units.
                 No detailed housing data is available yet from the 2010 Census. However, given
                 the limited housing growth, the composition of the City’s housing stock is
                 expected to remain stable.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                              9-24

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                  Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 Table HE-23. Housing Unit Types
                                                        2000                         2013
                   Housing Type       Number of Units % of Total Units Number of Units % of Total Units
                   Single-Family
                     Detached               6,482                 92.7     6,519              91.9
                     Attached                200                   2.9      186                2.6
                     Subtotal               6,682                 95.6     6,705              94.5
                   Multi-Family
                       2–4 units             132                   1.9       96                1.4
                       5+ Units              175                   2.5      250                3.5
                   Subtotal                  307                   4.4      346                4.9
                   Mobile homes                0                   0.0       44                 .6
                   Total units              6,989                 100      7,095              100
                   Vacancy rate                          2.4                          2.4
                   Source: State Department of Finance 2000 and 2013.
9.2.6.3          Age and Condition of Housing Stock
                 Generally, housing older than 30 years of age will require minor repairs and
                 modernization improvements. Housing units over 50 years of age are more
                 likely to require major rehabilitation, such as roofing, plumbing, and electrical
                 system repairs. After 70 years of age a unit is generally deemed to have
                 exceeded its useful life without major repairs or renovations.
                 Homes in La Cañada Flintridge are generally older than those of many
                 communities in Los Angeles County. The City developed as a residential
                 community, beginning with the Flintridge and Alta Canyada subdivisions in the
                 1920s. As shown in Figure HE-2, the largest proportion of La Cañada
                 Flintridge’s housing (32%) was built between 1950 and 1959, making it
                 approximately 54 to 63 years old. Housing units of this age are more likely to
                 require major rehabilitation and repairs. The City has few newer units, as nearly
                 67 percent of the housing stock was built before 1960.
                 Overall, the housing stock in the City is generally in excellent condition.
                 According to City staff assessment, about 30 single-family homes near
                 Commonwealth Avenue are in need of substantial rehabilitation or replacement
                 due to dilapidation. These are scattered homes in the City’s non-tract areas.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                          9-25

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                         Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 Figure HE-2.       Year Housing Units Built
                   35.0%                                                            32.1%
                   30.0%
                   25.0%
                                                                                              19.8%
                   20.0%                                                     17.4%
                                                                                                       15.4%
                   15.0%
                   10.0%
                                                  4.7%              4.6%
                    5.0%                2.8%               2.5%
                             0.8%
                    0.0%
                            2005 or    2000 to   1990 to  1980 to  1970 to  1960 to 1950 to  1940 to  1939 or
                             later      2004      1999     1989     1979      1969   1959      1949    earlier
                 Source: Bureau of the Census, 2009-2011 American Community Survey.
9.2.7            Housing Costs and Affordability
                 Housing costs vary widely from one community to the next, being affected by a
                 range of factors. The type and style of homes, neighborhood characteristics,
                 quality of schools and public services, crime rates, and access to employment
                 opportunities are qualities that many home buyers consider when looking for a
                 new home in a particular community.
                 La Cañada Flintridge’s attractive hillside homes, tree-lined streets, low crime
                 rate, and highly ranked school district are all factors that contribute to the high
                 quality of life in the community. According to local realtors, the primary reasons
                 cited by home buyers that relocate to La Cañada Flintridge are the high caliber of
                 the local school district and the quality of homes in the community. These
                 qualities make La Cañada Flintridge a highly desirable location for families with
                 school-aged children.
9.2.7.1          Ownership Housing Costs
                 The City maintains some of the region’s highest single-family housing prices. As
                 provided within Table HE-24, the City’s median home price was approximately
                 $1,162,500 in September 2013, a slight three-percent decrease from the same
                 month in 2012. The City of Pasadena, located adjacent and south of La Cañada
                 Flintridge, contains the second highest housing prices in the surrounding area,
                 with a median price of about $598,000 which is about half of that in the City.
                 Despite the recent fluctuation of housing prices, single-family home prices in La
                 Cañada Flintridge have remained considerably higher than home prices in
                 surrounding communities and cities. A contributing factor is the City’s superb
                 school district.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                                   9-26

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 Table HE-24. Home Prices
                                                   Median               Distance from
                  City/Community                  Home Price        La Cañada Flintridge
                  La Crescenta                     $508,000                2.8 miles
                  Glendale                         $545,000                6.0 miles
                  Altadena                         $557,500                6.3 miles
                  Pasadena                         $598,000                7.8 miles
                  Burbank                          $539,000               11.2 miles
                  La Cañada Flintridge            $1,162,500                   –
                  Source: DQNews.com, September 2013.
9.2.7.2          Rental Housing Costs
                 According to the 2008-2010 ACS, the median contract rent was over $2,000 in the
                 City of La Cañada Flintridge, compared to $1,047 for Los Angeles County. Few
                 homes are available for rent. Rental listings on craigslist.org indicate the
                 following rental rates:
                         One-bedroom units: $1,200 - $1,400
                         Two-bedroom units: $2,100 - $3,000
                         Three-bedroom units: $2,600 - $3,500
9.2.7.3          Housing Affordability
                 The ability to afford a home is an important factor affecting the quality of life in a
                 community. Housing affordability in La Cañada Flintridge can be determined
                 by comparing the costs of owning or renting a home with the maximum amount
                 which households with different income levels can afford to pay for housing.
                 This information can reveal what type and size of housing is affordable in the
                 community and what types of households will likely experience overcrowding
                 and overpayment.
                 The federal Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) conducts
                 annual household income surveys for metropolitan areas across the country,
                 including Los Angeles County. These surveys are adjusted for differences in the
                 type and size of families. HUD and HCD use these income levels to determine
                 the maximum amount that a household could pay for housing and their
                 eligibility for housing assistance. The 2013 AMI for a four-person household in
                 Los Angeles County was $64,800.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                         9-27

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                               Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 Table HE-25 provides the annual income for extremely low, very low, low, and
                 moderate income households by the maximum affordable housing payment
                 based on the state and federal standards of 30 percent of gross household
                 income, except for moderate-income ownership housing, which is based on 35
                 percent of gross income. Standard housing costs for utilities, taxes, and property
                 insurance are also provided.
                 Extremely Low Income Households
                 Extremely low income households earn between 0 and 30 percent of the AMI.
                 Given the high rental and home prices in the community, housing options for
                 extremely low income households are very limited.
                 Very Low Income Households
                 Earning between 31 and 50 percent of the AMI, these very low income
                 households are also unable to afford rental prices in La Cañada Flintridge.
                 Apartment prices are beyond their reach, especially apartments that are the
                 suitable size. Home prices are completely out of the reach of very low income
                 households in La Cañada Flintridge.
                 Low Income Households
                 Low-income households can afford to rent the smaller apartments in La Cañada
                 Flintridge; however this could lead to overcrowding as larger households cannot
                 afford adequately sized housing. Homeownership is beyond the reach of low
                 income households in La Cañada Flintridge.
                 Moderate Income Households
                 Moderate-income households cannot afford to purchase homes or
                 condominiums without assistance. However, the home prices in La Cañada
                 Flintridge have essentially precluded most homebuyers from participating in
                 homebuyer assistance programs offered by the county, state, or federal
                 governments.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                       9-28

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                       Chapter 9. Housing Element
Table HE-25. Housing Affordability by Income Group
                                                                   Estimated
                                                               Utility Allowance,
                                        Affordable Costs            Taxes &
                                           (All Costs)             Insurance
   Household         Annual          Rental      Ownership                         Affordable       Affordable
   (Persons)         Income          Costs         Costs       Renters     Owners     Rent          Home Price
Extremely Low Income (0–30% AMI)
        1           $17,950           $449          $449         $76        $172      $373             $64,468
        2           $20,500           $513          $513         $88        $199      $425             $73,079
        3           $23,050           $576          $576        $106        $232      $470             $80,061
        4           $25,600           $640          $640        $127        $270      $513             $86,112
        5           $27,650           $691          $691        $146        $303      $545             $90,301
Very Low Income (31–50% AMI)
        1           $29,900           $748          $748         $76        $232      $672            $120,091
        2           $34,200           $855          $855         $88        $267      $767            $136,848
        3           $38,450           $961          $961        $106        $309      $855            $151,743
        4           $42,700          $1,068        $1,068       $127        $356      $941            $165,707
        5           $46,150          $1,154        $1,154       $146        $396     $1,008           $176,413
Low Income (51–80% AMI)
        1           $47,850          $1,196        $1,196        $76        $321     $1,120           $203,643
        2           $54,650          $1,366        $1,366        $88        $369     $1,278           $232,037
        3           $61,500          $1,538        $1,538       $106        $425     $1,432           $259,034
        4           $68,300          $1,708        $1,708       $127        $484     $1,581           $284,867
        5           $73,800          $1,845        $1,845       $146        $534     $1,699           $305,115
Moderate Income (81–120% AMI)
        1           $54,450          $1,361        $1,588        $76        $400     $1,285           $276,605
        2           $62,200          $1,555        $1,814        $88        $459     $1,467           $315,433
        3           $70,000          $1,750        $2,042       $106        $525     $1,644           $352,903
        4           $77,750          $1,944        $2,268       $127        $596     $1,817           $389,171
        5           $83,950          $2,099        $2,449       $146        $655     $1,953           $417,487
Assumptions: 2013 HCD income limits; 30 percent of gross income as affordable housing cost, except 35 percent of
gross income for moderate-income ownership cost; 20 percent of monthly affordable cost for taxes and insurance in
determining ownership housing affordable price; 10 percent downpayment and 4.0 percent interest rate for 30-year
fixed-rate mortgage loan; utilities based on Los Angeles County Utility Allowance.
Sources:
1. State Department of Housing and Community Development 2013 Income Limits.
2. Veronica Tam and Associates, 2013.
9.2.7.4          Affordable Housing
                 No publicly assisted affordable housing project is located in La Cañada
                 Flintridge.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                                  9-29

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                  Chapter 9. Housing Element
9.3              Housing Constraints
                 A variety of factors can constrain the development, maintenance, and
                 improvement of housing. The following section explores various housing
                 constraints in La Cañada Flintridge, including market conditions, governmental
                 regulations, and environmental and infrastructure constraints.
9.3.1            Market Constraints
                 The price of land, construction costs, and market financing contribute to the cost
                 of housing and can potentially hinder the production of both market rate and
                 affordable housing units. These potential market constraints are driven by
                 market conditions over which the City has little control. Direct public subsidies
                 that lower the cost of housing development, such as land write-down or fee
                 waivers, are an effective way to lessen the impacts of market conditions. The
                 City can also participate in programs to enhance access to credit for mortgage
                 and home improvement financing for low- and moderate-income households.
9.3.1.1          Construction Costs
                 Depending on the type of development, construction costs can vary widely, with
                 multi-family housing generally less expensive to construct than single-family
                 homes. However, there is wide variation within each construction type,
                 depending on the size of the unit, amenities, and finishing details provided. An
                 important factor in the cost of a housing development is the type and number of
                 improvements that must be made to raw land in order to construct housing.
                 Construction costs for residential units in La Cañada Flintridge can rise above
                 regional averages due to the steeply sloping hillsides that characterize much of
                 the remaining vacant land in the community. These topographical features can
                 increase construction costs by as much as 15 to 25 percent over non-hillside
                 development areas, due to the following factors:
                         additional soils and geological engineering reports;
                         complex foundations, which include exotic caisson and grade beam
                          foundation designs or foundations that incorporate massive retaining
                          walls;
                         intensified percolation difficulties leading to more costly onsite septic
                          systems; and
                         increased grading required to create adequate building pads.
                 Areas designated for multi-family developments are located off Foothill
                 Boulevard in non-hillside locations and are therefore not subject to these
                 additional costs and factors.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                          9-30

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                  Chapter 9. Housing Element
9.3.1.2          Land Costs
                 Critical determinants in the price of raw land include location, size of parcel,
                 zoning, and supply. La Cañada Flintridge’s regional location, attractive
                 neighborhoods, and high caliber school district are qualities that make the
                 community highly desirable for potential homebuyers. This demand, coupled
                 with the built-out status of the community and steep topography of many
                 residential areas, keep land costs high regardless of local controls. According to
                 current listings of vacant land on Realtor.com, the average price per square foot
                 of vacant single-family residential land is approximately $20 for large sites. In
                 November 2013, there were a total of six vacant single-family parcels for sale,
                 ranging from $1,000,000 for approximately one acre to $1,500,000 for a 2.25-acre
                 lot. No vacant multi-family parcels were listed for sale.
9.3.1.3          Financing Costs
                 The availability and cost of mortgage financing directly impact the affordability
                 of housing. Increases in mortgage interest rates can significantly impede housing
                 opportunities, especially for first-time homebuyers, while reductions in interest
                 rates can introduce more potential buyers into the housing market. Over the
                 past 20 years, interest rates have fluctuated significantly, reaching peak levels of
                 over 12 percent in the late 1980s. Since that period, interest rates have fallen
                 dramatically, with mortgage rates for 30-year fixed rate loans ranging from 4 to
                 4.5 percent in November 2013.
                 For the most part, economic conditions and national policies influence mortgage
                 rates, and there is little that local governments can do to affect these rates.
                 However, public and private entities can offer interest rate write-downs to
                 expand home purchase opportunities to lower income households, and
                 government-insured loan programs may be available to reduce mortgage down
                 payment requirements.
                 Under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), lending institutions must
                 disclose information on the disposition of loan applications by the income,
                 gender, and race of the applicants. This applies to all home loan applications,
                 including those financed at market rate or through government assistance. The
                 following discussions present the lending patterns in four major census tracts in
                 the City:
                         4605.01: Northeastern portion of the City above Foothill Boulevard
                         4605.02: Downtown/Foothill Corridor
                         4606: Northwestern portion of the City above Foothill Boulevard
                         4607: Southern portion of the City below Foothill Boulevard
General Plan—February 2014                                                                          9-31

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                                    Chapter 9. Housing Element
                   Home Purchase Loans
                   There was a total of 281 conventional loan applications in the four tracts in 2012.
                   Of those applications, 71.5-percent received approval (Table HE-26), though only
                   66.5 percent were originated, that is, 5 percent were not accepted by the
                   applicant. The number of loan applications was evenly distributed among the
                   four census tracts; however, Tract 4605.02 had smallest number of applications
                   but the highest approval rate at 85.5 percent and the lowest denial rate at 7.3
                   percent. Tract 4607 had the highest rate of loans being closed or withdrawn at
                   18.4 percent, while Tract 4606 had the highest denial rate at 18 percent. Overall,
                   conventional financing for home purchase was generally available throughout
                   the City. There were only four applications for government-backed loans in the
                   four tracts during 2012, primarily due to the City’s high home prices. Three of
                   the loans were approved but not accepted; one originated.
Table HE-26. Disposition of Conventional Home Purchase Loans—2012
                                              Loans                 Approved                               Withdrawn or
                       Total                Originated            not Accepted              Denied           Incomplete
Tract             Applications             #         %           #          %            #       %         #        %
4605.01                 89                63        70.8         6          6.7          9      10.1      11       12.4
4605.02                  55               47        85.5         1          1.8          4      7.3        3       5.5
4606                     61               40        65.6         2          3.3         11      18.0       8       13.1
4607                     76               51        67.1         5          6.6          6       7.9      14       18.4
Total                   281               201       71.5        14          5.0         30      10.7      36       12.8
Note: An originated loan is one that is approved by the lender and accepted by the applicant.
Source: LendingPatterns.comTM, HMDA 2012, Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale, CA
                   Refinance Loans
                   People tend to refinance their mortgages to get better loan terms, such as interest
                   rates and repayment periods, and to increase their cash flow with lower
                   payments. In La Cañada Flintridge, there was a total of 1,917 refinance loan
                   applications in the four tracts, nearly seven times the number of conventional
                   purchase applications in 2013 (Table HE-27). Home prices in La Cañada
                   Flintridge have consistently been among the highest in the County. With such
                   high home prices, it would be difficult to buy into the community. Many
                   homebuyers utilized adjustable rate mortgage (ARM) loans, particularly during
                   the early part of the last decade. Many of these loans had 5-year introductory
                   fixed rates that adjusted upward in 2006 and the following years. By 2012,
                   however, mortgage interest rates had dropped to historically low levels in
                   response to the recession, reaching less than 4 percent during 2012 and 2013. Yet
                   few homes were on the market. This would explain the high number of refinance
General Plan—February 2014                                                                                            9-32

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                                   Chapter 9. Housing Element
                   applications, as many homeowners were trying to obtain better rates and loan
                   terms in general, though few could find homes to purchase.
                   Refinance applications had a 70.6 percent approval rate, and 3.4 percent of the
                   applications were not accepted by the applicants. Another 13.5 percent of the
                   applications were denied, and 12.5 percent were closed for incompleteness.
                   Tract 4605.01 had the highest number of loan applications and also the highest
                   denial rate of 14.3 percent. The highest origination rate was in Tract 4605.02.
Table HE-27. Disposition of Refinance Loans—2012
                                             Loans                Approved                                Withdrawn or
                      Total                Originated            not Accepted             Denied            Incomplete
Tract            Applications             #         %           #         %             #      %          #         %
4605.01                554               384       69.3        18         3.2          79     14.3       73        13.2
4605.02                418               308       73.7        12         2.9          53     12.7       45        10.8
4606                   443               304       68.6        21         4.7          59     13.3       59        13.3
4607                   502               357       71.1        15         3.0          68     13.5       62        12.4
Total                 1,917             1,353      70.6        66         3.4         259     13.5      239        12.5
Note: An originated loan is one that is approved by the lender and accepted by the applicant.
Source: LendingPatterns.comTM, HMDA 2012, Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale, CA
                   Home Improvement Loans
                   Homes in La Cañada Flintridge are generally in excellent condition, and most
                   homeowners have sufficient incomes to afford improvements without using
                   financing. A total of 49 home improvement loan applications were filed in 2013
                   in the four tracts, with a 73.5 percent approval rate (Table HE-28). Only 2 percent
                   of the applications were approved but not accepted by the applicants, and the
                   denial rate was 18.4 percent. Tract 4607 had more applications than the other
                   tracts and also had the highest origination rate.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                                           9-33

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                                   Chapter 9. Housing Element
Table HE-28. Disposition of Home Improvement Loans—2012
                                              Loans               Approved                                Withdrawn or
                      Total                 Originated           not Accepted             Denied           Incomplete
Tract             Applications             #       %           #          %             #      %         #        %
4605.01                 14                 9      64.3         0          0.0           4     28.6       1        7.1
4605.02                  9                 6      66.7         0          0.0           2     22.2       1       11.1
4606                     7                 5      71.4         1         14.3           0     0.0        1       14.3
4607                    19                16      84.2         0          0.0           3     15.8       0        0.0
Total                   49                36      73.5         1          2.0           9     18.4       3        6.1
Note: An originated loan is one that is approved by the lender and accepted by the applicant.
Source: LendingPatterns.comTM, HMDA 2012, Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale, CA
                   Foreclosures
                   Los Angeles County, and the southern California region in particular,
                   experienced soaring home prices coupled with low interest rates from 2000 to
                   2005. The new financing (adjustable rate mortgages) as well as predatory
                   lending practices (aggressive marketing, hidden fees, and negative amortization)
                   allowed people to purchase homes beyond their means. However, changes in
                   the state and national economy led to rising interest rates in 2006, and
                   nationwide home prices declined. As the interest rates increased and home
                   prices decreased, many households that were trapped in adjustable rate
                   mortgages were unable to refinance their loans with fixed rates. Foreclosure
                   rates reached national highs, and many California cities were affected. As of
                   August 2007, the Los Angeles/Long Beach metro area ranked 29th on a list of
                   highest foreclosure rates nationally.1 Beginning in 2010, the number of
                   foreclosures began to fall. During the third quarter of 2013, the number of
                   Notices of Default in the metro area dropped 56 percent from the total one year
                   earlier. Statewide, the second and third quarters of 2013 had the lowest numbers
                   of Notices of Default since the first quarter of 2006.2
                   As of November 5, 2013, there were 27 foreclosure properties listed for sale in La
                   Cañada Flintridge. These homes had a significant price range, reaching as high
                   as $3 million and as low as $327,000. The wide price range of foreclosure
                   properties shows that above moderate income households have also been
                   affected by the problems in the mortgage industry.
1 http://money.cnn.com/2007/08/14/real_estate/California_cities_lead_foreclosure/
index.htm?postversion=2007081411
2 www.dqnews.com (October 22, 2013)
General Plan—February 2014                                                                                           9-34

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                      Chapter 9. Housing Element
9.3.2            Government Constraints
                 In addition to market factors, local policies and regulations can impede the
                 availability and affordability of housing. Land use controls, building codes, site
                 improvements, fees, and other local programs may constrain the development
                 and improvement of housing.
9.3.2.1          Land Use Controls
                 The physical makeup of La Cañada Flintridge, including the character of its
                 housing, was established years before incorporation. Water supplies were
                 limited, and the first developers created an up-scale living environment using
                 large lot subdivisions. The General Plan and Zoning Code are tools that the City
                 uses to recognize these influences.
                 The City’s Land Use Element identifies 3,410 acres of land designated for
                 residential uses (71% of the entire City), as well as an additional 119 acres (2.5%)
                 for mixed use commercial-residential development. Single-family residential
                 densities range from one unit per 10 acres in the Hillside Residential areas to 8.7
                 units per acre in the Medium Density Residential Zone. Multi-family residential
                 density is established at 30 units per acre in the High Density Residential district
                 and Mixed Use districts. The City’s residential land use designations and
                 corresponding zoning districts are presented in Table HE-29.
Table HE-29. Residential Land Use Designations
Residential Land      Corresponding          Maximum
Use Category          Zoning District        Density         Description
Single-Family Residential
   Hillside           R-1-10 acre            1 du/10 acre    Extremely low density development in steeply
   Residential                                               sloping hillside areas in the northern portion of the
                                                             City. The minimum lot size is 10 acres.
   Estate             R-1-40,000             1 du/acre       Extremely low density development for single-
   Residential                                               family homes with a minimum lot size of
                                                             40,000 SF.
   Very Low           R-1-20,000 and R-1-    2 du/acre       Very low density development for single-family
   Density            30,000                                 homes with a minimum lot size of 20,000 SF or
                                                             30,000 SF.
   Low Density        R-1-10,000 and R-1-    4 du/acre       Low density residential development for single-
   Residential        15,000                                 family homes with a minimum lot size of
                                                             10,000 SF or 7,500 SF
   Medium             R-1-5,000 and R-1-     8.7 du/acre     Medium density single-family residential
   Density            7,500                                  development with a minimum lot size of 5,000 SF.
   Residential
Multi-Family
   High Density       R-3                    30 du/acre      High density multi-family housing, including
   Residential                                               duplex, triplex, apartments, condominiums, and
                                                             group homes.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                                 9-35

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                              Chapter 9. Housing Element
Residential Land       Corresponding             Maximum
Use Category           Zoning District           Density             Description
Mixed Use
   Mixed Use           MU                        30 du/acre          Provides for a mix of residential and non-
                       (Created on February                          residential uses within a single development. The
                       10, 2014, prior to                            uses can be vertically and horizontally mixed.
                       adoption of 2013-2021
                       Housing Element)
   Downtown            Mixed Use 1 (upper        15 du/ac            Includes two mixed use districts that allow various
   Village Specific    level residential w/                          combinations of retail, office, and multi-family
   Plan                CUP)                                          residential and senior housing. Detached single-
                       Mixed Use 2 (MF                               family and multi-family residential developments
                       residential w/ CUP)                           are also permitted.
                       Residential (SF and MF
                       15 du/acre)
Source: 2013 Land Use Element, Downtown Village Specific Plan and Zoning Ordinance.
9.3.2.2           Residential Development Standards
                  The City’s Zoning Code addresses a variety of housing issues in the community
                  including:
                           providing site-specific development standards for the appropriate
                            development of single-family homes;
                           ensuring environmental neighborhood compatibility of hillside
                            development; and
                           providing flexible zoning standards that respond to unique site
                            conditions and project attributes.
                  The City’s Zoning Code provides for the following residential zones:
                         Single-Family:                       R-1 - 10 acres, R-1 – 40,000, R-1 – 30,000,
                                                              R-1 – 20,000, R-1 – 15,000, R-1 – 10,000,
                                                              R-1 – 7,500, R-1 -5,000
                         Multi-Family:                        R-3
                         Residential Planned                  RPD
                         Development:
                         Mixed Use:                           MU
                                                              (New zone was adopted on February 10,
                                                              2014 prior to adoption of 2013-2021 Housing
                                                              Element at the same City Council meeting.)
                         Downtown Village                     MU1, MU2, Residential
                         Specific Plan (DVSP):
General Plan—February 2014                                                                                        9-36

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 The development standards for these zones are summarized in Table HE-30.
                 La Cañada Flintridge’s development standards establish opportunities for a
                 diverse housing mix, while retaining the existing residential characteristics of the
                 community and protecting environmentally sensitive hillside areas. Higher
                 densities are not considered feasible in many areas of the City due to
                 environmental and infrastructure constraints. In order to accommodate
                 residential growth, the City allows for higher density in the mixed use and
                 Specific Plan areas.
                 The City adopted the Downtown Village Specific Plan (DVSP) in November of
                 2000. The DVSP provides for integration of residential uses along Foothill
                 Boulevard at densities of up to 15 units per acre. The DVSP replaced the Foothill
                 Community District, Community Planned Development, and Public/Semi-
                 Public zones that previously existed for this area with Mixed Use 1, Mixed Use 2,
                 Residential, Institutional, and Park zones. Land use zones within the DVSP
                 include a combination of single-family detached, single-family attached, and
                 multi-family residential uses. The DVSP designates three Land Use Districts that
                 can accommodate residential development:
                         Mixed Use 1: Retail on the ground floor with office uses and residential
                          uses permitted on upper levels only (CUP required).
                         Mixed Use 2: Multi-family residential, office, and retail mix. Office use is
                          permitted on upper levels only, and multi-family use is permitted on
                          ground or upper levels (CUP required).
                         Residential: This area is exclusively designated for residential
                          development. Single-family homes, condominiums, townhomes, and
                          apartments are permitted.
                 The new Mixed Use land use designation created as part of the General Plan
                 update is intended to facilitate higher density residential development in the
                 City outside of the DVSP area. The City updated the Zoning Code to implement
                 the new General Plan, including developing appropriate development standards
                 to implement the Mixed Use zone. Specifically, the City held a meeting with
                 residents, community stakeholders, and developers on October 30, 2013 to help
                 establish appropriate development standards (including parking standards) to
                 facilitate mixed-use developments in the community, offering a variety of
                 housing options for all income segments of the community.
                 The Planning Commission held public hearings to review the proposed
                 development standards on November 26 and December 10, 2013. These
                 amendments to the Zoning Code were adopted on February 10, 2014, prior to
                 adoption of the 2013-2021 Housing Element at the same City Council meeting.
                 Development standards adopted for the new Mixed Use designation permit
                 densities of 30 units per acre for multi-family projects and 35 units per acre for
General Plan—February 2014                                                                         9-37

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                               Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 mixed-use buildings. The maximum floor-to-area ratio (FAR) for mixed-use
                 projects is 1.5. Maximum building floor area is 35,000 square feet, and the
                 maximum wall height is 28 feet. Parking standards for the residential units are
                 the same as the requirements adopted for the R-3 multi-family zone (discussed
                 later). Open space area for multi-family projects is a minimum of 300 square feet
                 per unit, and the minimum ground floor retail or service use area for mixed-use
                 projects is 800 square feet.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                       9-38

Table HE-30. Residential Development Standards
                                                                                                                                                                CPD
                                                                                                                                                      Community Planned
Standards                    R-1                             R-3/RPD                MU1, MU2, Residential                       MU                         Development
Floor       Lot size/Frontage                      Single-Family: Same as R-       Minimum lot size:              Minimum Lot Size:               Multi-Family:
Area/Lot    80 ft. of frontage or less – 4,500     1-5,000                         Single-Family: 5,000 sq. ft.   Single-Family: 5,000 sq. ft.    Minimum lot size: 2,500 sq.
Coverage    sq. ft. of underlying lot area         Multi-Family: 50%6                                                                             ft.
                                                                                   Multi-Family: One acre.        Multi-Family: One acre
            10,000 sq. ft. or less – 36% of lot                                    Average open space of 600      Lot Coverage:                   Maximum lot coverage: 50%
            area                                                                   sq. ft. per dwelling unit                                      of lot area
                                                                                                                  Single-Family: 50%
            10,0001 to 15,000 sq. ft. – 3,600
            sq. ft. + 23% of lot area                                                                             Mixed Use: 80%
            15,0001 sq. ft. or more – 4,750 sq.
            ft.+ 20% of lot area over 15,000
            sq. ft.1
Setback     Flag lots minimum of 25 ft.            Single-Family: Same as R-1      Single-Family: same as R-1     Front: 0-5 ft.                  W. Gateway/Downtown (E. of
Required    For all other lots: front yard         Multi-Family: 25 ft. arterial   Multi-Family: No required                                      Commonwealth)
(front)     setback is based on the average        streets; 20 ft. local streets   front or yard setback,                                         15 ft. average
            depth of the front setback of the                                      although setbacks required                                     Old Town/Downtown (W. of
            two adjacent properties2                                               for a multi-family are subject                                 Commonwealth)
                                                                                   to CUP review.
                                                                                                                                                  5 ft. average
                                                                                   Mixed Use: Contiguous with
                                                                                   front property line, or up to                                  For each additional 2 ft. of
                                                                                   10 ft.                                                         building height exceeding 15
                                                                                                                                                  ft., 1 additional foot of
                                                                                                                                                  setback is to be provided.
Side Yard4  Two side yards on both sides of        Single-Family: Same as R-1      Single-Family: Same as R-1     Side: 0 ft., 15 ft. if adjacent Interior Setbacks: Adjacent to
            the lot equal to 10% of the average    Multi-Family: 10 ft.; 20 ft. if Multi-Family: No required      to residential zone             commercial; 5 ft. min. at rear;
            lot width of the subject lot for first residential windows face        front or yard setbacks,                                        no min. at side.
            floor and 20% of lot width for         side.                           although setbacks required                                     Adjacent to commercial: 5 ft.
            second floor3                                                          for a multi-family are subject                                 min. at rear; no min. at side.
                                                                                   to CUP review.                                                 Adjacent to residential:
                                                                                                                                                  setbacks per R-1 standard.
Corner      20% of the average of the subject      Single-Family: Same as R-1                     –-                                                              –
(Street)    lot; but no less than 10 ft. No        Multi-Family: 15 ft. arterial
Side Yards  more than 20 ft. is required.          street; 10 ft. local street5
General Plan— February 2014                                                                                                                                                   9-39

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                                                                                          Chapter 9. Housing Element
                                                                                                                                                                    CPD
                                                                                                                                                          Community Planned
Standards                       R-1                            R-3/RPD                MU1, MU2, Residential                        MU                          Development
Rear Yard     15 ft.                                 Single-Family: Same as R-1      Single-Family: Same as R-1       Rear: 5 ft., 15 ft. if adjacent  Rear setbacks: Adjacent to
                                                     Multi-Family: 25 ft.            Multi-Family: 15 ft.             to residential zone              commercial: 5 ft. min. at rear;
                                                     principle buildings; 20 ft.                                                                       no min. at side.
                                                     accessory buildings                                                                               Adjacent to residential:
                                                                                                                                                       setbacks per R-1 standard.
Height        28 ft. - lots < 10,000 sq. ft., all    Single-Family: Same as R-       Single-Family: Same as R-1       35 ft.                           35 ft.7
Limit         hillside lots, or lots of less than 65 1-5,000                         5,000
              ft. of frontage                        Multi-Family: 35 ft.,           Multi-Family: two stories, or
              32 ft. - lots> 10,000 sq. ft.          accessory structures 15 ft.     32 ft.
                                                                                     Mixed Use:
                                                                                     Fronting Foothill Blvd:
                                                                                     - buildings less than 35,000
                                                                                     sq. ft. floor area: 24 ft.
                                                                                     -buildings more than 35,000
                                                                                     sq. ft. floor area: 32 ft.
                                                                                     Not fronting Foothill Blvd:
                                                                                     32 ft.
Notes:
1. Exceptions allowed through Floor Area Review.
2. A vacant lot or a flag strip shall be omitted from calculation of average setbacks, with the nearest adjacent non-vacant or non-flag lot beyond to be used for averaging
    purposes instead. In no case shall the required setback be less than 25 ft.
3. Minimum side yard is 5 ft., maximum 20 ft.
4. Side yards-second floors –Any exterior wall located above the first floor of the immediately abutting second floor shall be set back an additional 10% of the average lot width.
    Not more than 20 ft. shall be required.
5. Reverse corner side: 20 ft.
6. Single-family units are subject to the same development standards as R-1.
7. Exception: Architectural extensions of up to 50 ft. in height are allowed for an area of up to 10% of a building’s floor area, provided that the horizontal dimensions of each
    individual extension does not exceed 20% of the corresponding building dimensions.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                                                                                                        9-40

               Hillside Development
               The City recognizes that the community’s hillside areas provide an important
               aesthetic, environmental, and recreational resource to the community. To
               preserve habitat areas and natural characteristics of the City’s hillside areas,
               additional development standards are imposed on hillside properties based on
               topographic and viewscape concerns. Depending on the location and slope of
               the lot, the General Plan and the Zoning Code establish standards to provide
               limitations on residential densities and the maximum size of dwelling units.
               Cost of hillside development is high due to the geological and construction
               constraints. Therefore, for costs, as well as safety issues, the City permits only
               low-intensity developments in the hillside areas.
               Mansionization
               “Mansionization” refers to an expansion or replacement of an existing house
               with a much larger house that is out of scale with its site and the surrounding
               homes. The overall community qualities in La Cañada Flintridge are
               characterized by low density, 1,200- to 2,500-square-foot homes primarily built
               before 1960. The construction of new homes or the remodeling of existing homes
               to much larger homes on small lots may adversely affect the quality of present
               neighborhoods, as well as have a considerable impact on the long-term
               affordability of the City’s housing stock. By providing standards for controlling
               setbacks, building height and bulk, and lot coverage for single-family homes, the
               City’s Zoning Code reduces the visual impacts of mansionization and controls
               housing costs in the City. Multi-family development is similarly regulated with
               respect to building size and lot coverage.
               Parking Requirements
               As shown in Table HE-31, the City’s Zoning Code contains provisions for
               parking based on unit type, and on a per-bedroom basis for multi-family units.
               As part of the Zoning Code update to implement the General Plan, the City
               adopted new parking standards to implement the Mixed Use and R-3 land use
               designations prior to adoption of the 2013-2021 Housing Element. The new
               standards represent reduced number of required spaces for units with three or
               more bedrooms, adding only 0.25 space rather than a full space for each bedroom
               beyond two, and reducing the minimum number of covered spaces from two to
               one. Only a single parking space is required for a unit with less than two
               bedrooms. The requirement for guest parking spaces is also reduced to 0.25 per
               unit. Reduced parking is allowed for affordable housing, senior housing, or by
               provision of a parking study that justifies a reduced rate. Affordable housing
               meeting the state density bonus law may use the parking standards established
               by the State. The Planning Commission held public hearings on November 26
               and December 10, 2013. The City Council adopted the new parking standards on
               February 10, 2014, prior to adopting the 2013-2021 Housing Element at the same
               Council meeting.
General Plan— February 2014                                                                     9-41

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                             Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 Table HE-31. Parking Requirements
                  Unit Type                            Parking Requirement
                  Single-Family                        2 spaces in a fully enclosed garage space
                  Multi-Family, R-3, and RPD           1 space per bedroom for units with up to two bedrooms; each
                                                       additional bedroom beyond two bedrooms adds 0.25 parking
                                                       space. One guest parking space per four units. Minimum
                                                       one covered space per unit.
                  State Density Bonus Parking          Zero to one bedrooms: 1 parking space
                  Standards                            Two to three bedrooms: 2 parking spaces
                                                       Four and more bedrooms: 2.5 parking spaces
                  Source: La Cañada Flintridge Zoning Code, Downtown Village Specific Plan.
                 Minimum Unit Size
                 The current regulations require a minimum unit size of 1,800 square feet for a
                 unit with two or fewer bedrooms and 2,200 square feet for a unit with three or
                 more bedrooms. Any unit with five bedrooms or more must have at least 200
                 square feet per additional bedroom (five and above) included in the unit, above
                 the minimum size of 2,200 square feet. These minimum unit sizes constrain
                 multi-family housing developments, particularly housing for seniors. As part of
                 the Zoning Code update to implement the General Plan, the City proposed to
                 eliminate the minimum size limit. The Planning Commission held public
                 hearings to review the proposed development standards on November 26 and
                 December 10, 2013. On February 10, 2014, the City Council adopted the
                 proposed development standards prior to adoption of the 2013-2021 Housing
                 Element at the same City Council meeting.
9.3.2.3          Provision for a Variety of Housing Types
                 State housing law specifies that jurisdictions must identify adequate sites to be
                 made available through appropriate zoning and development standards to
                 encourage the development of various types of housing for all segments of the
                 population, including multi-family rental housing, factory built housing, mobile
                 homes, emergency shelters, and transitional housing. Table HE-32 summarizes
                 the housing types permitted in each of the residential zoning districts.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                                      9-42

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                              Chapter 9. Housing Element
Table HE-32. Housing Types by Zoning District
                                                                                          DVSP
                                                                  Mixed       Mixed
Housing Types Permitted          R-1       R-3   RPD     CPD       Use 1      Use 2       Residential   Institutional
Detached Single-Family             P        P      P        –        –           –            P               –
Attached Single-Family             –        P      P        –        –          C             P               –
                                                                      1
Multi-Family                       –        P      P       C        C           C             P               –
                                                                      1
Condominiums                       –        P      P       C        C           C             P               –
Accessory Living Quarters2         P        P      P        –        –           –             –              –
Manufactured Homes                 P        P      P        –        –           –            P               –
Group Homes (6 or fewer)           P        P      P       C         –           –            P               C
Group Homes (7 or more)            –        C     C        C         –           –             –              C
Notes:
1
  Upper floor only
2
  Also known as Second Dwelling Units
P= Permitted by right, C=Conditionally Permitted
La Cañada Flintridge Zoning Code, Downtown Village Specific Plan, Land Use Plan Update, 2013.
                   Single-Family Housing
                   Single-family detached housing is permitted in all residential zones except for
                   the zones designated for higher densities. Attached single-family housing is also
                   permitted in the Residential and conditionally permitted in the Mixed Use 2
                   districts of the DVSP.
                   Multi-Family Housing
                   The City’s Zoning Code and General Plan identify several areas in the
                   community for multi-family residential uses. These areas include: multi-family
                   developments up to 30 dwelling units per acre in the R-3 zone, up to 15 dwelling
                   units per acre in the CPD zone, and multi-family development up to 12 dwelling
                   units per acre in the Residential Planned Development (RPD) zone. Multi-family
                   and mixed use housing development is permitted up to 15 dwelling units per
                   acre in the DVSP. The City is considering amending the DVSP to increase the
                   density to up to 30 units per acre, consistent with multi-family zoning citywide.
                   Multi-family housing up to 30 units per acre is permitted in the Mixed Use land
                   use designation.
                   Condominiums
                   In order to preserve the existing multi-family rental housing in the community,
                   the City has adopted a condominium conversion ordinance that includes tenant
General Plan—February 2014                                                                                        9-43

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 provisions and a number of standards and criteria. Before a multi-family rental
                 property is converted to condominium ownership, the applicants must provide
                 an information report on the rental and vacancy rate of the property and provide
                 an analysis of the effect of the proposed conversion of the property on the City’s
                 low- and moderate-income housing supply. The applicant must also follow
                 stringent development standards and an extensive review process by the City.
                 These changes are intended to preserve the City’s limited apartment stock for
                 rental use.
                 Second Units/Accessory Living Quarters (ALQs)
                 “Accessory living quarter” (ALQ) means an attached or detached residential unit
                 that provides complete independent living facilities characterized by physical
                 features providing privacy for the occupants separate from the primary dwelling
                 unit, including a separate exterior entrance. ALQs are permitted on each lot in
                 any R-1 zone, Foothill Community District (FCD), overlay zone, R-3 zone, or
                 RPD-zoned lots that are greater than 10,000 square feet. One ALQ is allowed on
                 each lot in these districts where existing units are developed, provided that the
                 lot width is at least 70 feet and the following conditions are met:
               Underlying Zone                Minimum Lot Area           Type of Unit Permitted
               R-1, FCD, R-3, or RPD          Less than                  Not permitted
                                              10,000 square feet
               R-1                            10,000-19,999 square feet  Attached only
               R-1                            20,000 or more square      Attached or detached
                                              feet
               FCD, R-3, or RPD               10,000 or more square      Attached only
                                              feet
                 The maximum unit size varies according to the size of the lot, but ranges from
                 640 square feet for lots between 10,000 and 14,999 square feet. For lots 40,000
                 square feet or greater, the maximum unit size is 1,000 square feet. One parking
                 space is required. Since January 1, 2006, about ten ALQs have been approved in
                 the City.
                 Manufactured Homes
                 The City’s Zoning Code defines a “manufactured home” as a structure,
                 transportable in one or more sections, that is built on a permanent chassis and is
                 designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the
                 required utilities. This definition does not include a recreational vehicle.
                 Manufactured homes that are installed on a foundation are permitted on a
                 single-family lot. Manufactured housing that is not constructed with a
                 foundation is generally found in mobile home parks. This type of housing is
                 subject to the same development standards and design review criteria as “stick–
                 built” housing.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                          9-44

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 Group Care Facilities
                 Group care facilities, including group homes for seniors, developmentally
                 disabled adults, and foster family care homes serving six or fewer persons are
                 permitted in all residential zones (R-1, R-3, RPD, DVSP Residential) and are
                 conditionally permitted in the CPD zone and the DVSP Institutional zone.
                 Group care facilities of seven or more individuals are conditionally permitted in
                 the R-3, RPD, and DVSP Institutional zones.
                 Emergency Shelters
                 Pursuant to the recently passed state law (SB 2), local jurisdictions must address
                 the shelter needs of the homeless. Specifically, emergency shelters must be
                 permitted by right in at least one zone with adequate capacity to accommodate at
                 least one shelter.
                 Few homeless individuals are identified in the community. According to the
                 homeless survey conducted by LAHSA commissioned by the San Gabriel Valley
                 Council of Governments (SGVCOG), one homeless person was located in La
                 Cañada Flintridge. The neighboring cities of Glendale and Pasadena provide a
                 wide variety of homeless services and facilities.
                 Jurisdictions are bound by state law to allow emergency shelters in at least one
                 zone. The identified zone must have adequate capacity to accommodate at least
                 one shelter. The 2008-2014 Housing Element included a program to amend the
                 Zoning Code to permit emergency shelters in the CPD zone. The increased
                 intensities permitted by the General Plan update in the CPD zone led to the
                 reclassification of many parcels in this zone as underutilized. Most existing
                 buildings in the CPD zone are lower scale and are occupied by retail sales and
                 professional office uses. The CPD zone contains 74 parcels, ranging from very
                 small in size to over an acre, totaling 30 acres. All of the CPD properties are
                 located along Foothill Boulevard and Verdugo Boulevard, the City’s two main
                 transportation lines with easy access to the service hubs in nearby communities.
                 Some samplings of the sites can be seen in Figure 3. Given the high property
                 values in the City, new construction of emergency shelters is unlikely due to
                 financial feasibility. However, adaptive reuse of existing properties in the CPD
                 zone can be an appropriate option for accommodating emergency shelters. A
                 sample list of 18 parcels is provided in the appendix to illustrate the existing uses
                 on some of the CPD properties. These properties are typically occupied by old
                 single-story buildings that can include a second story expansion or accommodate
                 additional buildings on site. Some properties have large parking space or have
                 vacated tenants.
                 The Zoning Code was amended prior to adoption of the 2013-2021 Housing
                 Element to develop objective standards for emergency shelters to regulate the
                 following, as permitted under SB 2, including:
General Plan—February 2014                                                                          9-45

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                            Chapter 9. Housing Element
                         maximum number of beds—shall have no more than thirty beds;
                         parking based on demonstrated need but that does not exceed parking
                          requirements for other uses in the same zone—one space for every four
                          beds plus one space for each staff member; for shelters with designated
                          family units, one half space shall be provided per bedroom designated as
                          a family unit;3
                         size/location of exterior and interior onsite waiting and client intake
                          areas—shall provide an enclosed or screened waiting area, physically
                          separated from the public right-of-way, of at least ten square feet to
                          accommodate clients and to prevent queuing in the public right-of-way;
                         provision of onsite management—shall have an on-site supervisor during
                          all hours when the shelter is open;
                         proximity of other emergency shelters—shall be at least 300 feet from
                          another emergency shelter;
                         length of stay—maximum term of stay shall be 30 days within any
                          consecutive twelve-month period;
                         lighting—exterior lighting shall be provided on pedestrian pathways and
                          parking lot areas on the property; and
                         security--shall have onsite security during all hours when the shelter is
                          open.
                 The Planning Commission held public hearings to review the proposed
                 amendments to the Zoning Code on November 26 and December 10, 2013. On
                 February 10, 2014 prior to adoption of the 2013-2021 Housing Element at the
                 same Council meeting, the City amended the Zoning Code to permit emergency
                 shelters by right, as required by SB2.
3   This parking standard is less than that required for multi-family housing in the same zone.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                                     9-46

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                          Chapter 9. Housing Element
                  Figure H-3. CPD Sites Located at West Foothill Boulevard,
                        Central Foothill Boulevard, and Verdugo Boulevard
General Plan—February 2014                                                                   9-47

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                  Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 Transitional Housing
                 Consistent with SB 2, local jurisdictions must also address the need for
                 transitional housing. California Government Code [Section 65582(h)] defines
                 “transitional housing” as buildings configured as rental housing developments,
                 but operated under program requirements that require the termination of
                 assistance and recirculating of the assisted unit to another eligible program
                 recipient at a predetermined future point in time that shall be no less than six
                 months from the beginning of the assistance.
                 The City amended the Zoning Code prior to adoption of the 2013-2021 Housing
                 Element to address the provision of transitional housing. The Planning
                 Commission held public hearings to review the proposed amendments on
                 November 26 and December 10, 2013. The City Council adopted the Zoning
                 Code amendments on February 10, 2014. Transitional housing is recognized as a
                 residential use and to be permitted in the same manner as other residential uses
                 in the same zone.
                 Supportive Housing
                 Supportive housing links the provision of housing and social services for the
                 homeless, people with disabilities, and a variety of other special needs
                 populations. California Government Code [Section 65582(f)] defines “supportive
                 housing” as housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the
                 target population, and that is linked to an onsite or offsite service that assists the
                 supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her
                 health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work
                 in the community. Government Code [Section 65582(g)] identifies “target
                 population” as persons with low incomes who have one or more disabilities,
                 including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic health
                 condition, or individuals eligible for services provided pursuant to the
                 Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act (Division 4.5 (commencing
                 with Section 4500) of the Welfare and Institutions Code) and may include, among
                 other populations, adults, emancipated minors, families with children, elderly
                 persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals exiting
                 from institutional settings, veterans, and homeless people.
                 The City amended the Zoning Code prior to adoption of the 2013-2021 Housing
                 Element to address the provision of supportive housing. The Planning
                 Commission held public hearings to review the proposed amendments on
                 November 26 and December 10, 2013. The City Council adopted the Zoning
                 Code amendments on February 10, 2014. Supportive housing is recognized as a
                 residential use and to be permitted in the same manner as other residential uses
                 in the same zone.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                           9-48

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                   Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 Single-Room Occupancy (SRO)
                 Single-Room Occupancy (SRO) units are one-room units intended for occupancy
                 by a single individual. They are distinct from a studio or efficiency unit, in that a
                 studio is a one-room unit that must contain a kitchen and bathroom. Although
                 SRO units are not necessarily required to have a kitchen or bathroom, many
                 modern SROs have one or the other.
                 As part of the Zoning Code update to implement the new General Plan, the City
                 included proposed standards to facilitate the provision of SROs. The Planning
                 Commission held public hearings to review the proposed amendments to the
                 Zoning Code on November 26 and December 10, 2013. On February 10, 2014, the
                 City Council adopted the proposed amendments. With the adopted
                 amendments, SROs are permitted with a Use Permit in the CPD zone, subject to
                 the following standards: Single-occupancy rooms shall have a floor area of
                 between 200 and 300 square feet; double-occupancy rooms shall be between 350
                 and 400 square feet, and rooms shall have a maximum occupancy of two people.
                 Each SRO unit shall have bathroom and kitchen facilities. Interior common area
                 will be provided, along with laundry facilities and a cleaning supply room. A
                 manager shall be available at all times. Units shall be rented month-to-month for
                 a period not to exceed six months.
9.3.2.4          Housing for Persons with Disabilities
                 Housing options for persons with disabilities are often limited. The Americans
                 with Disability Act (ADA) came into effect in 1990. Multi-family housing built
                 prior to 1990 does not typically include accessible units on the ground floor and
                 the ADA does not cover single-family homes. Rehabilitation to accommodate
                 the accessibility needs of disabled residents is needed, particularly to the older
                 single-family housing stock. Therefore, it is important that the City’s codes,
                 policies, and regulations are free of constraints to encourage rehabilitation of the
                 existing housing stock and to comply with ADA requirements.
                 Land Use Controls
                 The City’s Zoning Code complies with the Lanterman Disability Services Act
                 with regard to licensing for residential care facilities for the disabled. According
                 to the State Department of Social Services, there are five residential care homes
                 for the elderly, serving 30 residents, located in the City of La Cañada Flintridge.
                 The City amended the Zoning Code to address the provision of transitional
                 housing, supportive housing, and single-room occupancy housing. Specifically,
                 the Planning Commission held public hearings on November 26 and December
                 10, 2013 to review the proposed amendments. On February 10, 2014, the City
General Plan—February 2014                                                                            9-49

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                                Chapter 9. Housing Element
                   Council adopted the proposed amendments prior to adoption of the Housing
                   Element at the same meeting.
                   Definition of Family
                   Local governments may restrict access to housing for households failing to
                   qualify as a “family” by definition specified in the Zoning Code. Specifically, a
                   restrictive definition of “family” that limits the number of and differentiates
                   between related and unrelated individuals living together may illegally limit the
                   development and siting of group homes for persons with disabilities but not for
                   housing families that are similarly sized or situated.4 The City of La Cañada
                   Flintridge Zoning Code does not contain a definition of family.
                   Reasonable Accommodations Procedure
                   Both the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and
                   Housing Act direct local governments to make reasonable accommodations (i.e.,
                   modifications or exceptions) in their zoning laws and other land use regulations
                   when such accommodations may be necessary to afford disabled persons an
                   equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. For example, it may be a
                   reasonable accommodation to waive a setback requirement so that a paved path
                   of travel can be provided to residents who have mobility impairments. Another
                   example would be to waive the maximum lot coverage requirement to allow a
                   disabled person to create a bedroom on the ground floor.
                   The City amended the Zoning Code to include a formal procedure that utilizes
                   administrative procedures to provide for reasonable accommodation requests.
                   The amendment established a process for requesting reasonable accommodation
                   with the Planning Commission and the Director of Community Development as
                   the reviewing authorities, depending on the nature of the request. Written
                   decisions will include findings and shall be consistent with fair housing laws.
                   The Planning Commission held public hearings to review the proposed
                   amendments on November 26 and December 10, 2013. The City Council adopted
                   the proposed amendments on February 10, 2014, prior to adoption of the 2013-
                   2021 Housing Element.
4 California court cases (City of Santa Barbara v. Adamson, 1980 and City of Chula Vista v. Pagard, 1981, etc.) have ruled
an ordinance as invalid if it defines a “Family” as (a) an individual; (b) two or more persons related by blood,
marriage, or adoption; (c) a group of not more than a specific number of unrelated persons as a single housekeeping
unit. These cases have explained that defining a family in a manner that distinguishes between blood-related and
non-blood related individuals does not serve any legitimate or useful objective or purpose recognized under the
zoning and land use planning powers of a municipality, and therefore violates rights of privacy under the California
Constitution.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                                              9-50

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                             Chapter 9. Housing Element
9.3.2.5          Building Codes
                 State Health and Safety Code Section 17958 mandates that the California
                 Building Standards Commission adopt the California Building Standards Code
                 every 3 years. The 2010 edition of the California Code of Regulations Title 24
                 became effective on January 1, 2011. The City adopted the 2011 Los Angeles
                 County Building Codes by reference.
9.3.2.6          Off-Site Improvements
                 Requirements for on- and off-site improvements vary depending on the presence
                 of existing improvements, as well as the size and nature of the proposed
                 development. The Zoning Code holds any person constructing any building or
                 parking lot, or developing any area responsible to pay for a number of
                 improvements, including concrete curbs, gutters, asphalt concrete street
                 pavement, sidewalks, and streetlights.
                 Public street widths are specified in Table HE-33. The Circulation Element
                 establishes street standards for various types of streets. For a typical residential
                 street, the standards width is a 52-foot right-of-way (ROW). Private streets must
                 be wide enough to meet the standards established by the Los Angeles County
                 Fire Department for equipment needs. Additional information regarding street
                 widths and off-site improvements can be found in the Circulation Element.
                 Table HE-33. Off-site Improvements
                  Street Type              Right-of-Way (feet)        Curb to Curb (feet)
                  Primary                            100                       80
                  Major                               80                     Varies
                  Special Major                       66                     Varies
                  Collector                           88                       68
                  Residential Collector               60                       40
                  Local Residential                   52                       36
                  Source: City of La Cañada Flintridge Circulation Element, 2013
                 The City of La Cañada Flintridge’s fee structure includes some on- and off-site
                 improvements, which are described in the section below. Off-site improvement
                 fees include drainage and sewer facility fees, school fees, and public facility fees,
                 among others. While these fees add to the cost of housing development, these
                 fees are established to cover the costs of infrastructure, facilities, and
                 improvements necessary to serve the development.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                                      9-51

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                             Chapter 9. Housing Element
9.3.2.7          Fees and Permit Process
                 Planning and Development Fees
                 A limited set of fees and assessments are charged by the City to cover the costs of
                 processing permits and providing services. Table HE-34 summarizes the
                 planning fees charged by the City, which has chosen to maintain fees at the same
                 level since 2007. With half of the City on septic systems, the City does not charge
                 or collect fees for water and sewer connections. Where the City is “sewered” and
                 the purveyor charges connection fees, the City has a Sewer Connection Program
                 that uses community block grant (CDBG) funds to assist very low-, low- and
                 moderate-income households. The City collects the school fees on behalf of the
                 school district. However, those fees are established by the district under state
                 law, not the City.
                 Table HE-34. Planning Fees
                                                                            Environmental          Deposit for
                  Fee Type                      Fee         Notice Fee        Assessment            Engineer
                  General Plan
                                              $5,000           $450         EIR Cost + 20%            $1,500
                  Amendment
                  Change of Zone              $4,955           $450               $250                $1,500
                  CUP                         $4,515           $300               $250                $1,500
                  Variance                    $2,905           $150               $250                $1,500
                  Hillside Development
                  Permit (HDP) –               $465            $100               $100                  –
                  Directors Review
                  Admin Review HDP            $1,440           $150               $250                $1,500
                                                                                                      $1,000
                  Design Commission                                                                  (Design
                                               $500             $75               $100
                  Architectural Review                                                            Commission
                                                                                                    Deposit)
                  Sign                         $780              –                 –                    –
                  Tentative Parcel Map        $6,195           $150               $250                $1,500
                  Source: City of La Cañada Flintridge, Planning Department, 2013
                 The City does not impose any development impact fees, but collects school fees
                 for the District, which are mandated by State law. Overall, total planning and
                 development fees in the City represent a minute component (less than one
                 percent) of residential development costs in the City. Planning and development
                 fees do not constitute a constraint for the development of housing in the City.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                                      9-52

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 Local Processing and Permit Procedures
                 La Cañada Flintridge’s processing procedures for new housing developments
                 and the modification of existing residential projects include the following
                 permits and actions: tentative maps, administrative permits and appeals, site
                 plan reviews, variances, hillside development, and planned developments. The
                 City complies with requirements under the state’s Streamlining Review Act and
                 makes all attempts to expedite permit processing.
                 Conditional Use Permit (CUP)
                 Most housing types are permitted by right in the City, with the exception of a
                 few uses where the City must consider the location, access to services, and other
                 site planning factors, in which case a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) is required.
                 Currently, mixed use development and large group care facilities require
                 approval of a CUP.
                 A project requiring a CUP must file an application with the Community
                 Development Department. The application must include an initial study
                 questionnaire for environmental review, a map, a vicinity map, floor plans,
                 elevations, landscape plans, and a site plan. When a CUP application is filed, the
                 Planning Commission will hold a public hearing. The Planning Commission
                 must find the following to approve the CUP:
                         The proposed project will not be in substantial conflict with the General
                          Plan.
                         The requested use will not adversely affect health, peace, comfort, or
                          welfare of persons living or working in the surrounding area or be
                          detrimental to the use of or other persons in the vicinity or jeopardize or
                          otherwise be a menace to public, health, safety, or general welfare.
                         The proposed site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the
                          requirements of the project.
                         The proposed site is adequately served by highways, streets, and other
                          public or private facilities as required.
                         The proposed project preserves the existing scale and character of the
                          surrounding neighborhood and protects public views and aesthetic
                          values in the neighborhood.
                 These conditions are typical and do not constrain the development of housing.
                 Single-Family Development Review
                 The City employs three levels of development review, as follows:
General Plan—February 2014                                                                          9-53

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                      Chapter 9. Housing Element
                      1. Staff Level: Staff uses the Zoning Ordinance as an over-the-counter
                          format when determining zoning compliance during the building permit
                          process. This format does not require notification to neighbors and all
                          review is performed over the counter as part of the application for a
                          building permit.
                      2. Director’s Review: This level of review is required by the Zoning
                          Ordinance for certain projects and requires submittal of an application
                          and fee. Notification to the surrounding neighbors will also be required.
                          The Single-Family Residential Design Guidelines are used to assist in
                          evaluating the project in conjunction with the requirements and findings
                          of the special review; the Guidelines are not regulations. The processing
                          and assessment of a Director’s Review project can take one to four weeks.
                      3. Planning Commission Review: This level of review also requires
                          submittal of an application and fee associated with Modifications and
                          Special Reviews required by the Zoning Ordinance. However; the review
                          process is more involved and requires a public hearing notice
                          (notification through the newspaper and mailing) and a hearing before a
                          single member of the Planning Commission acting as a Hearing Officer or
                          the full five-member Planning Commission. The Commission will apply
                          the Single-Family Residential Guidelines for projects that are subject to
                          findings through Special Reviews. The members of the Planning
                          Commission are appointed by the City Council and meet as a group twice
                          a month.
                 Modifications and Special Reviews are triggered with setback modifications,
                 large garage review, floor area review, height modifications and second floor
                 reviews. The City Council has identified second floor additions and new two-
                 story homes as projects with the most impacts on the compatibility of La Cañada
                 Flintridge neighborhoods. Therefore, the tiered review process, from building
                 permits and Director’s Review to Planning Commission level reviews, was
                 created to capture all second floor projects. A project is approved if it is found to
                 be in compliance with the following finding:
                      The proposed project preserves the existing scale and character of the surrounding
                      neighborhood and protects public views and aesthetics and other property values in
                      such neighborhoods in a manner which is compatible with reasonable development of
                      the subject lot and is consistent with the Residential Design Guidelines as adopted by
                      Resolution of the City Council.
                 Multi-Family Development Review
                 In the past, all projects proposed for the R-3 zone, other than single-family
                 residences, were subject to approval of a planned development permit prior to
General Plan—February 2014                                                                               9-54

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                   Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 any construction. The following findings were required to be made by the
                 Planning Commission in order to grant a planned development permit:
                         That the proposed development complies with the General Plan and with
                          the intent of the development standards of the R-3 zone for protection of
                          neighborhood character and preservation of the general welfare of the
                          community;
                         That the site plans, architectural design and landscaping plans of the
                          project contribute to the R-3 zone goals of:
                             Compatibility with the density, character and design of any
                              surrounding neighborhoods, particularly where adjacent to single-
                              family residences;
                             Internal compatibility of the project’s architecture, landscaping, and
                              use of open space to achieve a high quality residential environment;
                              and
                             Sufficient open space provided for both private and common areas to
                              maintain a low density or semi-rural character for the project as a
                              whole;
                         That any departure from guidelines permitted by the Planning
                          Commission should be utilized to effectively achieve quality and
                          compatibility with the surrounding neighborhoods;
                         That the project will not create a nuisance, hazard or enforcement
                          problem within the neighborhood or the City or require the City to
                          provide an unusual or disproportionate level of public services; and
                         That any potential for the project to present visibly excessive bulk from
                          any nearby vantage point is mitigated by screening or siting
                          characteristics.
                 These findings were put in place many years ago and had not been updated.
                 However, virtually all of the City’s existing R-3 properties are built out with no
                 potential for redevelopment in the near future. Nevertheless, as part of the City’s
                 zoning revisions to implement the updated General Plan, the City amended the
                 Zoning Code to remove the requirement for a planned development permit for
                 multi-family development of two or more units in the R-3 zone. The Planning
                 Commission held public hearings to review the proposed amendments on
                 November 26 and December 10, 2013. On February 10, 2014, the City Council
                 adopted the proposed amendments prior to adoption of the 2013-2021 Housing
                 Element at the same meeting.
                 Design Review
                 A Design Review by the Design Commission is required for non-residential
                 development, residential planned development, mixed use development, and
General Plan—February 2014                                                                            9-55

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                  Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 multi-family development. In order for design review approval to be granted,
                 the following findings must be made:
                         The design and layout of the proposed development is consistent with
                          the General Plan and any design criteria adopted for specialized areas,
                          such as designated historic or other special districts, planned
                          developments, master plans, or specific plans, or adopted for the project
                          through conditions of approval or development agreements;
                         The design and layout of the proposed development will accommodate
                          the functions and activities that are proposed for the property, will not
                          unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of neighboring
                          property, and will not create traffic or pedestrian hazards;
                         The architectural design of the proposed development is compatible with
                          the character of the surrounding neighborhood and that all reasonable
                          design efforts have been made to maintain the harmonious, orderly, and
                          attractive development contemplated by this title and the General Plan;
                         The design of the proposed development will provide a desirable
                          environment for its occupants and visiting public as well as its neighbors
                          and that it is aesthetically of good composition, materials, texture, and
                          color that will remain aesthetically appealing with the level of
                          maintenance that might reasonably be expected.
                 The time frame for Design Review is generally two to eight weeks. Applicants
                 are encouraged to consult with planning staff as early as possible in the design
                 process. Review by the Design Commission involves the following:
                         Design Concept Review: Design concept review is the opportunity for
                          initial Design Commission response to the project. Topics of review
                          include building massing and siting, circulation, facade composition and
                          articulation, and open space design.
                         Final Design Review: Final design review includes review for compliance
                          with conditions set forth in design concept approval, as well as more
                          detailed concerns including materials, colors, lighting, detailing, and
                          landscape/hardscape specifications.
                 During Design Review, the Design Commission evaluates projects for
                 compliance with the Zoning Code and architectural compatibility with the
                 neighborhood. During the public hearing the City staff will present a report to
                 the Commissioners and make a recommendation and the Commissioners will
                 discuss the project with the applicant. The applicant is given the opportunity to
                 make a presentation to the Design Commission and community members are
                 invited to speak about the proposed project. Following the hearing, the project
                 will be approved, approved with conditions, denied or continued to a future date
                 for a redesign.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                           9-56

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 In cases for which Planning Commission action is required, Planning
                 Commission review and action shall precede final design commission review
                 and action. Design Commission review concurrent with planning commission
                 review shall be used for those cases in which the Director of Community
                 Development determines that design considerations are essential to project
                 analysis for the purpose of the Planning Commission action.
                 The City has established design guidelines for single-family residential uses,
                 which provides general guidelines, not regulations, on the architectural style,
                 streetscape, scale and mass, setbacks, site planning and environmental
                 considerations (e.g., shade and sun, imperious coverage, and sustainable
                 building materials), physical design (e.g., façade treatment, roof treatment,
                 lighting), and landscaping consideration.
                 The Downtown Village Specific Plan contains general design guidelines for
                 multi-family residential developments in the Specific Plan area to avoid a
                 massive appearance, give considerations to immediate edges, and unit sizes.
                 The City, along with establishing appropriate development standards to
                 implement the new Mixed Use and High Density Residential (30 units per acre)
                 designation, will develop appropriate design guidelines to assist developers in
                 project design and the review process.
                 Hillside Development
                 Hillside development standards and approval procedures apply to any lot or
                 parcel of land, residentially zoned and in residential use, which has an average
                 slope of 15 percent or greater. The project must go through an approval process
                 that varies based on the size of the unit of the addition. This process can include
                 a Director’s Review, Administrative Hearing, or Planning Commission Review
                 (Table HE-35). Given the safety concerns related to hillside development, this
                 permit procedure is considered reasonable. Furthermore, the City does not
                 anticipate any affordable housing construction would be feasible on a hillside
                 given the costs involved.
                 Hillside development must also abide by parcel standards and guidelines, based
                 on density and slope factors, grading guidelines, siting requirements,
                 architectural design guidelines, and landscape and lighting guidelines.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                          9-57

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                    Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 Table HE-35. Hillside Development Procedure
                 Development Type                           Director’s Administrative       Planning
                                                             Review      Hearing           Commission
                 New Developments                                                              X
                 Existing Development
                 Ground Floor Increases
                    600 sq. ft. or less                         X
                    601-1,200 sq. ft.                                       X
                    Greater than 1,200 sq. ft.                                                 X
                 Second Floor Additions
                    600 sq. ft. or less                                     X
                    Greater than 600 sq. ft.                                                   X
                 Source: City of La Cañada Flintridge, Zoning Code.
                 Project Approval Procedure
                 The project is initiated by an application that undergoes the necessary hearing
                 procedures discussed earlier. Notification of the hearing must be provided to all
                 property owners within 500 to 800 feet of the proposed site 10 days prior to the
                 hearing. Conditions of approval are authorized at any level of review.
                 Director’s Review involves a review of the project application by the Director of
                 the Community Development Department or his or her designee. The Director
                 must find that the project is not in conflict with or detrimental to the public
                 health, safety, or welfare of the community and conforms to the City’s General
                 Plan.
                 During an Administrative Hearing, the application is reviewed by a delegated
                 administrative hearing officer (one Planning Commissioner). An administrative
                 hearing officer must find the following in order to approve the project:
                         The project, through elements of architecture and landscape design will
                          uphold the policies in place and be harmonious with the built and natural
                          setting.
                         The project will maximize potential for sensitive use and effective
                          preservation of open space.
                         The project will not be detrimental to public health, safety, or general
                          welfare.
                         The project will not adversely affect the orderly development of property
                          within the City.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                             9-58

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                  Chapter 9. Housing Element
                         The project will conform to the goals and policies set forth in the General
                          Plan.
                         The project will not create a nuisance, hazard, or enforcement problem
                          within the neighborhood or the City or require the City to provide an
                          unusual or disproportionate level of public services.
                         The project possesses unique characteristics such as minimal views or the
                          potential for reducing effectively viewed bulk, which justifies exceeding
                          one or more of the provisions set forth in the Zoning Ordinance to permit
                          project development.
                         Any potential for the project to be viewed as excessively massive from
                          any vantage point, near or far, is mitigated by screening or siting
                          characteristics.
                         The project does not create an avoidable or unreasonable impairment of
                          the view from any other property.
                 Appeals may be made in person by filing a written letter within 15 days of the
                 action. Actions of the Director are subject to an Administrative Hearing and
                 actions of the administrative hearing authority are subject to appeal to the
                 Planning Commission.
                 Processing Time
                 The average processing time for residential projects in the City varies depending
                 on project complexity. Discretionary projects that can be approved by City staff
                 typically require an initial plan check and a final plan check, each of which
                 require 2 or 3 weeks to review upon submittal of a complete application. Any
                 significant development in the City’s hillsides or multi-family development
                 requires Planning Commission approval, which generally takes 8 to 10 weeks
                 from time of complete application to public hearing. Appeals to the City Council
                 take approximately 1 additional month to be placed on the Council Agenda.
                 Table HE-36 below provides the estimated timeframes for various processes.
                 These timeframes are considered typical and meet the requirements of the
                 Streamlining Act.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                           9-59

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                            Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 Table HE-36. Processing Time
                   Action                                         Typical Processing Time
                   Director’s Review                                       2 weeks
                   Administrative Hearing                                  5 weeks
                   Design Commission Review                              2-8 weeks
                   Planning Commission Hearing                            10 weeks
                   City Council                                           16 weeks
                   Source: City of La Cañada Flintridge, Planning Department, 2013.
9.3.3            Environmental and Infrastructure Constraints
9.3.3.1          Environmental Constraints
                 The City is subject to seismic activity from the Sierra Madre Fault zone.
                 Regionally, several active faults are considered capable of affecting property
                 within the City. With many homes constructed prior to the 1930s, the City’s
                 housing stock includes unreinforced masonry structures that are particularly
                 vulnerable in an earthquake. The exact number of such structures is not known,
                 and the high quality of construction employed in the City suggests that many
                 pre-1934 masonry structures may actually be reinforced.
                 As a hillside community, the City is subject to landslides, increased likelihood of
                 firestorms, and seasonal mudflows. However, several precautionary actions
                 have been taken to protect hillside areas, including the establishment of a series
                 of fire roads on open hillside areas, drainage debris basins, and flood control
                 structures. The City regulates the number and degree of manmade cuts and fills
                 through its Hillside Development Ordinance for all properties that have an
                 average slope of 15 percent or greater. Site grading and building design are
                 primary concerns of the City and new development must meet stringent
                 requirements for geologic and soils stability.
                 Future residential development in the City will be focused primarily along the
                 Foothill Boulevard either in the Downtown or in the new mixed use areas. These
                 sites are located outside of the hillside areas and therefore not subject to
                 landslides or mudflows associated with hillside developments.
                 All new developments must meet accessibility requirements established by the
                 Los Angeles County Fire Department, and all homes are required to meet very
                 high fire hazard severity zone fire protection standards of the building and safety
                 and fire codes to reduce the potential for spread of wildfire.
                 In some situations, the implementation of these environmentally sound
                 protection measures may reduce the total number of new housing units that can
General Plan—February 2014                                                                                     9-60

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 be developed from the number that would be developed in a non-hillside area.
                 However, it is recognized that such protection is necessary for long-term stability
                 and safety. Furthermore, the sites inventory (as shown in the Section 9.4,
                 Housing Resources, of the Housing Element) assume a density factor at 80
                 percent of the maximum density permitted to account for building code
                 requirements (such as accessibility) and other zoning code requirements.
9.3.3.2          Infrastructure Constraints
                 Of critical importance to the maintenance of existing housing and development
                 of new housing is the availability of adequate infrastructure, including water
                 facilities, drainage and debris channels, sewage facilities, and streets and related
                 elements (street trees, lighting, sidewalks, and curbs). The provision and
                 maintenance of these facilities in a community enhances not only the character of
                 the neighborhoods but also serves as an incentive to homeowners to routinely
                 maintain and keep up their homes. Within La Cañada Flintridge, infrastructure
                 conditions vary as many neighborhoods lack certain street elements, including
                 streetlights, sidewalks, and curbs. The absence of these elements is considered
                 an indication of a semi-rural residential area.
                 The single most significant infrastructure constraint is the lack of sanitary sewers
                 to serve the City. For a number of years, only two areas were served with public
                 sewers: the northeastern section near the La Cañada Flintridge Country Club and
                 the western-most section along Ocean View Boulevard and near Glen Haven
                 Park.
                 In 1998, the City embarked on a process to provide sewers to all residences
                 within the City limits. Thus far, sewers have been installed in the northern half
                 of the City above Foothill Boulevard (completed in June 2008). The City installed
                 a sewer system along Foothill Boulevard to support intensified development
                 along the Foothill Boulevard commercial corridor, including parcels designated
                 for multi-family development.
                 Installation of sewers in the southern half of the City has been more problematic.
                 The lower elevation, rocky soil, and high groundwater table have made sewers
                 desirable but difficult and expensive to design. The City has held several
                 community meetings and has conducted at least two surveys with engineering
                 estimates to gauge the public’s interest. The surveys have sparked community
                 debate about the best method to use in various locations and about the cost. The
                 City actively sought technical and funding options to provide sewers for the
                 southern portion of the City. A vote was taken in 2009 to form the districts
                 necessary to sewer the remaining unsewered portions of the city. The voters
                 rejected sewer district formation due to cost issues.
                 Currently, sewage is either processed on site with septic systems (southern areas
                 of the city) or transmitted to Los Angeles County’s Sanitation District (LACSD)
General Plan—February 2014                                                                          9-61

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 28 or the City of Los Angeles. There is also a small treatment facility within the
                 city limits. Future residential and mixed use developments are expected to
                 concentrate along the Foothill Boulevard, the sewered portion of the City.
                 Adequate capacity is available to accommodate the sewered portion of the City.
                 When additional areas are provided with sewers, additional capacity will be
                 acquired from the districts.
                 Virtually all of the City’s future residential development for fulfilling the RHNA
                 is expected to be accommodated along Foothill Boulevard. Future residential
                 within the Downtown Village Specific Plan and Mixed Use land use designations
                 would be annexed into the Consolidated Sewer Maintenance District or within
                 wastewater district 3A or the City of Los Angeles within wastewater districts 1,
                 2, and 3B. New development would be required to comply with either the
                 LACSD or the City of Los Angeles requirements for trunk sewer system disposal
                 facilities. The increase in wastewater at buildout of the General Plan in 2030 is
                 estimated at about 0.5 percent of existing capacity and is not considered to result
                 in the need for additional wastewater facilities.
                 Public water service for the City is served by the Foothill Municipal Water
                 District (FMWD), which provides water to four retailing agencies that directly
                 serve the City: the Mesa Crest Water Company, La Cañada Irrigation District,
                 Valley Water Company, and Crescenta Valley Water District. According to the
                 purveyors, the City has adequate water supply to serve its projected population
                 through 2030. Furthermore, the FMWD has scheduled improvements to the
                 water distribution system to occur in 2015. Pursuant to State law, when water
                 supply becomes an issue and an allocation system must be put in place, then the
                 water purveyors are required to provide priority status to affordable housing
                 projects for water allocation.
9.4              Housing Resources
                 As a small city, La Cañada Flintridge has limited resources for the development
                 and preservation of housing. This section presents an overview of the land,
                 financial, and administrative resources available to the City.
9.4.1            Residential Development Potential
9.4.1.1          Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA)
                 State Housing Element law requires a local jurisdiction to accommodate a share
                 of the region’s projected housing needs for the planning period. This share,
                 known as the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA), is important because
                 state law mandates that the jurisdiction must provide sufficient land to
                 accommodate a variety of housing opportunities for all economic segments of the
                 community. Compliance with this requirement is measured by the jurisdiction’s
General Plan—February 2014                                                                          9-62

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                          Chapter 9. Housing Element
                  ability to provide adequate land to accommodate the RHNA. The Southern
                  California Association of Governments (SCAG), as the regional planning agency,
                  is responsible for allocating the RHNA to individual jurisdictions within the six-
                  county region.5
                  RHNA Carried Forward from 2008-2014
                  AB 1233 amended the State Housing Element law to promote the effective and
                  timely implementation of local housing elements. Specifically, the law states that
                  if a jurisdiction is unable to provide adequate sites (with appropriate zoning and
                  development standards) in the prior planning period, within one year of the new
                  cycle, the jurisdiction must rezone/upzone adequate sites to accommodate the
                  shortfall.
                  The City adopted the 2008-2014 Housing Element in March 2013 as part of its
                  General Plan update. The updated General Plan created new Multi-Family
                  Residential and Mixed Use designations at 30 units per acre. However, the
                  Zoning Code was not updated at the time of Housing Element adoption to
                  establish development standards to implement the new General Plan
                  designations. Therefore 2008-2014 Housing Element included commitments to
                  making the appropriate zoning amendments to implement the General Plan and
                  accommodate the RHNA within one year of the Housing Element adoption. The
                  City amended the Zoning Code on February 10, 2014 to fulfill these
                  commitments.
                  For the 2008-2014 Housing Element period, the RHNA cycle extended from
                  January 1, 2006 through December 31, 2013. The City of La Cañada Flintridge
                  was assigned a RHNA of 235 housing units divided by household income as
                  follows:
                          Extremely Low/Very Low-Income (up to 50% of AMI): 62 units (26.4%)
                          Low-Income (51 to 80% of AMI): 39 units (16.6%)
                          Moderate-Income (81 to 120% of AMI): 42 units (17.9%)
                          Above Moderate-Income (more than 120% of AMI): 92 units (39.1%)
                  According to the 2008-2014 Housing Element adopted in March 2013, the City
                  achieved a total of 4 units during the period beginning January 1, 2006.
                  Without any pricing information, all of these units are assumed to be affordable
                  to above moderate-income households only. Thus, based on units constructed,
                  the City has a remaining RHNA of 231 units (62 very low-income, 39 low-
                  income, 42 moderate-income, and 88 above moderate-income units) for the 2008-
                  2014 Housing Element period.
4 Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) covers a six-county region, including Los Angeles,
Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino, Ventura, and Imperial.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                                   9-63

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                          Chapter 9. Housing Element
                  RHNA for 2013-2021
                  For the 2013-2021 Housing Element update, the City of La Cañada Flintridge is
                  allocated a RHNA of 112 units by SCAG as follows:
                          Extremely Low/Very Low-Income (up to 50% of AMI): 30 units (26.8%)
                          Low-Income (51 to 80% of AMI): 18 units (16.1%)
                          Moderate-Income (81 to 120% of AMI): 20 units (17.9%)
                          Above Moderate-Income (more than 120% of AMI): 44 units (39.3%)
                  Through its Housing Element, the City must ensure the availability of residential
                  sites at adequate densities and appropriate development standards to
                  accommodate these units.
                  Overall RHNA Obligations
                  Combined with the carryover from the previous Housing Element cycle and new
                  RHNA for the 2013-2021 Housing Element, the City has a RHNA obligation of
                  343 units:
                          Extremely Low/Very Low-Income (up to 50% of AMI): 92 units6
                          Low-Income (51 to 80% of AMI): 57 units
                          Moderate-Income (81 to 120% of AMI): 62 units
                          Above Moderate-Income (more than 120% of AMI): 132units
                  The City proposes to utilize capacity available in the Mixed Use and High
                  Density Residential zones to fulfill the RHNA.
6The City has an overall RHNA obligation of 92 very low-income units, including extremely low-income units.
Pursuant to new state law (AB 2634), the City must project the number of extremely low-income housing needs based
on Census income distribution or assume 50 percent of the very low-income units as extremely low. According to the
CHAS data developed by HUD using 2000 Census data, the City had 6.7 percent very low-income households,
including 3.6 percent extremely low-income and 3.1 percent very low-income, as shown in Table HE-13. Therefore
the City’s RHNA of 92 very low-income units may be split into 49 extremely low- and 43 very low-income units.
However, for purposes of identifying adequate sites for the RHNA, state law does not mandate the separate
accounting for the extremely low-income category.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                                    9-64

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                Chapter 9. Housing Element
9.4.1.2          Residential Sites Available
                 The City of La Cañada Flintridge is primarily built out. However, through the
                 Downtown Village Specific Plan and the General Plan update, the City created
                 additional opportunities for residential development.
                 Characteristics of Vacant and Underutilized Sites and Trend of
                 Recycling in La Cañada Flintridge
                 In recent years, older, lower intensity commercial properties have recycled into
                 modern, higher intensity commercial uses. For examples, the “Town Center”
                 Shopping Center was recently completed with over 143,000 square feet of retail
                 and restaurant space. Prior to the redevelopment, the Town Center site was
                 developed with single-family homes and several small commercial buildings.
                 The owner/developer (Sport Chalet) acquired and assembled multiple
                 properties as they came on the market over two decades. The site was approved
                 for a shopping center development in the late 1980s but the project was
                 suspended due to the economic recession during the 1990s. Subsequent project
                 application was approved and rescinded due to oppositions by residents. The
                 City then created the Downtown Village Specific Plan to facilitate development
                 in the Downtown area. In order to facilitate development of the Town Center
                 project, the City offered a number of incentives, including:
                         Approval of changes to the Specific Plan development standards to
                          accommodate higher height of the buildings;
                         Approval of a reduction in total required parking
                         Relocation of the required park; and
                         Provision of some of the infrastructure improvements.
                 The Town Center project illustrates the feasibility of lot consolidation and
                 redevelopment of underutilized properties in La Cañada Flintridge.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                         9-65

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                  Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 Additional redevelopment/expansion activities have also been implemented or
                 are being planned. The Ralph’s Market just completed an expansion and
                 remodel. The old Sportland building, at 21,000 square feet, was redeveloped into
                 a new “whole foods” type market. A Verdugo Boulevard gas station was
                 redeveloped into restaurant/retail uses. The owner of the property that
                 currently houses a pizza restaurant is also approved for rebuilding into larger
                 uses. These activities not only demonstrate a local demand for an expanded
                 commercial/ retail base, but also that many existing properties are underutilized
                 based on current and proposed zoning standards and that redevelopment or
                 expansion to new uses is financially and physically feasible given the low
                 intensity of existing uses.
                 According to the methodology developed by the University of California at
                 Berkeley for the State of California Business, Transportation, and Housing
                 Agency, the ratio of land improvements to land value (ILR) can facilitate
                 identification of underutilized sites with potential for infill or redevelopment
                 with higher density residential uses. An improved site may be considered
                 underutilized if it is located in a non-single-family area (e.g., commercial,
                 industrial, multi-family, etc.) and the total value of improvements on the site is
                 less than the total value of the underlying land (i.e., ILR < 1.0).
                 Determining a site’s ILR is rarely enough to establish that a site has a reasonable
                 potential to redevelop with higher density residential uses within the planning
                 period. Improved properties included in the City’s sites inventory have been
                 carefully screened to eliminate parcels with structures built within the past 15
General Plan—February 2014                                                                           9-66

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                  Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 years, as owners of newer structures may not be inclined to redevelop their
                 properties even though the land value may be more than the value of
                 improvements.
                 A parcel-specific analysis was conducted on properties within the City to
                 identify vacant and underutilized properties. For underutilized properties, the
                 following criteria were used:
                         existing improvements are at least 15 years old; and
                         improvement-to-land value ratio is less than 1.0, indicating the land is
                          worth more than the improvements on site.
                 Appendix A provides a list of the vacant and underutilized properties in the
                 City, focusing along the Foothill Boulevard. Site visits were conducted to
                 confirm the status of the properties.
                 Most underutilized parcels identified have improvements that were constructed
                 prior to the 1980s, with a median year built of 1953. These properties exhibit
                 similar characteristics in terms of conditions and existing operations as
                 properties on the Town Center site prior to redevelopment.
                 In October 2013, the City conducted a community workshop to discuss the 2013-
                 2021 Housing Element update and proposed Zoning Code amendments to
                 implement the High Density Residential and Mixed use designations, among
                 other code amendments to facilitate a variety of housing options. Two
                 developers attended the workshop and expressed interest in developing active
                 senior living and assisted living in the City.
                 Downtown Village Specific Plan (DVSP)
                 In response to the City’s limited vacant land resources, the City intends to focus
                 much of its future residential growth within the DVSP. Based on its downtown
                 location, flat terrain, and relatively new sewer system, this area can readily
                 support the development of multi-family housing for the City’s workforce and
                 senior population.
                 The DVSP designates the following Land Use Districts that can accommodate
                 residential development:
                      1. Mixed Use 1: Provide opportunities for residential development and
                           commercial development within the same building. Residential use is
                           restricted to the second floor. Multi-family residential development is
                           permitted at densities of up to 15 units per acre.
                      2. Mixed Use 2: Offers more flexible opportunities for residential
                          development with housing permitted on the first or second story on the
General Plan—February 2014                                                                           9-67

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 9. Housing Element
                          same parcel of land, or side by side within the same area. Multi-family
                          residential development is permitted at densities of up to 15 units per
                          acre without a requirement for retail or commercial uses.
                      3. Residential: This Land Use District is exclusively designated for
                          residential development. Single-family homes, townhomes, apartments,
                          and condominiums are permitted in this district at densities of 15 units
                          per acre. However, currently only senior multi-family housing is
                          permitted in this district. The Planning Commission held public hearings
                          on November 26 and December 10, 2013. On February 10, prior to
                          adoption of the 2013-2021 Housing Element, the City amended the DVSP
                          designation to allow multi-family housing for all household types.
                 The DVSP area is characterized by a variety of low-intensity uses. The majority
                 of the non-vacant properties in the area were constructed at least 40 years ago.
                 The median year of built improvements in the area is 1955, making most of the
                 structures at least 50 years old. These properties are occupied primarily by
                 independent small businesses. Redevelopment of these properties or relocation
                 of existing businesses would not involve the strategic planning of regional or
                 national chains and therefore could occur independently and as market
                 conditions improve. The following pictures illustrate the characteristics of
                 properties within the DVSP area. While most buildings are in good condition
                 and businesses seem to be economically viable operations, the intensification
                 potential offered by the updated General Plan, high land values, and increasing
                 market demand make redevelopment feasible.
                 The intensification permitted under the DVSP offers potential for redevelopment.
                 To estimate development potential in the DVSP, an average development density
                 is used, rather than the maximum density. Pursuant to state law (AB 2348),
                 development capacity must be estimated on a realistic basis, not theoretical basis,
                 accounting for development trends and patterns, as well as development
                 standards such as height limit, parking requirements, open space/landscaping
                 requirements, and lot coverage/setbacks. Based on a development intensity at
                 80 percent of the maximum capacity (i.e. 12 units per acre), redevelopment of
                 vacant and underutilized parcels in the DVSP area can yield approximately 292
                 units (see Table HE-37). The 80 percent factor is typical for urban development
                 in the San Gabriel Valley. As part of the City’s discussions with developers, the
                 City will identify development standards that can facilitate mixed use
                 development at the target density.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                          9-68

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                         Chapter 9. Housing Element
Table HE-37. Vacant and Underutilized Properties in the DVSP Area
                         Maximum       Potential                                    Potential
District                   Density      Density          Net Acres # of Parcels       Units
Residential
   Vacant                 15 du/ac      12 du/ac            0.00         0               0
   Underutilized          15 du/ac      12 du/ac            0.68          3              8
   Total                                                    0.68         3               8
Mixed Use 1
   Vacant                 15 du/ac      12 du/ac            0.53         3               5
   Underutilized          15 du/ac      12 du/ac            9.88         54             91
   Total                                                   10.41        57              96
Mixed Use 2
   Vacant                 15 du/ac      12 du/ac            0.72         2               8
   Underutilized          15 du/ac      12 du/ac           16.00         48            180
   Total                                                   16.72        50             188
Total                                                      27.81        110            292
General Plan—February 2014                                                                  9-69

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 Mixed Use Areas
                 In addition to the DVSP, the General Plan established a new land use
                 designation, Mixed Use. Underutilized properties in the Mixed Use area are
                 identified using the following criteria:
                         existing improvements are at least 15 years old; and
                         improvement-to-land value ratio is less than 1.0, indicating the land is
                          worth more than the improvements on site.
                 Vacant and underutilized parcels in the Mixed Use land use designation are
                 summarized in Table HE-38. Most of these properties contain low-intensity
                 commercial uses with large surface parking lots. Some properties contain
                 vacated businesses. Specifically included in the Mixed Use area is a 5.14-acre
                 property owned by Caltrans that is significantly underutilized. Of the 5.14 acres,
                 4.15 acres are used as a parking lot. Three commercial structures occupy the
                 remaining 0.99 acre on the site. The objective of the General Plan is to encourage
                 mixed use/residential development on surface parking area to complement the
                 existing uses.
Table HE-38. Vacant and Underutilized Properties in Mixed Use Areas
                          Maximum           Potential                          # of         Potential
 District                   Density          Density        Net Acres         Parcels         Units
 Mixed Use
    Vacant                  30 du/ac         24 du/ac          0.92              2              21
    Underutilized           30 du/ac         24 du/ac         17.35              9             378
 Total                                                        18.27             11             399
                 Area Identified for Rezoning to High-Density Multi-Family Use
                 In order to accommodate the City’s RHNA, meeting the new State law
                 requirements on available sites, the City has identified two additional areas for
                 rezoning to high-density multi-family residential use at 30 units per acre. The
                 City rezoned the properties prior to adoption of the 2013-2021 Housing Element.
                 The Planning Commission held public hearings to review the rezoning on
                 November 26 and December 10, 2013. The rezoning was approved by the City
                 Council on February 10, 2014, prior to adoption of the 2013-2021 Housing
                 Element at the same meeting.
                 Curran Street
                 The first potential area is the Curran Street area, comprising of nine residential
                 parcels, five commercial parcels, and portions of street right-of-way that serve
General Plan—February 2014                                                                          9-70

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                       Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 only the few residential parcels behind Foothill Boulevard. An aerial view of this
                 area is provided in the appendix.
                 The nine residential parcels are zoned single-family residential (R-1-5000) and
                 commercial parcels are zoned Community Planned Development (CPD).
                 Because the portions of the street right-of-way included in this area serve only
                 the nine residential parcels, they can potentially be included in a project that
                 consolidate these parcels, whereby ingress and egress can occur directly from
                 Foothill Boulevard or Union Avenue, eliminating the need for these interior
                 right-of-ways. Therefore, these right-of-way segments serve as a bonus land area
                 from the City to encourage lot consolidation for a large project. The residential
                 parcels are developed with older and smaller single-family homes and existing
                 uses along Foothill Boulevard include a restaurant, independently owned
                 exercise gyms, and commercial office uses with relatively large parking areas in
                 the back. While some stores have undergone some cosmetic refurbishing, most
                 structures are older and specifically one of the older buildings has recently been
                 demolished and the land is left vacant. Vacancies can also be observed among
                 the commercial structures (picture shown). All buildings are currently single-
                 story buildings. Once redesignated, the density increase will present significant
                 financial incentives for redevelopment of this area.
                 Redevelopment of the vacant site is expected to occur when the economy
                 recovers, which can serve as a catalyst to redevelopment of the area. Discussions
                 with a residential developer in Arcadia (a nearby community with high housing
                 costs) indicate that conversion of older single-family into multi-family housing is
                 a trend in this sub region. While housing condition plays a role in determining
                 feasibility of recycling, it is not a critical factor in site selection. The ability to
                 gain additional housing units typically outweighs the cost differentials based on
                 housing conditions.
                 In 2010, the City solicited the participation of mixed use and multi-family
                 developers in a developers workshop. Several developers expressed interest in
                 developing in the City. To facilitate redevelopment of this site, the City will
                 direct interested developers to these sites and depending on the project
                 configuration, the Curran Street right-of-way may be offered as a land bonus.
                 This area totals 3.59 acres. Assuming an average density of 24 units per acre, this
                 area can accommodate 86 multi-family units. With the rezoning of the Curran
                 Street parcels, 58 percent of the City’s 149 lower income RHNA can be fulfilled in
                 this area. With adoption of the Zoning Code amendments, no discretionary
                 approval will be required for multi-family development on these R-3 sites.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                                9-71

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                     Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 Jo-Ann’s Fabrics
                 The second potential area is the Jo-Ann’s Fabrics site. This site is located at the
                 southeast corner of Foothill Boulevard and La Cañada Plaza Road. An aerial
                 view of this site is provided in the appendix. This single-use commercial
                 building occupies a large site consisting of two parcels and totaling 0.84 acre.
                 The single-story structure is old and as shown in the following photos, the site is
                 significantly underutilized. Because of its irregular shape, the existing
                 commercial building is oddly situated, leaving a large portion of the site as
                 excess paved areas that cannot be used as parking (see aerial photo in the
                 appendix), and resulting in an underutilized site. Multi-family residential
                 development, on the other hand, may be more adaptable to this triangular site
                 and better utilize the full area of this site. This site is also located directly across
                 the commercial areas redesignated for mixed use developments as part of the
                 General Plan update. Across Jo-Ann’s Fabric Site 18 (see Appendix), a 3.5-acre
                 site designated for mixed use and currently includes underutilized commercial
                 uses and a vacant parcel. Redevelopment of Site 18 and other mixed use areas
                 across the street will serve as a catalyst for the redevelopment of Jo-Ann’s Fabric.
                 Furthermore, immediately behind this site are existing multi-family residential
                 uses. Redevelopment of this site into multi-family residential use would
                 introduce a compatible use to the adjacent area. At an average density of 24
                 units per acre, this site can accommodate 20 multi-family units. To facilitate
                 multi-family development on this site, the City will direct interested developers
                 to this opportunity site. As with the Curran Street sites, no discretionary
                 approval will be required for multi-family development on the Jo-Ann’s Fabrics
                 site, following adoption of the Zoning Code amendments.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                              9-72

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                  Chapter 9. Housing Element
Table HE-39. Vacant and Underutilized Properties in Potential Rezone Area
                            Maximum          Potential                           # of        Potential
 District                    Density          Density        Net Acres         Parcels         Units
 Rezone to High Density
    Curran Street            30 du/ac         24 du/ac          3.59              15             86
    Jo-Ann’s Fabrics         30 du/ac         24 du/ac          0.84              2              20
 Total                                                          4.43              17            106
                  Accessory Living Quarters
                  The City’s standards allow ALQs with a kitchen and sleeping areas on larger
                  lots. Based on this requirement, approximately half the single-family residential
                  lots in the City (3,400 lots) would qualify for consideration for an ALQ.
                  Since adoption of the ALQs standards in 1991, the City has approved an average
                  of five units on an annual basis. Approximately half of these units include a
                  kitchen facility and can potentially be used as independent living quarters. Most
                  of these units are used by family members and therefore, are available at low or
                  no costs. Given the history of providing ALQs in the community over the past 10
                  years, the Housing Element establishes a goal to achieve approximately two
                  units per year to be developed as affordable rental units.
                  Adequacy of Sites for RHNA
                  With the implementation of the new General Plan, an estimated 691 housing
                  units can be accommodated on the vacant and underutilized mixed use and
                  residential sites in La Cañada Flintridge (Table HE-40). However, the City does
                  not anticipate all Mixed Use sites will be developed with a residential
                  component. For purposes of accommodating the RHNA for this Housing
                  Element period, the City assumes 50 percent of the Mixed Use sites will contain a
                  residential component when redeveloped. This 50 percent factor will yield a
                  total of 146 units in Mixed Use areas within the DVSP area and 200 units in other
                  Mixed Use areas. At a maximum density of 15 units per acre, mixed use
                  residential potential in the DVSP area can facilitate the development of housing
                  for moderate and above moderate income households. Mixed Use sites outside
                  the DVSP area at 30 units per acre can facilitate the development of housing for
                  lower income households. In addition, the City identified an area around Curran
                  Street where redesignation from single-family or nonresidential uses to R-3 High
                  Density Multi-Family Residential use is appropriate and feasible. This area alone
                  provides a capacity of 86 additional units for 58 percent of the City’s lower
                  income RHNA. Finally, the City identified a second area (Jo-Ann’s Fabrics) for
                  rezoning due to its location and existing site conditions. These two areas total
                  4.43 acres, with a capacity to accommodate 106 units. On February 10, 2014, the
General Plan—February 2014                                                                           9-73

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                   Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 City rezoned these areas as R-3 High Density Multi-Family Residential prior to
                 the adoption of the 2013-2021 Housing Element at the same meeting. The sites
                 identified in the inventory have a surplus capacity of 119 units beyond the
                 RHNA obligation.
Table HE-40. Adequacy of Vacant Sites to Accommodate RHNA
                                           Extremely Low/                         Above
Income                                     Very Low/Low            Moderate     Moderate       Total
Downtown Village SP
   Residential                                    –-                    8            –-           8
   Mixed Use 1                                    –-                    96           –-          96
   Mixed Use 2                                    –-                   188           –-          188
Mixed Use (New)                                  399                    –-           –-          399
Total Mixed Use Capacity                         399                   292           –-          691
   50-Percent                                    200                   146           –-          346
Rezone to High Density                           106                   ---           ---         106
Second Units                                      –-                    10           –-          10
Total                                            306                   156           –-          462
          th    th
RHNA (4 and 5 Cycles)                      92             57            62          132          343
Surplus/Deficit                                 +157                  +94          (132)        +119
9.4.2            Financial Resources
9.4.2.1          Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Funds
                 Through the CDBG program, HUD provides funds to local governments for
                 funding a wide range of community development activities for low-income
                 persons. The CDBG program provides formula funding to larger cities and
                 counties, while smaller cities (less than 50,000 in population) can either receive
                 funding from the county or compete for funding that is allocated by the state. La
                 Cañada Flintridge receives its allocation of CDBG funds through the Los Angeles
                 County Community Development Commission.
                 The CDBG program is very flexible in that the funds can be used for a wide
                 range of activities. The eligible activities include, but are not limited to:
                 acquisition and/or disposition of real estate or property; public facilities and
                 improvements; relocation, rehabilitation, and construction (under certain
                 limitations) of housing; homeownership assistance; and clearance activities. The
                 City currently receives approximately $114,950 (FY 2013/2014) in CDBG funds
                 on an annual basis. During FY 2013/2014, $91,950 was allocated to the Resident
                 Rehabilitation Program and $23,000 to the Sewer Connection Program.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                            9-74

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 9. Housing Element
9.4.3            Administrative Resources
                 Non-profit agencies can assist the City in accessing outside funds in support of
                 affordable housing and in implementing the City’s housing programs. The
                 following non-profit agencies have been involved in developing housing in
                 nearby communities.
9.4.3.1          Habitat for Humanity—San Gabriel Valley
                 Habitat for Humanity is a non-profit, Christian organization dedicated to
                 building affordable housing and rehabilitating homes for lower income families.
                 With the help of volunteers and homeowners/partner families, Habitat for
                 Humanity constructs and repairs homes for families, which are then sold to
                 partner families at no profit with affordable, no-interest loans. Volunteers,
                 churches, businesses, and other groups provide most of the labor for the
                 construction of the homes. Land for new homes is usually donated by
                 government agencies or individuals. Since its founding in 1990, the San Gabriel
                 Valley Habitat for Humanity has partnered with numerous families and
                 volunteers to construct single-family and attached housing throughout the San
                 Gabriel Valley, including projects in Pasadena, Glendale, and El Monte.
9.4.3.2          Southern California Presbyterian Homes (SCPH)
                 An experienced non-profit developer, Southern California Presbyterian Homes
                 (SCPH) specializes in developing affordable housing projects, primarily for
                 seniors, throughout southern California and in the San Gabriel Valley. Projects
                 in nearby communities include two multi-family projects in Glendale and one
                 multi-family development in Duarte.
9.4.3.3          Pasadena Neighborhood Housing Services
                 Pasadena Neighborhood Housing Services is a non-profit development
                 corporation that is involved with housing rehabilitation and the development of
                 affordable housing in Pasadena and surrounding communities. Working with
                 residents and the business community, Pasadena Neighborhood Services
                 provides both rental and homeownership opportunities to low- and moderate-
                 income families.
9.4.3.4          National Community Renaissance (CORE)
                 CORE, formerly known as the Southern California Housing Corporation, is one
                 of the largest nonprofit developers and managers of affordable housing in
                 southern California. Based in the Inland Empire, CORE finances, develops, and
                 manages affordable housing throughout southern California, including
                 properties in Orange, San Diego, and Los Angeles Counties.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                          9-75

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 9. Housing Element
9.4.3.5          Ecumenical Ministerial Association of La Cañada
                 Flintridge
                 Ecumenical Ministerial Association of La Cañada Flintridge is a faith-based
                 organization comprising seven local churches and one synagogue. The
                 organization partners with Habitat for Humanity of San Gabriel Valley to assist
                 with financing and housing construction.
9.5              Opportunities for Energy Conservation
                 There is a growing awareness at the national and state levels of the importance to
                 implement green practices. Legislation has been approved by the State of
                 California with mandates for cities and regions to implement such practices in
                 order to reduce impacts on the environment. Cities and counties throughout the
                 state are required to comply with SB 375, the goal of which is to reduce
                 greenhouse gases in the state. In addition, other State legislation, such as AB 811,
                 provides financial incentives for homeowners to lower home utility usage
                 through the installation of insulation or solar equipment.
                 To address the above requirements, the City of La Cañada Flintridge has taken
                 several measures to implement energy conservation programs in residential
                 projects. The City’s Residential Design Guidelines address solar orientation. The
                 building orientation, street layout, lot design, landscaping, and street tree
                 configuration of all residential projects are reviewed to maximize solar access
                 and energy conservation. The City also currently participates in the
                 Construction and Demolition Debris Management program (C&D) and Calsense,
                 both administered by the Public Works Department. Under the City’s Municipal
                 Code (Ordinance 313), a minimum of 50 percent of construction waste generated
                 by projects has to be recycled as part of the C&D program. In 2008, 87 percent of
                 construction materials were recycled, which increased to 94 percent in 2009. This
                 significantly reduces the amount of recyclable debris being put in limited
                 landfills. Calsense provides irrigation controllers, water and labor saving
                 accessories and water management software. The City uses this system at City
                 facilities, medians, parks and school district sites. In addition, Calsense allows
                 the City to detect water line breaks and reduce or stop the potential for slope
                 failures, manpower efforts, and water loss. Over time, both programs have had
                 significant success in reducing construction debris and water usage.
                 Furthermore, the City plans to encourage energy conservation through
                 implementation measures on different levels. The first level includes requiring
                 new residential development to meet applicable energy standards of Title 24 of
                 the California Administrative Code. Building additions or alterations must also
                 meet Title 24 standards if they increase the heated or cooled floor space of the
                 building. Builders of these units may achieve compliance either by calculating
                 the energy performance in a prescribed manner or by selecting from alternative
General Plan—February 2014                                                                          9-76

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                  Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 component packages that prescribe a fixed method of energy compliance. The
                 City’s Building and Safety Division checks all proposed residential units for
                 design and construction compliance with Title 24 energy standards. The State of
                 California updated the energy conservation requirements in Title 24 and the
                 changes went into effect on January 1, 2011. The City will continue to enforce the
                 requirements of Title 24.
                 In addition, the City created a Green Task Force, an ad hoc committee, to
                 develop recommendations to the City Council in order to improve energy
                 conservation in the City. As a result of the work by the Green Task Force, the
                 City continues to refine programs and information regarding conservation of
                 energy and water. A City information program provides residents with
                 recommendations for conservation. Additionally, the City restructured its
                 Building Fee Schedule to subsidize the use of solar photovoltaic panels.
                 The City’s website now provides links to the utility companies and energy and
                 water conservations tips and programs.
                 In addition to the City’s initiatives, local utility companies also offer assistance to
                 make energy conservation improvements:
                         Southern California Gas Company offers the Energy Assistance
                          Program, which provides no-cost energy-saving home improvements and
                          furnace repair or replacement services for qualified limited-income
                          renters and homeowners.
                         Southern California Edison Company offers the Energy Savings
                          Assistance Program, which helps income-qualified households conserve
                          energy and reduce their electricity costs. The program pays all costs of
                          purchasing and installing energy-efficient appliances and equipment,
                          which are free to eligible customers.
9.5              Housing Plan
                 The earlier sections of the Housing Element establish the housing needs,
                 constraints, and opportunities in La Cañada Flintridge. The following Housing
                 Plan evaluates the accomplishments of the last adopted housing element and
                 presents the City’s eight-year Housing Plan for this planning cycle. This
                 Housing Plan sets forth goals, policies, and programs to address the identified
                 housing needs of the community.
9.5.1            Evaluation of Past Accomplishments
                 In order to develop an effective housing plan for the 2013-2021 planning period,
                 the City is required to assess the achievements and continued appropriateness of
                 existing housing programs and actions. These results should be quantified
General Plan—February 2014                                                                           9-77

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 where possible (e.g., the number of units that were rehabilitated), but may be
                 qualitative where necessary (e.g., mitigation of government constraints).
                 The La Cañada Flintridge Housing Element was last updated in March 2013 and
                 set forth a series of housing programs with related objectives for the following
                 topic areas: new housing opportunities; removal of government constraints;
                 maintenance, preservation and enhancement; environmental sensitivity; and fair
                 housing. The following section reviews the continued appropriateness of these
                 programs, the effectiveness of the Housing Element, and the progress in
                 implementation.
9.5.1.1          Progress toward the 2008-2014 RHNA
                 The City had a total RHNA of 287 units for the 2008-2014 housing element cycle,
                 including a penalty of 52 units from the prior period, 2000-2005. The combined
                 RHNA total of 287 units included 80 very low-income units, 52 low-income
                 units, 59 moderate-income units, and 96 above moderate-income units. The
                 RHNA for the 2008-2014 Housing Element cycle covered the period from
                 January 1, 2006 to December 31, 2013.
                 Table HE-41. Progress toward 2006-2014 Combined RHNA
                 Income Category     2006-2014 RHNA  Units Constructed
                 Very Low                   80               0
                 Low                        52               0
                 Moderate                   59               0
                 Above Moderate             96               4
                 Total                     287               4
9.5.1.2          Program Accomplishments
                 Providing New Housing Opportunities
                 Adequate Residential Sites
                 With the comprehensive update of the City’s General Plan (2013), the City
                 created additional opportunities for residential development through mixed use
                 zoning. In addition, the City identified 4.4 acres of land to rezone for high
                 density residential uses. The City processed amendments to the Zoning Code to
                 rezone these properties. Public hearings were held on November 26 and
                 December 10, 2013 before the Planning Commission to review the proposed
                 rezoning. The rezoning was approved by the City Council on February 10, 2014,
                 prior to adoption of the 2013-2021 Housing Element at the same meeting.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                          9-78

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                  Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 2008-2014 Housing Element Goal: Amend the General Plan Land Use Element
                 and Zoning Code to rezone 4.4 acres of existing lower density residential and
                 nonresidential land to high density residential land, where multi-family
                 residential development will be permitted by right without discretionary review
                 at up to 30 units per acre (with a minimum density of 20 units per acre). To
                 facilitate residential development on these properties, the Planned Development
                 (PD) permit requirement will be removed for the High Density (30 units per acre)
                 properties identified for rezoning. The City will regularly monitor the
                 effectiveness of incentives in encouraging redevelopment and identify
                 alternatives as necessary.
                 Concurrent with that rezoning, adopt appropriate development standards,
                 including reduced parking requirements, reduced minimum unit sizes, and
                 height limit (at least two stories) that are consistent with similar developments in
                 the region. Ensure that the development standards are adequate to allow the
                 achievement of the maximum density permitted. Adopt design guidelines to
                 implement the City’s new mixed use and high density residential zoning.
                 Maintain an inventory of residential and mixed-use sites and make the
                 information available to interested developers; update the inventory annually.
                 Assist in lot consolidation by providing a list of appropriate and available sites to
                 interested developers.
                 Program Status: The City updated the Land Use Element in January 2013
                 allowing densities up to 30 units per acre on sites that were identified in the
                 2008-2014 Housing Element, which was adopted in March 2013. The Planning
                 Commission conducted public hearings on November 26 and December 10, 2013
                 to make a recommendation to the City Council concerning rezoning the sites to
                 R-3, which permits high density development at 30 units per acre. The
                 Commission considered various Zoning Code amendments for the R-3 district,
                 including, among others, elimination of the requirement for a Planned
                 Development (PD) permit for residential development. Additional amendments
                 had also been proposed to establish standards for the newly created Mixed-Use
                 zone and reduce parking requirements for multi-family residential development
                 in various zones. The City Council adopted these amendments on February 10,
                 2014, prior to adoption of the 2013-2021 Housing Element at the same meeting.
                 Downtown Village Specific Plan (DVSP)
                 In November of 2000, the City adopted the DVSP, consisting of areas along
                 Foothill Boulevard in the center of the City. The primary focus of the DVSP is to
                 enhance Foothill Boulevard by creating a community-oriented town center that
                 includes a mixture of commercial, office, and residential uses. The DVSP
                 provides for integration of residential uses in designated Mixed Use areas as a
                 means of enhancing 24-hour activity along Foothill Boulevard.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                           9-79

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                  Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 2008-2014 Housing Element Goal: Conduct a Developer’s Workshop in 2012 to
                 inform non-profit and other interested housing developers of available sites
                 within the DVSP for mixed use and multi-family housing. Provide information
                 on development incentives available through the City’s density bonus ordinance
                 in support of affordable housing and on available financial assistance through
                 the City, county, and state. The City will also amend the DVSP designation to
                 allow multi-family housing for all household types, not just senior multi-family
                 housing, within one year of adoption of the Housing Element.
                 Program Status: The Planning Commission conducted hearings on November
                 26 and December 10, 2013 to make a recommendation to the City Council to
                 allow multi-family housing for all housing types in the Downtown Village
                 Specific Plan, not senior multi-family housing only. The City conducted a
                 community meeting in October 2013 to discuss zoning amendments, potential
                 development sites, and Housing Element update issues. Two developers
                 attended the meeting, expressing interests in providing senior active living and
                 assisted living communities in the City, and provided input on appropriate
                 development standards.
                 Lot Consolidation
                 Much of the future residential development is expected to occur in the DVSP
                 area and in the newly created Mixed Use and High Density Residential (30 units
                 per acre) zones. The City will facilitate lot consolidation for mixed use and
                 housing developments in these areas.
                 2008-2014 Housing Element Goal: Allow administrative processing of lot
                 consolidation requests. Provide assistance with site identification and
                 entitlement processing. Offer fee deferrals for affordable housing projects. Work
                 with property owners to facilitate lot consolidation and identify redevelopment
                 potential.
                 Program Status: City staff continues to be committed to assisting developers
                 with mixed-use and multi-family projects, which may involve lot consolidation.
                 Second Units/Accessory Living Quarters (ALQs)
                 Second units represent a viable means of dispersing lower cost rental housing in
                 the community while assisting homeowners, such as seniors on fixed incomes, to
                 obtain rental income. The City amended the ALQs ordinance to permit the
                 development of ALQs (second units) via a ministerial process. Many property
                 owners have developed second units pursuant to the City’s ALQ ordinance to
                 use for guests, family members, domestic workers, and as independent rental
                 units.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                           9-80

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 2008-2014 Housing Element Goal: Continue to support the development of
                 second units as a source of affordable housing for lower and extremely low
                 income persons, and monitor annually to ensure adherence to codes and to
                 assess rental rates. The City’s goal is to achieve development of two second units
                 per year, which provides rental housing to low- and moderate-income
                 households.
                 Program Status: The City permits development of second units by right on
                 parcels with minimum size of 10,000 square feet. Between 2006 and 2013, about
                 ten ALQs have been approved in the City.
                 Conserving and Maintaining Existing Housing
                 Code Enforcement
                 The objective of the City’s Code Enforcement Program is to ensure the safety of
                 residents and prevent structures and properties from falling into substandard
                 condition. Potential code violations are identified based on complaints reported
                 to the City. Exterior inspections are then performed and if necessary, a
                 notification of violation is issued to the property owner.
                 2008-2014 Housing Element Goal: Continue to enforce the City’s Property
                 Maintenance Ordinance to preserve existing units, maintain property values, and
                 support a high quality of life for residents. Provide information to income-
                 qualified property owners on available rehabilitation assistance.
                 Program Status: On an ongoing basis, the Planning Department responds to
                 complaints regarding potential code violations, performs inspections, and works
                 to abate code violations. The vast majority pertains to landscaping, abandoned
                 vehicles, and property maintenance issues that affect neighborhood quality. The
                 property owner is allowed a reasonable amount of time to correct the violation
                 and almost all of the violations are resolved in a short time frame. This program
                 remains appropriate to the updated Housing Element.
                 Residential Rehabilitation Program
                 The City’s Residential Rehabilitation Program offers home improvement grants
                 to low-income households in single-family homes. Funded through the City’s
                 CDBG allocation, eligible activities include plumbing and electrical work, roof
                 repairs, foundation and exterior painting, handicapped accessibility, and energy
                 efficiency improvements.
                 2008-2014 Housing Element Goal: Continue to advertise availability of the
                 Residential Rehabilitation Program through brochures at the public counter and
                 posting on the City’s website. Target advertising to the lower and extremely low
General Plan—February 2014                                                                          9-81

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 income households, including seniors and persons with disabilities. Provide
                 CDBG funds to achieve approximately five grants per year.
                 Program Status: Between 2008 and 2013, 23 households have been assisted.
                 CDBG funding through the Los Angeles County Community Development
                 Commission has declined as a result of Congressional reductions to the CDBG
                 budget. Staff administrative costs are borne now entirely by the City.
                 Sewer Connection Grant Program
                 The City implemented a Sewer Connection Grant Program to assist lower and
                 moderate-income households, especially extremely low income households, with
                 the costs of connecting single-family homes to the City’s sewer system in the
                 City’s sewer districts. (This program is targeted for single-family homes because
                 multi-family tenants do not pay for sewer connections.)
                 2008-2014 Housing Element Goal: Provide grants for approximately four to six
                 lower and moderate-income households annually. The City will continue to
                 advertise the availability of this program through brochures at the public
                 counter, posting on the City’s website, and other appropriate venues.
                 Program Status: Between 2008 and 2013, 16 households have been assisted.
                 Grants are a maximum of $12,000 for a qualified household and limited to
                 plumbing retrofit and hardscape construction costs associated with the
                 connection of single-family residences to newly constructed sewer lines. CDBG
                 funding through the Los Angeles County Community Development Commission
                 has declined as a result of Congressional reductions to the CDBG budget. Staff
                 administrative costs are borne now entirely by the City.
                 Condominium Conversion Ordinance
                 The City has adopted a condominium conversion ordinance that sets forth
                 criteria for the conversion of existing multi-family rental housing to
                 condominiums. Included in the ordinance are a number of tenant provisions
                 such as priority of purchase, notice of hearing, relocation assistance, and
                 adequate notice to vacate. In addition, the applicant must file a report indicating
                 the impact of the condominium conversion upon the rental market in the
                 community and the availability of adequate replacement units. Before
                 approving a conversion, the Planning Commission must consider the effect of the
                 proposed conversion on the City’s low- and moderate-income housing supply.
                 2008-2014 Housing Element Goal: Continue to enforce condominium conversion
                 regulations to help conserve existing rental housing and provide tenant
                 protections.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                          9-82

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 Program Status: There have been no requests for condominium conversions
                 since the ordinance was adopted in 1982.
                 Multi-Family Acquisition and Rehabilitation
                 The City contains several older apartment buildings in need of upgrading and
                 repair. Several non-profit housing providers active in the greater Los Angeles
                 area have acquired similar aging apartment buildings and rehabilitated these
                 buildings as long-term affordable housing.
                 2008-2014 Housing Element Goal: The City will identify apartments and
                 duplexes in the community in need of substantial rehabilitation and will contact
                 property and housing corporations regarding opportunities for acquisition and
                 rehabilitation. Program will target assistance to units occupied by lower income
                 households (especially extremely low income senior households and persons
                 with disabilities).
                 Program Status: The City continues to support the rehabilitation of apartment
                 buildings, if a developer chooses to make an offer.
                 Facilitating Housing for Lower- and Moderate-Income and
                 Special Needs Households
                 Density Bonus
                 Density bonuses, together with the incentives and/or concessions, can result in a
                 lower average cost of land per dwelling unit, thereby making the provision of
                 affordable housing more feasible. SB 1818 (enacted 2005) and SB 435 (enacted
                 2006) changed the requirements of state law regarding the mandatory provision
                 of density bonuses, incentives, and concessions to affordable housing developers
                 that meet certain criteria. A density bonus up to 35 percent over the otherwise
                 maximum allowable residential density under the applicable zoning district is
                 available to developers who provide affordable housing as part of their projects.
                 Developers of affordable housing are also entitled to at least one concession or
                 incentive. The City will amend its Zoning Code to comply with current state
                 density bonus law. The density bonus ordinance will specify the types of
                 regulatory concessions and incentives to be offered consistent with state law.
                 Examples of concessions and incentives that could be offered include, but are not
                 limited to, reductions in the amount of required on-site parking, fee reductions,
                 expedited permit processing, and modified or waived development standards.
                 2008-2014 Housing Element Goal: Revise the Zoning Code to address density
                 bonus provisions consistent with state density bonus law within one year of
                 adoption of the 2008–2014 Housing Element. Promote the use of density bonus
                 incentives to developers and provide technical assistance to developers in
General Plan—February 2014                                                                         9-83

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 utilizing density bonus for maximized feasibility and to meet local housing
                 needs.
                 Program Status: The Planning Commission conducted public hearings on
                 November 26 and December 10, 2013 to make a recommendation to the City
                 Council concerning an amendment to the Zoning Code implementing current
                 State density bonus law. The City Council adopted the Zoning Code
                 amendments on February 10, 2014.
                 Special Needs Housing
                 The La Cañada Flintridge Zoning Code did not specifically address the siting of
                 transitional housing, emergency shelters, supportive housing, or single-room
                 occupancy units, which are housing options appropriate for special needs
                 households and lower income households, including extremely low-income
                 households.
                 Specifically, the following revisions would be made:
                         Transitional Housing: Amend the Zoning Ordinance to address the
                          provision of transitional housing. Transitional housing pursuant to
                          Health and Safety Code Section 50801(i) will be permitted by right where
                          housing is permitted, and subject to the same development standards as
                          other housing development.
                         Supportive Housing: Amend the Zoning Ordinance to address the
                          provision of supportive housing. Supportive housing pursuant to Health
                          and Safety Code Section 50675.14(a)(B)(2) will be permitted by right
                          where housing is permitted, and subject to the same development
                          standards as other housing development.
                         Emergency Shelters: Identify emergency shelters as a permitted use in
                          the CPD zone and develop standards in the Zoning Code that comply
                          with state law.
                         Single Room Occupancy (SRO): Specify SRO as a conditionally
                          permitted use in the CPD zone. Conditions for approval will relate to the
                          performance of the facility, such as parking, security, and management.
                         Reasonable Accommodation: Adopt a reasonable accommodation
                          ordinance to specify the types of requests to be considered, the
                          procedures for applying and reviewing accommodation requests, the
                          approval criteria and body, and any fee involved.
                 2008-2014 Housing Element Goal: Amend the Zoning Code within one year of
                 the adoption of the Housing Element.
                 Program Status: The Planning Commission conducted public hearings on
                 November 26 and December 10, 2013 to make a recommendation to the City
General Plan—February 2014                                                                          9-84

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 Council concerning amendments to the Zoning Code implementing current state
                 law related to households with specials needs. The City Council adopted the
                 amendments on February 10, 2014. The amendments addressed transitional
                 housing, supportive housing, emergency shelters, Single Room Occupancy, and
                 reasonable accommodation.
                 Senior and Workforce Housing
                 Providing adequate and affordable housing for senior residents is an important
                 goal for La Cañada Flintridge. As this population ages, the City will begin to
                 experience a significant increase in demand for senior needs and services. In
                 particular, those aged 75+ will begin to require housing with a supportive
                 services component.
                 The limited supply of rental apartments in La Cañada Flintridge, combined with
                 relatively high rental costs and low vacancy rates, has increased the need for
                 rental housing affordable to the local workforce.
                 The City will pursue several avenues to assist in establishing senior and
                 workforce housing. The DVSP and Mixed Use designations represent expanded
                 opportunities in the City to create quality, affordable housing that is within easy
                 access to shops, services, and employment centers. As a means of facilitating
                 senior and workforce housing development, the City will offer regulatory
                 incentives and/or direct financial assistance appropriate to the project.
                 2008-2014 Housing Element Goal: Facilitate and encourage the development of
                 affordable housing for lower income households (including extremely low
                 incomes, and housing for seniors and persons with disabilities). Specifically,
                 conduct a Developers Workshop in 2012 to inform the development community
                 of opportunity sites (such as the sites rezoned as high density multi-family use),
                 development incentives, and financial assistance for development of workforce
                 and senior housing. Prioritize funding assistance to affordable housing projects
                 that include units affordable to extremely low income households. Directly
                 contact developers experienced in using City of Industry funds to attend the
                 workshop and encourage them to apply for funds on an annual basis. On an
                 ongoing basis, support funding applications for county, state, and other financial
                 resources for projects that further the community’s housing goals. Work with
                 qualified housing developers to pursue affordable housing (including projects
                 that provide set-aside units for extremely low income households) in the
                 community.
                 Program Status: The City addressed existing requirements to make residential
                 development more flexible and less restrictive, including parking standards,
                 planned development permits for multi-family housing, and use of density
                 bonuses under State law, along with appropriate forms of financial assistance for
                 senior and workforce housing. The City conducted a community meeting in
General Plan—February 2014                                                                         9-85

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 October 2013 to discuss housing needs and appropriate development standards
                 for mixed use and multi-family developments. Two developers attended the
                 meeting and provided their input. The Planning Commission also conducted
                 public hearings on November 26 and December 10, 2013 to make a
                 recommendation to the City Council concerning amendments to the Zoning
                 Code. The City Council adopted the amendments on February 10, 2014.
                 Mortgage Credit Certificate (MCC)
                 The Mortgage Credit Certificate (MCC) program is a federal program that allows
                 qualified first-time homebuyers to take an annual credit against federal income
                 taxes of up to 15 percent of the annual interest paid on the applicant’s mortgage.
                 This enables homebuyers to have more income available to qualify for a
                 mortgage loan and make the monthly payments. The value of the MCC program
                 has covenant restrictions to ensure the affordability of the participating home for
                 a period of 15 years. MCCs can be used in conjunction with the County’s Home
                 Ownership Program (HOP).
                 2008-2014 Housing Element Goal: The City will advertise the programs in the
                 City newsletter and website and provide brochures at the public counter to
                 interested homebuyers. In addition, the City will work with local realtors to
                 make them aware of these programs.
                 Program Status: City staff will provide publicity materials and will post
                 information on the City’s website.
                 Home Ownership Program (HOP)
                 The Los Angeles County Community Development Commission HOP provides
                 zero-interest loans with no repayment due until the home is sold, transferred, or
                 refinanced. The loan is secured by second trust deed and a promissory note. The
                 home must be owner occupied for the 20-year life of the loan.
                 2008-2014 Housing Element Goal: The City will advertise the Los Angeles
                 County programs in the City newsletter and website and provide brochures at
                 the public counter to interested homebuyers. In addition, the City will work
                 with local realtors to make them aware of these programs.
                 Program Status: The City provides information on the program in the City Hall
                 lobby.
                 Housing Choice Voucher Program
                 The Housing Choice Voucher Program extends rental subsidies to extremely
                 low- and very low-income households who spend more than 30 percent of their
General Plan—February 2014                                                                          9-86

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 gross income on housing. The Los Angeles County Housing Authority
                 coordinates the Housing Choice Voucher Program on behalf of the City.
                 2008-2014 Housing Element Goal: Continue to participate in the Housing
                 Choice Voucher Program. Encourage property owners, particularly owners of
                 ALQs, to accept the vouchers. Promote program to extremely low-income
                 households.
                 Program Status: The City provides written information on the program in the
                 City Hall lobby. As of October 2013, one senior household is utilizing Housing
                 Choice Voucher in the City, with seven households on the waiting list for
                 assistance.
                 Ensuring Environmental Sensitivity
                 Hillside Development Standards
                 Much of the City’s residential development is located in hillside areas of varying
                 slope characteristics. Hillside development issues include environmental
                 impacts, such as drainage and slope stability, as well as aesthetic considerations,
                 such as view impacts on surrounding properties. The City has adopted Hillside
                 Development Standards that provide development criteria and public review of
                 single-family development in hillside areas and on lots with an average slope of
                 15 percent or greater.
                 2008-2014 Housing Element Goal: Continue to enforce hillside development
                 standards to protect and preserve the environment of the City’s hillside areas
                 and protect residents from unreasonable risk of landslide, wildfire, and other
                 slope-related hazards.
                 Program Status: The City has established Hillside Development Standards that
                 provide development criteria and extensive public review of single-family
                 development in the City’s hillside areas and on lots with an average slope of 15
                 percent of greater. This program remains appropriate to the updated Housing
                 Element.
                 Green Task Force
                 The City has been convening a Green Task Force to explore measures to promote
                 energy conservation in the community. Specifically, the Task Force has held
                 several meetings and met with utility companies to identify resources available.
                 The Task Force has also identified a list of recommendations regarding outreach
                 and education; municipal code and City policy; demonstration projects; and
                 funding. Since establishment of the Green Task Force, the City has already
                 updated its website to include resources for energy and water conservation.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                         9-87

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 2008-2014 Housing Element Goal: Continue to post and expand resources for
                 energy and water conservation on City website. Continue to implement the
                 Construction and Demolition Debris Management program and Calsense by the
                 Public Works Department. Continue to implement recommendations of the
                 Green Task Force as funding permits.
                 Program Status: As a result of the work by the Green Task Force, the City
                 continues to refine programs and information regarding conservation of energy
                 and water. A City information program provides residents with
                 recommendations for conservation. Additionally, the City restructured its
                 Building Fee Schedule to subsidize the use of solar photovoltaic panels.
                 Advancement of Residential Design and Character
                 The City has revised and adopted modifications regarding single-family
                 residential zones in order to address issues regarding size, design, and overall
                 quality issues of new single-family development. The City has refined and
                 modified R-1 development standards, which include modifications to prevent
                 homes that are too large from being constructed on smaller lots (mansionization)
                 and review of second story additions (or new two story homes) for scale,
                 architectural character, and privacy.
                 2008-2014 Housing Element Goal: Continue to review overall design, size, scale,
                 and other quality issues as they relate to residential development.
                 Program Status: The City continues to review development in the single-family
                 residential districts to comply with the adopted development standards.
                 Promoting Equal Housing Opportunities
                 Fair Housing Program
                 The City will continue to use the contract for fair housing services through the
                 Los Angeles County Community Development Commission CDBG program.
                 Fair housing services include outreach and education, tenant/landlord dispute
                 resolution, and fair housing investigations. The roles of the service provider is to
                 provide services to participating jurisdictions, agencies and the general public to
                 further fair housing practices in the sale or rental of housing. La Cañada
                 Flintridge advertises the fair housing program through placement of fair housing
                 services brochures at the public counter and the City’s website.
                 2008-2014 Housing Element Goal: Continue to promote fair housing practices
                 and provide educational information on fair housing to the public. Provide
                 referral to the fair housing service providers (Housing Rights Center and Fair
                 Housing Council of San Fernando Valley). Place fair housing brochures at City
General Plan—February 2014                                                                          9-88

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                  Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 counters and community locations. Provide a link to the fair housing service
                 providers on the City’s website.
                 Program Status: Since La Cañada Flintridge is not a large tenant-based
                 community, there have been limited tenant/landlord disputes or incidents of
                 alleged housing discrimination as reported by the fair housing service provider.
                 The City will continue to participate in the program through the County
                 Community Development Commission and to provide brochures and
                 information on the City’s website.
 9.6             Goals and Policies
                 This section of the Housing Element contains the goals and policies the City
                 intends to implement to address a number of important housing related issues.
                 HE Goal 1: Facilitate the provision of a variety of types and adequate
                 supply of housing to meet the existing and future needs of City
                 residents.
                       HE Policy 1.1: Facilitate a range of residential development types in the
                       City, including low density single-family homes, Accessory Living Quarters
                       (second units), moderate density apartments and condominiums, and mixed
                       use residential development, in accordance with the Regional Housing
                       Needs Allocation (RHNA).
                       HE Policy 1.2: Facilitate mixed use and senior housing development within
                       the Downtown Village Specific Plan area and other mixed use areas to
                       expand housing opportunities for all income groups.
                       HE Policy 1.3: Assist residential developers in identifying land suitable for
                       new housing development.
                       HE Policy 1.4: Support the dispersion of Accessory Living Quarters
                       throughout the City's lower density single-family neighborhoods.
                       HE Policy 1.5: Locate higher density residential development in close
                       proximity to public transportation, other public and private services, and
                       recreation.
                       HE Policy 1.6: Continue to support the development of childcare facilities to
                       provide improved housing conditions benefitting households lacking in-
                       home childcare capability.
                       HE Policy 1.7: Monitor all regulations, ordinances, departmental processing
                       procedures, and fees related to the rehabilitation and/or construction of
                       dwelling units to assess their impact on housing costs.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                           9-89

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                  Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 HE Goal 2: Maintain and enhance the quality of existing residential
                 neighborhoods in the City.
                       HE Policy 2.1: Promote increased awareness among property owners and
                       residents of the importance of property maintenance to long-term
                       neighborhood quality and housing values.
                       HE Policy 2.2: Continue to use the City's code enforcement program to
                       bring substandard units into compliance with the City's Property
                       Maintenance Ordinance and other codes, and to ensure the maintenance of
                       the overall condition of the City's residential neighborhoods.
                       HE Policy 2.3: Encourage property owners to consider the benefits of home
                       repair and remodeling using design and materials consistent with the
                       existing or historic character of the residence.
                 HE Goal 3: Address the housing needs of lower and moderate-income
                 households and those households with special needs.
                       HE Policy 3.1: Encourage the private sector to produce housing with
                       particular emphasis on underserved segments of the community and
                       households with special needs, including affordable and market-rate
                       housing for seniors.
                       HE Policy 3.2: Facilitate the development of low- and moderate-income
                       housing by allowing developers a density bonus, as required by state law.
                       HE Policy 3.3: Accommodate the development of residential units that are
                       accessible to or are adaptable for conversion to residential use by persons
                       with disabilities.
                       HE Policy 3.4: Address governmental constraints to the development and
                       preservation of housing for lower income households and those with special
                       needs through appropriate development standards and land use controls,
                       and efficient permit processing procedures.
                 HE GOAL 4: Ensure that housing is sensitive to the existing natural and
                 built environment.
                       HE Policy 4.1: Protect residential neighborhoods from excessive noise
                       through appropriate planning to minimize traffic and incompatible land
                       uses.
                       HE Policy 4.2: Require that new residential development is coordinated
                       with the provision of infrastructure and public services.
                       HE Policy 4.3: Improve standards for adequate off-street parking space for
                       vehicles (including garages for single-family dwellings), with safe access to
                       streets and highways.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                           9-90

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                   Chapter 9. Housing Element
                       HE Policy 4.4: Encourage the use of energy conservation devices and
                       passive design concepts, which make use of the natural climate to increase
                       energy efficiency and reduce housing costs.
                       HE Policy 4.5: Regularly examine new residential construction methods and
                       materials, and upgrade the City's residential building and design standards
                       as appropriate to ensure energy efficiency.
                       HE Policy 4.6: Provide affordable and special needs housing with priority
                       for water and sewer allocations should water and sewer capacity become a
                       constraining factor to housing development.
                       HE Policy 4.7: Continue to provide residents the opportunity to approve
                       benefit assessment districts for the installation of sewers.
                 HE GOAL 5: Promote equal housing opportunities for all persons in
                 accordance with fair housing laws.
                       HE Policy 5.1: Cooperate with local fair housing agencies to enforce fair
                       housing laws.
                       HE Policy 5.2: Inform the fair housing service provider of any known
                       violations of applicable federal and state laws.
                       HE Policy 5.3: Refer individuals concerned with possible violations of
                       applicable fair housing laws to the fair housing service provider to ensure
                       timely and effective response to such concerns. Publish information on
                       these services at least annually.
9.7              Housing Programs
                 The goals and policies contained in the Housing Element address La Cañada
                 Flintridge’s identified housing needs and are implemented through a series of
                 housing programs offered through the Community Development Department
                 and the Division of Building and Safety. Housing programs define the specific
                 actions the City will undertake to achieve the stated goals and policies. La
                 Cañada Flintridge’s housing programs address the following five major areas:
                         providing new housing opportunities;
                         conserving and maintaining existing housing;
                         facilitating the provision of housing for lower and moderate-income and
                          special needs households;
                         ensuring environmental sensitivity; and
                         promoting equal housing opportunity
General Plan—February 2014                                                                            9-91

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                   Chapter 9. Housing Element
9.7.1            Providing New Housing Opportunities
                 A major focus of La Cañada Flintridge’s housing plan is to adequately provide a
                 balanced inventory of housing types, style, and prices to allow the City to meet
                 the housing needs of all residents in the community. In addition, providing
                 financial and regulatory assistance will be essential to facilitate the production of
                 affordable housing not provided through the private market.
9.7.1.1          Adequate Residential Sites
                 As part of the comprehensive update to the City’s General Plan, the City created
                 additional opportunities for residential development through mixed use zoning.
                 In addition, the City proposes to rezone 4.4 acres of land as high density
                 residential uses prior to the adoption of the 2013-2021 Housing Element. The
                 Planning Commission adopted a resolution recommending the rezoning on
                 December 10, 2013 following a public hearing. The City Council approved the
                 rezoning on February 10, 2014.
                 The City of La Cañada Flintridge is primarily built out. Much of the City’s land
                 area is constrained by topographic and other environmental features. With
                 limited opportunities for future residential development, the City will ensure
                 that it maintains an inventory of residential sites to accommodate the City’s total
                 Regional Housing Needs Assessment of 343 units, including 92 very low, 57 low,
                 62 moderate, and 132 above moderate income units.
                 Objectives and Time Frame: Prior to adoption of the 2013-2021 Housing
                 Element on February 10, 2014, at the same meeting, the City amended the Zoning
                 Code to rezone 4.4 acres of existing lower density residential and nonresidential
                 land to high density residential land, where multi-family residential
                 development will be permitted by right without discretionary review at up to 30
                 units per acre (with a minimum density of 20 units per acre). To facilitate
                 residential development on these properties, the Planned Development (PD)
                 permit requirement will be removed for the High Density (30 units per acre)
                 properties identified for rezoning. Regularly monitor the effectiveness of
                 incentives in encouraging redevelopment and identify alternatives as necessary.
                 Concurrent with that rezoning, the City adopted appropriate development
                 standards, including reduced parking requirements, reduced minimum unit
                 sizes, and height limit (at least two stories) that are consistent with similar
                 developments in the region. Ensure that the development standards are
                 adequate to allow the achievement of the maximum density permitted. Adopt
                 design guidelines to implement the City’s new mixed use and high density
                 residential zoning. Maintain an inventory of residential and mixed use sites for
                 interested developers; update the inventory annually. Assist in lot consolidation
                 by providing a list of appropriate and available sites to interested developers.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                            9-92

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                  Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 Monitor the sites inventory annually to ensure the City has adequate capacity for
                 its RHNA.
                 Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department
                 Funding Sources: General funds
9.7.1.2          Downtown Village Specific Plan (DVSP)
                 In November of 2000, the City adopted the DVSP, consisting of areas along
                 Foothill Boulevard in the center of the City. The primary focus of the DVSP is to
                 enhance Foothill Boulevard by creating a community-oriented town center that
                 includes a mixture of commercial, office, and residential uses. The DVSP
                 provides for integration of residential uses in designated Mixed Use areas as a
                 means of enhancing 24-hour activity along Foothill Boulevard.
                 Objectives and Time Frame: Provide information on sites within the DVSP area
                 and development incentives available through the City’s density bonus
                 ordinance in support of affordable housing and on available financial assistance
                 through the City, county, and state. The City will also amend the DVSP
                 designation to allow multi-family housing for all household types, not just senior
                 multi-family housing, prior to adoption of the 2013-2014 Housing Element. The
                 Planning Commission held public hearings on November 26 and December 10,
                 2013 to review the amendments. Upon conclusion of the public hearings, the
                 Planning Commission recommended adoption of the amendments. On February
                 10, 2014, the City Council adopted the amendments prior to adoption of the 2013-
                 2021 Housing Element at the same hearing.
                 Furthermore, in 2014/2015, the City will consider amending the DVSP to
                 increase the multi-family residential density from 15 units per acre to 30 units per
                 acre, consistent with citywide regulations.
                 Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department
                 Funding Sources: CDBG; State housing funds
9.7.1.3          Lot Consolidation
                 Much of the future residential development is expected to occur in the DVSP
                 area and in the newly created Mixed Use and High Density Residential (30 units
                 per acre) zones. The City will facilitate lot consolidation for mixed use and
                 housing developments in these areas.
                 Objectives and Time Frame: Allowing administrative processing of lot
                 consolidation requests. Provide assistance with site identification and
                 entitlement processing. Offer fee deferrals for affordable housing projects. Work
General Plan—February 2014                                                                           9-93

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 with property owners to facilitate lot consolidation and identify redevelopment
                 potential.
                 Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department
                 Funding Sources: CDBG; State housing funds
9.7.1.4          Second Units/Accessory Living Quarters (ALQs)
                 Second units represent a viable means of dispersing lower cost rental housing in
                 the community while assisting homeowners, such as seniors on fixed incomes, to
                 obtain rental income. The City amended the ALQs ordinance to permit the
                 development of ALQs (second units) via a ministerial process. Many property
                 owners have developed second units pursuant to the City’s ALQ ordinance to
                 use for guests, family members, domestic workers, and as independent rental
                 units.
                 Objectives and Timeframe: Continue to support the development of second
                 units as a source of affordable housing for lower and extremely low income
                 persons, and monitor annually to ensure adherence to codes and to assess rental
                 rates. The City’s goal is to achieve development of two second units per year,
                 which provides rental housing to low- and moderate-income households.
                 Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department
                 Funding Sources: Departmental budget
9.7.2            Conserving and Maintaining Existing Housing
9.7.2.1          Code Enforcement (Community Preservation)
                 The objective of the City’s Code Enforcement Program is to ensure the safety of
                 residents and prevent structures and properties from falling into substandard
                 condition. Potential code violations are identified based on complaints reported
                 to the City. Exterior inspections are then performed and if necessary, a
                 notification of violation is issued to the property owners.
                 Objectives and Timeframe: Continue to enforce the City’s Property
                 Maintenance Ordinance to preserve existing units, maintain property values, and
                 support a high quality of life for residents. Provide information to income-
                 qualified property owners on available rehabilitation assistance.
                 Responsible Agencies: Building and Safety Division; Community Development
                 Department Code Enforcement
General Plan—February 2014                                                                          9-94

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 Funding Sources: Departmental budget
9.7.2.2          Residential Rehabilitation Program
                 The City’s Residential Rehabilitation Program offers home improvement grants
                 to low-income households in single-family homes. Funded through the City’s
                 CDBG allocation, eligible activities include plumbing and electrical work, roof
                 repairs, foundation and exterior painting, handicapped accessibility, and energy
                 efficiency improvements.
                 Objectives and Timeframe: Continue to advertise availability of the Residential
                 Rehabilitation Program through brochures at the public counter and posting on
                 the City’s website. Target advertising to the lower and extremely low income
                 households, including seniors and persons with disabilities (including persons
                 with developmental disabilities). Provide CDBG funds to achieve approximately
                 three grants per year.
                 Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department
                 Funding Sources: CDBG
9.7.2.3          Sewer Connection Grant Program
                 The City implemented a Sewer Connection Grant Program to assist lower and
                 moderate-income households, especially extremely low income households, with
                 the costs of connecting single-family homes to the City’s sewer system in the
                 City’s sewer districts. (This program is targeted for single-family homes because
                 multi-family tenants do not pay for sewer connections.)
                 Objectives and Timeframe: Provide grants for approximately four to six lower
                 and moderate-income households annually. The City will continue to advertise
                 the availability of this program through brochures at the public counter, posting
                 on the City’s website, and other appropriate venues.
                 Responsible Agencies: Public Works Department; Community Development
                 Department
                 Funding Sources: CDBG
9.7.2.4          Condominium Conversion Ordinance
                 The City has adopted a condominium conversion ordinance that sets forth
                 criteria for the conversion of existing multi-family rental housing to
                 condominiums. Included in the ordinance are a number of tenant provisions
                 such as priority of purchase, notice of hearing, relocation assistance, and
General Plan—February 2014                                                                          9-95

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                  Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 adequate notice to vacate. In addition, the applicant must file a report indicating
                 the impact of the condominium conversion upon the rental market in the
                 community and the availability of adequate replacement units. Before
                 approving a conversion, the Planning Commission must consider the effect of the
                 proposed conversion on the City’s low- and moderate-income housing supply.
                 Objectives and Timeframe: Continue to enforce condominium conversion
                 regulations to help conserve existing rental housing and provide tenant
                 protections.
                 Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department
                 Funding Sources: Departmental budget
9.7.2.5          Multi-Family Housing Acquisition and Rehabilitation
                 The City contains several older apartment buildings in need of upgrading and
                 repair. Several non-profit housing providers active in the greater Los Angeles
                 area have acquired similar aging apartment buildings and rehabilitated these
                 buildings as long-term affordable housing. While the City has limited funds to
                 support such a project, it can assist a non-profit in accessing outside funds, such
                 as through City of Industry funds.
                 Objectives and Timeframe: The City will identify apartments and duplexes in
                 the community in need of substantial rehabilitation and will contact property
                 and housing corporations regarding opportunities for acquisition and
                 rehabilitation. Program will target assistance to units occupied by lower income
                 households (especially extremely low income senior households and persons
                 with disabilities).
                 Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department; Community
                 Development Commission
                 Funding Sources: CDBG; HOME; state and federal housing funds
9.7.3            Facilitating Housing for Lower- and Moderate-
                 Income and Special Needs Households
9.7.3.1          Density Bonus
                 Density bonuses, together with the incentives and/or concessions, can result in a
                 lower average cost of land per dwelling unit, thereby making the provision of
                 affordable housing more feasible. A density bonus up to 35 percent over the
                 otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the applicable zoning
                 district is available to developers who provide affordable housing as part of their
General Plan—February 2014                                                                           9-96

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 projects. Developers of affordable housing are also entitled to at least one
                 concession or incentive. The City will amend its Zoning Code to comply with
                 current state density bonus law. The density bonus ordinance will specify the
                 types of regulatory concessions and incentives to be offered consistent with state
                 law. Examples of concessions and incentives that could be offered include, but
                 are not limited to, reductions in the amount of required on-site parking, fee
                 reductions, expedited permit processing, and modified or waived development
                 standards.
                 Objectives and Timeframe: Revise the Zoning Code to address density bonus
                 provisions consistent with state density bonus law prior to adoption of the 2013-
                 2021 Housing Element. The Planning Commission conducted hearings on
                 November 26 and December 10, 2013 to review the proposed ordinance. Upon
                 conclusion of the hearings, the Planning Commission recommended approval of
                 the density bonus ordinance. On February 10, 2014, the City Council adopted the
                 density bonus ordinance. Promote the use of density bonus incentives to
                 developers and provide technical assistance to developers in utilizing density
                 bonus for maximized feasibility and to meet local housing needs.
                 Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department
                 Funding Sources: Departmental budget
9.7.3.2          Special Needs Housing
                 The La Cañada Flintridge Zoning Code did not specifically address the siting of
                 transitional housing, emergency shelters, supportive housing, or single-room
                 occupancy units, which are housing options appropriate for special needs
                 households and lower income households, including extremely low-income
                 households.
                 Specifically, the following revisions would be made:
                         Transitional Housing: Amend the Zoning Ordinance to address the
                          provision of transitional housing. Transitional housing pursuant to
                          Government Code Section 65582(h) will be permitted where housing is
                          permitted, and subject to the same development standards as other
                          housing development.
                         Supportive Housing: Amend the Zoning Ordinance to address the
                          provision of supportive housing. Supportive housing pursuant to
                          Government Code Sections 65582(f) and (g) will be permitted where
                          housing is permitted, and subject to the same development standards as
                          other housing development.
                         Emergency Shelters: Amend the Zoning Ordinance to identify
                          emergency shelters as a permitted use in the CPD zone.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                         9-97

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 9. Housing Element
                         Single Room Occupancy (SRO): Amend the Zoning Code to specify SRO
                          as a conditionally permitted use in the CPD zone. Conditions for
                          approval will relate to the performance of the facility, such as parking,
                          security, and management.
                         Reasonable Accommodation: Adopt a reasonable accommodation
                          ordinance to specify the types of requests to be considered, the
                          procedures for applying and reviewing accommodation requests, the
                          approval criteria and body, and any fee involved.
                 Objectives and Timeframe: On February 10, 2014, the City amended the Zoning
                 Code prior to adoption of the 2013-2021 Housing Element. Continue to monitor
                 the effectiveness of the City’s Zoning Code in facilitating a range of housing
                 options in the City. Address impediments as appropriate and to the extent
                 legally feasible.
                 Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department
                 Funding Sources: Departmental budget
9.7.3.3          Senior and Workforce Housing
                 Providing adequate and affordable housing for senior residents is an important
                 goal for La Cañada Flintridge. According to the 2010 Census, 28 percent of the
                 City’s households contain one or more elderly members. As this population
                 ages, the City will begin to experience a significant increase in demand for senior
                 needs and services. In particular, those aged 75+ will begin to require housing
                 with a supportive services component. Currently, there are five small senior care
                 facilities in the community, each with a six-bed capacity.
                 The limited supply of rental apartments in La Cañada Flintridge, combined with
                 relatively high rental costs and low vacancy rates, has increased the need for
                 rental housing affordable to the local workforce. Workforce occupations that
                 may be precluded from residing in La Cañada Flintridge due to high housing
                 costs include teachers, firefighters, nurses, and many City employees.
                 The City will pursue several avenues to assist in establishing senior and
                 workforce housing. The DVSP and Mixed Use designations represent expanded
                 opportunities in the City to create quality, affordable housing that is within easy
                 access to shops, services, and employment centers. As a means of facilitating
                 senior and workforce housing development, the City will offer regulatory
                 incentives and/or direct financial assistance appropriate to the project. The
                 following are among the types of incentives that may be provided:
                         flexible development standards (reduced parking requirements, modified
                          setbacks, etc.);
General Plan—February 2014                                                                          9-98

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 9. Housing Element
                         density bonuses;
                         city support in affordable housing funding applications;
                         reduction in development fees; and
                         direct financial assistance.
                 A portion of the City’s CDBG funds can be used to assist in the financing of
                 senior and workforce housing projects. New housing developments in La
                 Cañada Flintridge may also be eligible for other state and federal financing.
                 Objectives and Timeframe: Facilitate and encourage the development of
                 affordable housing for lower income households (including extremely low
                 incomes, and housing for seniors and persons with disabilities, including
                 developmental disabilities. City staff will continue to inform the development
                 community of opportunity sites (such as the sites rezoned as high density multi-
                 family use), development incentives, and financial assistance for development of
                 workforce and senior housing. Prioritize funding assistance to affordable
                 housing projects that include units affordable to extremely low income
                 households. On an ongoing basis, support funding applications for county, state,
                 and other financial resources for projects that further the community’s housing
                 goals. Work with qualified housing developers to pursue affordable housing
                 (including projects that provide set-aside units for extremely low income
                 households and persons with disabilities, including those with developmental
                 disabilities) in the community.
                 Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department; Los Angeles
                 County Community Development Commission
                 Funding Sources: CDBG; state and federal housing funds
9.7.3.4          Mortgage Credit Certificate (MCC)
                 The Mortgage Credit Certificate (MCC) program is a federal program that allows
                 qualified first-time homebuyers to take an annual credit against federal income
                 taxes of up to 15 percent of the annual interest paid on the applicant’s mortgage.
                 This enables homebuyers to have more income available to qualify for a
                 mortgage loan and make the monthly payments. The value of the MCC program
                 has covenant restrictions to ensure the affordability of the participating home for
                 a period of 15 years. MCCs can be used in conjunction with the County’s Home
                 Ownership Program (HOP).
                 Objectives and Timeframe: The City will advertise the programs in the City
                 newsletter and website and provide brochures at the public counter to interested
                 homebuyers. In addition, the City will work with local realtors to make them
                 aware of these programs.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                          9-99

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                Chapter 9. Housing Element
                 Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department; Los Angeles
                 County Community Development Commission
                 Funding Sources: MCC credit allocations
9.7.3.5          Home Ownership Program (HOP)
                 The Los Angeles County HOP provides zero-interest loans with no repayment
                 due until the home is sold, transferred, or refinanced. The loan is secured by
                 second trust deed and a promissory note. The home must be owner occupied for
                 the 20-year life of the loan.
                 Objectives and Timeframe: The City will advertise the programs in the City
                 newsletter and website and provide brochures at the public counter to interested
                 homebuyers. In addition, the City will work with local realtors to make them
                 aware of these programs.
                 Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department; Los Angeles
                 County Community Development Commission
                 Funding Sources: HOME funds
9.7.3.6          Housing Choice Voucher Program
                 The Housing Choice Voucher Program extends rental subsidies to extremely
                 low- and very low-income households who spend more than 30 percent of their
                 gross income on housing. The Los Angeles County Housing Authority
                 coordinates the Housing Choice Voucher Program on behalf of the City. As of
                 October 2013, one senior household is utilizing Housing Choice Voucher in the
                 City, with seven households on the waiting list for assistance.
                 Objectives and Timeframe: Continue to participate in the Housing Choice
                 Voucher Program. Encourage property owners, particularly owners of ALQs, to
                 accept the vouchers. Promote program to extremely low-income households.
                 Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department; Los Angeles
                 County Community Development Commission
                 Funding Sources: HUD Section 8 allocations
General Plan—February 2014                                                                        9-100

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                Chapter 9. Housing Element
9.7.4            Ensuring Environmental Sensitivity
9.7.4.1          Hillside Development Standards
                 Much of the City’s residential development is located in hillside areas of varying
                 slope characteristics. Hillside development issues include environmental
                 impacts, such as drainage and slope stability, as well as aesthetic considerations,
                 such as view impacts on surrounding properties. The City has adopted Hillside
                 Development Standards that provide development criteria and public review of
                 single-family development in hillside areas and on lots with an average slope of
                 15 percent or greater.
                 Objectives and Timeframe: Continue to enforce hillside development standards
                 to protect and preserve the environment of the City’s hillside areas and protect
                 residents from unreasonable risk of landslide, wildfire, and other slope-related
                 hazards.
                 Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department
                 Funding Sources: General funds
9.7.4.2          Green Task Force
                 The City has been convening a Green Task Force to explore measures to promote
                 energy conservation in the community. Specifically, the Task Force has held
                 several meetings and met with utility companies to identify resources available.
                 The Task Force has also identified a list of recommendations regarding outreach
                 and education; municipal code and City policy; demonstration projects; and
                 funding. Since establishment of the Green Task Force, the City has already
                 updated its website to include resources for energy and water conservation, and
                 reduced the fee schedule to subsidize the use of solar photovoltaic panels.
                 Objectives and Timeframe: Continue to post and expand resources for energy
                 and water conservation on City website.            Continue to implement the
                 Construction and Demolition Debris Management program and Calsense by the
                 Public Works Department. Continue to implement recommendations of the
                 Green Task Force as funding permits.
                 Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department; Public Works
                 Department
                 Funding Sources: General funds
General Plan—February 2014                                                                        9-101

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                 Chapter 9. Housing Element
9.7.4.3          Advancement of Residential Design and Character
                 The City has revised and adopted modifications regarding single-family
                 residential zones in order to address issues regarding size, design, and overall
                 quality issues of new single-family development. The City has refined and
                 modified R-1 development standards, which include modifications to prevent
                 homes that are too large from being constructed on smaller lots (mansionization)
                 and review of second story additions (or new two story homes) for scale,
                 architectural character, and privacy.
                 Objectives and Timeframe: Continue to review overall design, size, scale, and
                 other quality issues as they relate to residential development.
                 Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department
                 Funding Sources: General funds
9.7.5            Promoting Equal Housing Opportunities
9.7.5.1          Fair Housing Program
                 The City will continue to use the contract for fair housing services through the
                 Los Angeles County Community Development Commission CDBG program.
                 Fair housing services include outreach and education, tenant/landlord dispute
                 resolution, and fair housing investigations. The roles of the service provider is to
                 provide services to participating jurisdictions, agencies and the general public to
                 further fair housing practices in the sale or rental of housing. La Cañada
                 Flintridge advertises the fair housing program through placement of fair housing
                 services brochures at the public counter and the City’s website.
                 Objectives and Timeframe: Continue to promote fair housing practices and
                 provide educational information on fair housing to the public. Provide referral
                 to the fair housing service providers (Housing Rights Center and Fair Housing
                 Council of San Fernando Valley). Place fair housing brochures at City counters
                 and community locations. In 2014, provide a link to the fair housing service
                 providers on the City’s website.
                 Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department; Community
                 Development Commission; fair housing service providers (Housing Rights
                 Center and Fair Housing Council of San Fernando Valley)
                 Funding Sources: CDBG
General Plan—February 2014                                                                         9-102

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                            Chapter 9. Housing Element
9.7.6             Quantified Objectives
                  Table HE-42 provides a summary of quantified housing objectives from the
                  various housing programs identified above.
Table HE-42. Summary of Quantified Objectives
                                  Extremely                                     Above
                                     Low     Very Low    Low    Moderate      Moderate       Total
Units to be Constructed (RHNA)        49         43       57       62             132         343
Units to be Rehabilitated             8          16       24       16              0           64
At-Risk Units to be Preserved         0           0       0         0              0           0
Households to be Assisted             0           1        0        0              0           1
(Section 8)
General Plan—February 2014                                                                    9-103

 
City of La Cañada Flintridge                           Chapter 9. Housing Element
Appendix HE-A:
Outreach List
Housing Rights Center
520 S. Virgil Avenue, Suite 400
Los Angeles, CA 90020
Armenian Relief Society
Regional Executive Board
517 W. Glenoaks Blvd.
Glendale, CA 91202
Elderly Services Consortium for Asian/Pacific American
767 N. Hill Street, Suite 400
Los Angeles, CA 90012
Crescenta-Cañada Family YMCA
1930 Foothill Blvd.
La Cañada Flintridge, CA 91011
La Cañada Presbyterian Church
626 Foothill Boulevard
La Cañada Flintridge, CA 91011
La Cañada Flintridge Kiwanis – AM Club
Joyce Ruygrok , President
c/o Lutheran Church in the Foothills
1700 Foothill Blvd.
La Cañada Flintridge, CA 91011
The Salvation Army Meals on Wheels
320 West Windsor Road
Glendale, California 91204
Assistance League(R) of Flintridge
4607 Oakwood Avenue
La Cañada Flintridge, CA 91011
Lutheran Church in the Foothills
1700 Foothill Blvd.
La Cañada Flintridge, CA 91011
St. Bede’s Church or Parish
215 Foothill Blvd.,
General Plan—February 2014                                                  9-A1

City of La Cañada Flintridge                Chapter 9. Housing Element
La Cañada Flintridge, CA 91011
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints
1830 Foothill Blvd.
La Cañada Flintridge, CA 91011
Rotary Club of La Cañada Flintridge
P.O. Box 44
La Cañada Flintridge, CA 91011
The Olson Company
3010 Old Ranch Parkway
Suite 100
Seal Beach, CA 90740
Jonathan Curtis
Trevear Holdings LLC
4811 Palm Drive
La Cañada Flintridge, CA 91011
Moule Polyzoides
180 East California Boulevard
Pasadena, CA 91105
Zentmyer Properties
1434 Foothill Boulevard
La Cañada Flintridge, CA 91011
General Plan—February 2014                                       9-A2

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                  Chapter 9. Housing Element
Appendix HE-B:
Sites Available for Emergency Shelters
 Acres      Existing Use
     0.90   Largely vacant lot, with a small building on site
     0.17   Gas station
     0.94   Old single story office building
     0.30   Auto-related, repair uses
     0.17   Auto-related, repair uses
     0.06
            Old small office building, not fully occupied
     0.34
     0.12   Small restaurant - vacated
     0.73
            Low-intensity strip shopping
     0.38
     0.56   Craft and hobby shop
     0.80   Preschool uses
     0.24   Auto-related, repair uses
     0.28   Low-intensity strip shopping
     0.10
            Single-story retail
     0.04
     0.48
            Vacant lot and parking space
     0.77
General Plan—February 2014                                                          9-B1

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                     Chapter 9. Housing Element
                             This page intentionally left blank.
General Plan—February 2014                                                             9-B2

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                    Chapter 9. Housing Element
Appendix HE-C:
Vacant and Underutilized Properties
Downtown Village Specific Plan (DVSP)
                                                                Site        Max.     Potential      Unit
 Site ID       APN (Map ID)               Land Use
                                                              Acreage     Density     Density    Capacity
DVSP Mixed Use 1
             5815-012-025 (236) Store Building                    0.446         15          12           5
             5815-012-026 (237) Store Building                    0.149         15          12           1
             5815-012-027 (238) Store Building                    0.149         15          12           1
             5815-012-028 (239) Store Building                    0.149         15          12           1
             5815-012-029 (340) Store Building                    0.149         15          12           1
             5815-012-030 (241) Store Building                    0.149         15          12           1
             5815-012-031 (242) Store Building                    0.149         15          12           1
             5815-013-001 (247) Store Building                    0.207         15          12           2
             5815-013-002 (248) Store Building                    0.227         15          12           2
             5815-013-008 (211) Store Building                    0.112         15          12           1
             5815-013-009 (212) Store Building                    0.112         15          12           1
             5815-013-010 (213) Store Building                    0.056         15          12           0
             5815-013-037 (249) Store Building                    0.228         15          12           2
             5815-013-038 (250) Store Building                    0.235         15          12           2
             5815-013-039 (251) Store Building                    0.235         15          12           2
             5815-013-040 (252) Store Building                    0.235         15          12           2
Site #6      5815-013-042 (215) Vacant Residential Lot            0.375         15          12           4
             5815-013-043 (253) Store Building                    0.126         15          12           1
             5815-013-044 (254) Store Building                    0.126         15          12           1
             5815-013-045 (216) Store Building                    0.074         15          12           0
             5815-013-046 (217) Store Building                    0.120         15          12           1
             5815-013-047 (60)    Vacant Commercial Lot           0.006         15          12           0
             5815-013-048 (218) Store Building                    0.054         15          12           0
             5815-013-049 (219) Store Building                    0.111         15          12           1
             5815-013-050 (294) Store Building                    0.044         15          12           0
             5815-013-051 (295) Store Building                    0.067         15          12           0
             5815-013-054 (255) Store Building                    0.172         15          12           2
             5815-013-055 (256) Store Building                    0.164         15          12           1
             5815-013-056 (296) Store Building                    0.055         15          12           0
             Notes: Low intensity commercial uses with multiple store fronts currently vacant (i.e.
             former Wells Fargo branch office) and available for lease and lacking regular maintenance
             and upkeep. The site also includes ample surface parking lots behind the street facing
             commercial structures, most of which remains empty and unused.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                            9-C1

City of La Cañada Flintridge                        Chapter 9. Housing Element
                                       Site     Max.    Potential     Unit
 Site ID       APN (Map ID)  Land Use
                                      Acreage  Density   Density    Capacity
             Total Site 6                4.457      15          12         36
General Plan—February 2014                                               9-C2

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                      Chapter 9. Housing Element
                                                                  Site        Max.     Potential     Unit
 Site ID       APN (Map ID)                  Land Use
                                                                Acreage Density         Density Capacity
             5815-013-012 (59)      Office Building                0.131          15           12          1
             5815-013-014 (67)      Store Building                 0.112          15           12          1
             5815-013-016 (185) Store Building                     0.112          15           12          1
             5815-013-017 (148) Store Building                     0.147          15           12          1
             5815-013-019 (162) SFR                                0.138          15           12          1
             5815-013-020 (267) SFR                                0.170          15           12          2
             5815-013-021 (355) SFR                                0.172          15           12          2
             5815-013-022 (356) Vacant Residential                 0.152          15           12          1
             5815-013-024 (153) SFR                                0.161          15           12          1
             5815-013-025 (143) SFR                                0.193          15           12          2
             5815-013-057 (374) SFR                                0.152          15           12          1
             5815-013-058 (157) SFR                                0.161          15           12          1
             Notes: Low intensity commercial uses on parcels facing Foothill Boulevard. Parcels in the
Site #8      rear, facing residential street, were primarily comprised of older single family residential
             structures on large lots.
             Total Site 8                                          1.801          15           12         15
             5815-013-027 (379) SFR                                0.172          15           12          2
             5815-013-028 (353) SFR                                0.287          15           12          3
             5815-013-032 (128) SFR                                0.181          15           12          2
             Notes: Older single family residential structures on large lots.
Site #9
             Total Site 9                                          0.640          15           12          7
General Plan—February 2014                                                                              9-C3

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                   Chapter 9. Housing Element
                                                               Site       Max.     Potential        Unit
 Site ID       APN (Map ID)                Land Use
                                                             Acreage    Density     Density      Capacity
             5815-014-004 (344)   SFR                            0.184        15            12            2
             5815-014-005 (168)   Restaurant                     0.710        15            12            8
             5815-014-008 (187)   Office Building                0.105        15            12            1
             5815-014-009 (21)    Auto Repair                    0.105        15            12            1
             5815-014-010 (29)    Office Building                0.053        15            12            0
             5815-014-011 (173)   Store Building                 0.053        15            12            0
                                  Single-Family
             5815-014-027 (172)                                  0.274        15            12            3
                                  Residential
                                  Single-Family
             5815-014-028 (33)                                   0.174        15            12            2
                                  Residential
             5815-014-043 (389) Parking Lot                      0.873        15            12           10
             Notes: Retail development on parcels adjacent to Foothill Boulevard with several retailers.
             Older, low-intensity commercial uses on rear parcels not adjacent to Foothill Boulevard,
             including a restaurant, an independent yoga studio, a yogurt shop, and real estate offices.
Site #10
             Total Site 10                                       2.529        15            12           27
General Plan—February 2014                                                                            9-C4

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                     Chapter 9. Housing Element
                                                                  Site      Max.     Potential     Unit
 Site ID       APN (Map ID)                 Land Use
                                                                Acreage Density       Density    Capacity
             5815-020-031 (81)     Retail                          0.470         15          12          5
             Notes: Service station on large lot and adjacent convenience store.
Site #12
             5814-020-001(75)      Restaurant                      0.248         15          12
             5814-020-014 (76)     Store Building                  0.292         15          12
             5814-020-028 (77)     Restaurant                      0.420         15          12
             Notes: Former Pinkberry site and Italian gelato shop that are currently vacant and available
             for lease. The third parcel is a marginal low intensity commercial use.
Site #H
             Total Site H                                          0.960         15          12         11
Total DVSP Mixed Use 1                                            10.411         15          12         96
General Plan—February 2014                                                                            9-C5

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                  Chapter 9. Housing Element
                                                              Site      Max.       Potential    Unit
 Site ID       APN (Map ID)               Land Use
                                                            Acreage    Density     Density     Capacity
DVSP Mixed Use 2
             5812-023-006 (25)    Store                        0.126         15            12
             5812-023-007 (26)    Commercial                   0.126         15            12
             5812-023-008 (27)    Commercial                   0.058         15            12
             5812-023-009 (28)    Commercial                   0.058         15            12
             5812-023-010 (29)    Service Station              0.185         15            12
             Notes: Low intensity commercial uses with multiple vacancies available for lease.
Site #A
             Site A Total                                      0.553         15            12         6
             5812-023-001 (20)    Store                        0.058         15            12
             5812-023-002 (21)    Store                        0.035         15            12
             5812-023-003 (22)    Office                       0.080         15            12
             5812-023-004 (23)    Store                        0.058         15            12
             5812-023-005 (24)    Store and Office             0.112         15            12
             5812-023-018 (32)    Office                       0.065         15            12
             5812-023-019 (33)    Office                       0.058         15            12
             5812-023-020 (34)    Office                       0.058         15            12
             5812-023-022 (35)    Store                        0.057         15            12
             5812-023-023 (36)    Store                        0.058         15            12
             5812-023-024 (37)    Office                       0.115         15            12
             5812-023-032 (41)    Office                       0.058         15            12
Site #B      5812-023-033 (42)    Office                       0.058         15            12
             Notes: Low intensity commercial uses with multiple vacancies available for lease.
General Plan—February 2014                                                                         9-C6

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                    Chapter 9. Housing Element
                                                                Site        Max.     Potential      Unit
 Site ID       APN (Map ID)                Land Use
                                                              Acreage     Density     Density     Capacity
             Site B Total                                        1.423          15           12          17
             5814-002-002 (385) Restaurant                       0.150          15           12           1
             5814-002-003 (61)     Office Building               0.150          15           12           1
             5814-002-005 (40)     Apartment                     0.640          15           12           7
             5814-002-018 (26)     Store Building                0.150          15           12           1
             Notes: Older, low-intensity, mom and pop restaurants and retail uses, including a sandwich
             shop, a restaurant, and an insurance office. Most parcels also have large surface parking lots
             located behind the street-adjacent commercial structures which remain primarily empty and
             unused.
Site #2
General Plan—February 2014                                                                            9-C7

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                    Chapter 9. Housing Element
                                                                 Site       Max.     Potential     Unit
 Site ID       APN (Map ID)               Land Use
                                                               Acreage    Density    Density     Capacity
             Total Site 2                                         1.090         15          12          10
             5814-008-024 (310) Store Building                    0.563         15          12           6
             5814-008-026 (357) Restaurant                        0.405         15          12           4
             5814-008-027 (308) Store Building                    0.293         15          12           3
             5814-008-028 (358) Parking Lot                       0.434         15          12           5
             Notes: Newer development consisting of a bookstore and café on parcels adjacent to Chevy
             Chase Drive. Parcels adjacent to Bel Aire Drive are comprised primarily of older low
             intensity commercial uses, including a nail salon, bookstore, and wine and liquor store.
Site #3
             Total Site 3                                         1.696         15          12          18
Site #4      5814-001-026 (94)    Car wash                        0.445         15          12           7
General Plan—February 2014                                                                            9-C8

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                       Chapter 9. Housing Element
                                                                  Site        Max.      Potential     Unit
 Site ID       APN (Map ID)                 Land Use
                                                                Acreage Density         Density Capacity
             5814-009-001 (201) Store Building                      0.666          15          12          7
             5814-009-13 (49)       Stores and Offices              0.137          15          12          1
             5814-009-025 (399) Fast Food Franchise                 0.296          15          12          3
             Notes: Low intensity, marginal commercial uses including. The site also contains multiple
             store fronts that are currently vacant and available for lease as well as ample surface parking
             lots behind the street facing commercial structures, most of which remains empty and
             unused.
Site #5
             Total Site 5                                           1.093          15          12         11
Site #6      5815-012-044 (243) Store Building                      0.290          15          12          3
Site #12     5815-001-008 (82)      Service Station                 0.530          15          12          6
             5815-001-008 (31)      Service Station                 0.464          15          12          5
             Notes: Service station on large lot.
Site #13
General Plan—February 2014                                                                              9-C9

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                     Chapter 9. Housing Element
                                                                Site         Max.     Potential    Unit
 Site ID       APN (Map ID)               Land Use
                                                              Acreage      Density    Density    Capacity
             5815-021-010 (271)   Office Building                 1.160          15          12         13
             5815-021-011 (178)   Medical Building                0.186          15          12          2
                                  Single-Family
             5815-021-027 (136)
                                  Residential                     0.257          15          12          3
             5815-021-031 (299) Private School                    0.515          15          12          6
                                  Finance
             5815-021-033 (400)
                                  Building                        0.940          15          12         11
             5815-021-036 (300) Vacant Commercial                 0.460          15          12          5
             5815-021-900 (391) Vacant Commercial                 0.257          15          12          3
             Notes: Older commercial structures on large lots surrounded by large tracts of landscaped
             areas and surface parking lots. Major tenants on this site include Wells Fargo.
Site #14
             Total Site 14                                        3.775          15          12         43
General Plan—February 2014                                                                           9-C10

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                       Chapter 9. Housing Element
                                                                  Site       Max.      Potential     Unit
 Site ID       APN (Map ID)                Land Use
                                                               Acreage      Density     Density    Capacity
                                    Store
             5820-001-002 (297)
                                    Building                        0.441          15          12          5
                                    Store
             5820-001-003 (109)
                                    Building                        0.657          15          12          7
             Notes: Older strip mall with low intensity, marginal commercial uses and chain restaurants
             including Subway and Round Table Pizza. The site also contains an ample surface parking
             lot in front of the commercial structures and adjacent to the street, most of which remains
             empty and unused.
Site #15
             Total Site 15                                          1.098          15          12         12
                                    Medical
             5815-022-002 (313)
                                    Building                        0.267          15          12          3
             5815-022-003 (337) SFR                                 0.027          15          12          0
             5815-022-004 (338) SFR                                 0.256          15          12          3
             5815-022-019 (360) SFR                                 0.280          15          12          3
             5815-022-020 (182) Commercial                          3.429          15          12         41
             Notes: Commercial development with very large surface parking lot located in front of
             commercial structures, adjacent to Foothill Boulevard. Major tenants in this development
             include Vons and Bank of America. Parcels not adjacent to Foothill Boulevard are
             comprised primarily of low intensity commercial and residential uses, including a small
             dental practice and older single family residential structures on large lots.
Site #16
General Plan—February 2014                                                                             9-C11

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                                      Chapter 9. Housing Element
                                                                 Site        Max.     Potential     Unit
 Site ID       APN (Map ID)                Land Use
                                                               Acreage     Density     Density     Capacity
             Total Site 16                                         4.259          15          12         50
Total DVSP Mixed Use 2                                           16.716           15          12        188
DVSP Residential
             5815-013-033 (193) SFR                                0.181          15          12          2
             5815-013-034 (142) SFR                                0.250          15          12          3
             5815-013-035 (312) SFR                                0.250          15          12          3
             Notes: This site is comprised of older, but well maintained, single family residential
             structures on large lots.
Site #9
             Total Site 9                                          0.680          15          12          8
Total DVSP Residential                                             0.680          15          12          8
General Plan—February 2014                                                                            9-C12

City of La Cañada Flintridge Chapter 9. Housing Element
General Plan—February 2014                       9-C13


City of La Cañada Flintridge                                        Chapter 9. Housing Element
New Mixed Use Areas
                                                    Site     Max.   Potential     Unit
  Site ID        APN (Map ID)        Land Use
                                                   Acreage  Density  Density    Capacity
Mixed Use
              5870-001-013 (15) Vacant Residential     0.40      30         24           9
              5870-001-014 (16) Retail stores with     2.70      30         24          64
Site # 18
                                large parking
              5870-001-015 (17)                        0.44      30         24          10
                                space
                                Vacant
---           5870-001-019 (21)                        0.52      30         24          12
                                Commercial
              5870-010-040 (22) Vacant                 1.18      30         24          28
              5870-010-043 (23) Low intensity          3.14      30         24          75
Site # 19
              5870-010-044 (24) retail with large      1.07      30         24          25
              5870-010-045 (25) parking space          0.73      30         24          17
              5870-011-056 (27) Occupied by a          1.18      30         24          28
                                small independent
Site # 20
                                market and car
              5870-011-057 (28)                        1.48      30         24          35
                                wash with large
                                parking space
                                Caltrans-owned
---           (29)                                     4.14      30         24          96
                                parking lot
Total Mixed Use                                       18.27      30         24         399
Site #18
Site #19
General Plan—February 2014                                                              9-C15

City of La Cañada Flintridge Chapter 9. Housing Element
Site #20
General Plan—February 2014                       9-C16

City of La Cañada Flintridge Chapter 9. Housing Element
General Plan—February 2014                       9-C17


City of La Cañada Flintridge                                            Chapter 9. Housing Element
New Areas for Rezoning to High Density Residential
                                                           Land Use      Max         Pot.    Unit
   New                        Area   Current
                APN                              Address Max Density   Density    Density    Capa
Properties                   (sq ft)  Zoning
                                                           (Current)                          city
                                               2160
Jo-Ann's      5810-015-                        Foothill  Commercial/
Fabrics       016             25,256 CPD       Boulevard Office
                                               2160
Jo-Ann's      5810-015-                        Foothill  Commercial/
Fabrics       015             11,330 CPD       Boulevard Office
              Subtotal:       36,586      0.84                         30         24        20
                                               4473
              5813-007-                        Indiana
Drake         015              6,040 R-1-5000  Avenue              8.7
                                               4471
              5813-007-                        Indiana
Cates         016              3,498 R-1-5000  Avenue              8.7
                                               4465
              5813-007-                        Indiana
Compeau       022              6,460 R-1-5000  Avenue              8.7
                                               1438
              5813-014-                        Foothill  Commercial/
Karasik       020             16,496 CPD       Boulevard Office
                                               4474
              5813-014-                        Indiana   Commercial/
Lee           017              7,390 R-1-5000  Avenue    Office
                                               1431
              5813-014-                        Curran    Commercial/
Inouye        015              5,076 R-1-5000  Street    Office
                                               1425
              5813-014-                        Curran
Kim           018              5,070 R-1-5000  Street              8.7
                                               1421
              5813-014-                        Curran
Fierro        038              7,380 R-1-5000  Street              8.7
                                               1417
              5813-014-                        Curran
Moore         036              6,360 R-1-5000  Street              8.7
                                               1413
              5813-014-                        Curran
Oseguera      016              7,920 R-1-5000  Street              8.7
                                               1400
              5813-014-                        Foothill  Commercial/
Walker        019             10,298 CPD       Boulevard Office
              5813-014-              w/ozon    w/o
Walker        031              3,800 e         addresse
General Plan—February 2014                                                                  9-C19

City of La Cañada Flintridge                                        Chapter 9. Housing Element
                                             1420
              5813-014-                      Foothill  Commercial/
Zentmyer      005             7,357 CPD      Boulevard Office
                                             1428
              5813-014-                      Foothill  Commercial/
Zentmyer      039             6,260 CPD      Boulevard Office
                                             1432
              5813-014-                      Foothill  Commercial/
Zentmyer      040            10,314 CPD      Boulevard Office
LCF -         street                         Indiana
Indiana       r-o-w          23,560          Avenue
LCF -         street                         Curran
Curran        r-o-w          23,100          Street
              Subtotal:     156,379     3.59                       30         24        86
General Plan—February 2014                                                              9-C20

City of La Cañada Flintridge Chapter 9. Housing Element
    Curran Street
General Plan—February 2014                       9-C21

City of La Cañada Flintridge Chapter 9. Housing Element
    Jo-Ann’s Fabrics
General Plan—February 2014                       9-C22

