City of Ferndale
              DRAFT
   Safety Element
April 2013
       City of Ferndale
     SAFETY ELEMENT
Adopted by Resolution No. 2013-XX
          XXXXXXX, 2013
            City Council:
           Stuart Titus, Mayor
              Ken Mierzwa
              John Maxwell
            Michael Sweeney
              Daniel Brown
     Planning Commission:
    Jorgen Von Frausing-Borch, Chair
            Uffe Christiansen
             Trevor Harper
               Lino Mogni
              Dean Nielsen
              City Staff:
        Jay Parrish, City Manager
    Nancy Kaytis-Slocum, City Clerk
             Prepared by:
This document printed on 100% post-consumer content recycled pape
                                               City of Ferndale
                                                Safety Element
                                                Table of Contents
Chapter
Chapter 1 - Introduction .............................................................................................................. 1-1
Chapter 2 - Definitions ................................................................................................................ 2-1
Chapter 3 - Setting and Context .................................................................................................. 3-1
Chapter 4 - Geologic & Seismic Hazards ................................................................................... 4-1
Chapter 5 - Flooding & Drainage Hazards ................................................................................. 5-1
Chapter 6 - Fire Hazards ............................................................................................................. 6-1
Chapter 7 - Hazardous Materials ............................................................................................... 7-1
Chapter 8 - Acceptable Risk ....................................................................................................... 8-1
Chapter 9 - Emergency Preparedness ......................................................................................... 9-1
Chapter 10 - Goals, Policies, & Implementation Programs ...................................................... 10-1
Chapter 11 - References ............................................................................................................ 11-1
List of Figures
Figure 1 - Location Map ............................................................................................................. 3-3
Figure 2 - Potential Liquefaction ................................................................................................ 4-2
Figure 3 - Slope Instability ......................................................................................................... 4-4
Figure 4 - Tsunami Evacuation Area .......................................................................................... 4-5
Figure 5 - Ferndale Drainage System ......................................................................................... 5-2
Figure 6 - Flooding Hazards ....................................................................................................... 5-6
Figure 7 - Fire Hazards ............................................................................................................... 6-4
Figure 8 - Hazardous Materials Facilities .................................................................................... 7-2
Figure 9 - Leaking Underground Storage Tanks ........................................................................ 7-4
Figure 10 - Risk Classifications of Structures, Occupancies, and Land Uses ............................ 8-4
Figure 11 - Levels of Acceptable Risk for Structures, Occupancies, and Land Uses ................ 8-5
Figure 12 - Location of Structures and Land Uses in Relation to Defined Hazard Areas .......... 8-6
Figure 13 - Emergency Management Hierarchy ......................................................................... 9-2
Figure 14 - City of Ferndale Emergency Management Organization ......................................... 9-3
Figure 15 - SEMS Five Level Emergency Response Organization ............................................ 9-4
City of Ferndale                                                i                                                        Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013                                                                                                                        TOC
1.0      Introduction
The purpose of the Safety Element is to provide a policy basis for measures Ferndale can take to
reduce the potential risk of death, injuries, property damage, and economic and social dislocation
resulting from fires, floods, earthquakes, landslides, and other natural and man-made hazards.
The Element summarizes potential hazards including: seismically induced surface rupture,
ground shaking, and ground failure; slope instability leading to landslides; subsidence,
liquefaction and other seismic hazards; flooding; and wildland and urban fires. The Safety
Element also addresses evacuation routes, peak load water supply requirements, and minimum
road widths and clearances around structures as those items relate to fire and geologic hazards.
The Safety Element is one of the seven mandated general plan elements listed in California
Government Code §65302.
This element is important because the Town of Ferndale is susceptible to natural hazards, such as
earthquakes, floods and fires, and man-made hazards such as the handling and transport of
hazardous materials. The City and its residents must understand the risks associated with these
hazards and devise a plan for an acceptable level of community safety. Although risks and
threats cannot be eliminated, damage levels can be reduced through community preparedness,
individual and community action to reduce or eliminate long-term risks (mitigation efforts), and
sound development practices.
Given that the community is fairly isolated, Ferndale’s challenge is to improve safety through a
variety of systematic, ongoing, and well planned actions. These actions to reduce risk are based
on sound analysis of hazardous conditions and include economically realistic interventions and
incentives.
Ferndale’s police and public works departments are first responders in the event of many natural
and/or man-made disasters. Coordination with other agencies, such as the Ferndale Volunteer
Fire Department, Humboldt County Office of Emergency Services, and even local service
organizations, is critical. The ability of the City of Ferndale to prepare for, and respond to
disaster events in a coordinated manner is essential to community health and safety.
Coordinating with other agencies for responding to fires, seismic events, hazardous materials
releases and floods in and around Ferndale are critical. For example wildfires can ignite in
adjacent forested and rangeland areas and threaten Ferndale structures, making CALFIRE and
Ferndale Volunteer Fire Department coordination critical. Also flooding on the Eel River can
affect Ferndale residents, making coordinated notification and evacuation efforts with County,
State and Federal agencies critical as well. The regional interdependence of medical,
transportation, communications, emergency response, and other systems necessitates these types
of coordination as well as constant preparedness.
The Safety Element defines and maps the different types of potential public safety hazards,
including known faults, steep slopes, areas subject to erosion, flood zones, high fire hazard areas,
and locations of known hazardous materials. The Safety Element contributes to developing land
use standards and policies to guide local decisions related to zoning, subdivisions, and
entitlement permits. These will relate type and intensity of use to the level of risk from fire,
geologic, and other hazards, to the effect of development upon that risk, and to the availability of
City of Ferndale                                   1-1                                   Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

services and facilities to combat them. The Element contains general hazard and risk reduction
strategies and policies.
During Element preparation, the city will collaborate with agencies, districts, and organizations
including but not limited to: Ferndale Volunteer Fire Department, Humboldt County Office of
Emergency Services, CALFIRE, FEMA, and California Geological Survey. The Element will be
reviewed for consistency with other relevant plans such as the County Hazard Mitigation Plan
and Master Fire Protection Plan.
Lastly, but most importantly, the community must be prepared if the City is to reduce the risks to
safety. Neighborhood and business groups need to be trained on how to prepare for and respond
to all types of disaster. If the citizens of Ferndale are prepared, the risk to life and property will
be significantly reduced. A major focus of the City’s mitigation efforts articulated in this element
must be the preparation and training of the community to help itself.
Relationship to the Rest of the General Plan
All general plan elements goals and policies must be internally consistent and are interdependent
and related to each other. No single element of the plan should be used in isolation without
consideration of all other component elements as an integrated general plan. The Safety Element
goals and policies were reviewed for consistency with other general plan elements including but
not limited to the Land Use and Unique Resources Element and the Transportation and Public
Facilities Element.
City of Ferndale                                   1-2                                     Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

2.0      Definitions
This section provides definitions of terms used throughout the Element.
Acceptable Risk: The level of risk that the majority of citizens will accept without asking for
governmental action to provide protection.
Building: A building is defined as a structure that is walled and roofed, principally aboveground,
and permanently fixed to a site. The term includes manufactured homes on permanent
foundations on which the wheels and axles carry no weight.
Critical Facility: A Critical Facility is infrastructure or a facility that is critical to the health and
welfare of the population. These become especially important after any hazard/natural disaster
event occurs. Critical Facilities include:
      Medical and Shelter Facilities and Vulnerable Populations—Facilities likely to be used as
         a sheltering or community assembly location, and structures likely to contain occupants
         who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid death or injury during and after a
         hazard/natural disaster event including but not limited to: Hospitals, schools, skilled
         nursing facilities, board and care homes, pharmacies, clinics, fairgrounds, community
         centers, ambulance services, and veterinary hospitals.
      Emergency Response—Facilities and emergency operations centers that are needed for
         response and recovery activities before, during, and after a hazard/natural disaster event
         including but not limited to: Police stations, fire stations, local, state and federal vehicle
         and equipment storage facilities, and emergency response staging sites.
      Utility Services—Public and private utility facilities and essential services that are vital to
         maintaining or restoring normal services to impacted areas before, during, and after a
         hazard/natural disaster event including but not limited to: All primary and secondary
         transportation infrastructure, municipal water pumps and wells, water treatment plants,
         water storage, sewage treatment facilities, lift stations, water and sewer mainlines,
         substations, electric power generating and transmission infrastructure, retail and
         wholesale fuel transmission infrastructure and transport and storage facilities,
         telecommunications, repeater stations, radio stations and towers, aviation control towers,
         standby power-generating equipment, and grocery stores.
Dam: Any artificial barrier or controlling mechanism that can or does impound 10 acre-feet or
more of water.
Dam Failure: Dam failure refers to a partial or complete breach in a dam (or levee) that impacts
its integrity. Dam failures occur for a number of reasons, such as flash flooding, inadequate
spillway size, mechanical failure of valves or other equipment, freezing and thawing cycles,
earthquakes, and intentional destruction.
Debris Flow: Rapidly moving mass of water-saturated debris (suspended earth materials).
Design Earthquake Ground Motion: The earthquake ground motion that buildings and
structures are specifically designed to resist in the adopted California Building Code Section
1613.
City of Ferndale                                  2-1                                        Safety Element
DRAFT February 2013

Erosion: The gradual wearing away of rock or soil by the action of water, wind, or ice.
Expansive Soils/Bedrock: Soils or bedrock that contains minerals that expand when they absorb
water and shrink when they dry out. This change in volume can exert enough force to damage
buildings and other structures.
Fault: A fracture in the earth’s crust resulting from the displacement of one side with respect to
the other.
Faulting: Fracturing of bedrock caused by displacement resulting from the action of tectonic
forces.
Fault, Active: A fault that has had surface displacement within Holocene time (about the last
11,000 years).
Fault, Potentially Active: A fault which shows evidence of surface displacement during
Quaternary time (the last 2 million years).
Fault Trace: The line formed by the intersection between a fault plane and the ground surface; it
is graphically portrayed as a line plotted on geological maps.
Fault Zone: An area of faulting or an area of related faults that may have some width which
commonly are braided, but may which may be branching.
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA): FEMA is an independent agency (now
part of the Department of Homeland Security) created in 1978 to provide a single point of
accountability for all federal activities related to disaster mitigation and emergency preparedness,
response, and recovery.
Fire Behavior: Fire behavior refers to the physical characteristics of a fire and is a function of
the interaction between the fuel characteristics (such as type of vegetation and structures that
could burn), topography, and weather. Variables that affect fire behavior include the rate of
spread, intensity, fuel consumption, and fire type (such as underbrush versus crown fire).
Fire Frequency: Fire frequency is the broad measure of the rate of fire occurrence in a particular
area. An estimate of the areas most likely to burn is based on past fire history or fire rotation in
the area, fuel conditions, weather, ignition sources (such as human or lightning), fire suppression
response, and other factors.
Flood or Flooding: Flooding is a general and temporary condition of rising and overflowing
water resulting in partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas. Floods result from
(1) the overflow of inland or tidal waters, (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of
surface water from any source, and (3) mudflows or the sudden collapse of shoreline land.
City of Ferndale                                   2-2                                  Safety Element
DRAFT February 2013

Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): FIRMs are the official maps on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated the Special Flood Hazard Area
(SFHA).
Floodplain: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by flood waters from any source. A
flood insurance rate map identifies most, but not necessarily all, of a community’s floodplain as
the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
Floodway: Floodways are areas within a floodplain that are reserved for the purpose of
conveying flood discharge without increasing the base flood elevation more that one-foot.
Generally speaking, no development is allowed in floodways, as any structures located there
would block the flow of floodwaters.
General Plan: California state law requires that every county and city prepare and adopt a
comprehensive long-range plan to serve as a guide for community development. The plan must
consist of an integrated and internally consistent set of goals, policies, and implementation
measures. In addition, the plan must focus on issues of the greatest concern to the community
and be written in a clear and concise manner. City actions, such as those relating to land-use
allocation, annexations, zoning, subdivision and design review, redevelopment, and capital
improvements, must be consistent with such a plan.
Geographic Information System (GIS): GIS is a computer software application that relates
data regarding physical and other features on the earth to a database for mapping and analysis.
Goal: A goal is a general guideline that explains what is to be achieved. Goals are usually broad-
based, long-term, policy-type statements and represent global visions. Goals help define the
benefits that a plan is trying to achieve. The success of the HMP, once implemented, should be
measured by the degree to which its goals have been met (that is, by the actual benefits in terms
of actual hazard mitigation).
Ground Failure: Ground destabilization, by mudslide, landslide, rockslide, soil liquefaction,
earth subsidence, cracking, surface faulting, differential settlement and lateral spreading.
Ground Settlement: The sinking of an area of land is caused by the withdrawal of water from
the ground or the gradual settlement of unconsolidated alluvial deposits or artificial fill.
Ground Shaking: Surface ground movement caused by an earthquake. The intensity of ground
shaking is affected by the tectonic structure framework and near-surface geology in the location
of the earthquake. Ground shaking can be measured by a seismometer. Measurements include
seismic acceleration, which can be further broken down into vertical measurements (up-down
shaking) and two horizontal measurements (east-west and north-south shaking).
Hazard: A hazard is a source of potential danger or adverse condition that could harm people
and/or cause property damage. Natural hazards include floods, winds, and earthquakes. Man-
made hazards include acts of terrorism and hazardous material spills.
City of Ferndale                                 2-3                                    Safety Element
DRAFT February 2013

Hazard Mitigation Grant Program (HMGP): Authorized under Section 202 of the Robert T.
Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act, the HMGP is administered by FEMA
and provides grants to states, tribes, and local governments to implement hazard mitigation
actions after a major disaster declaration. The purpose of the program is to reduce the loss of life
and property due to disasters and to enable mitigation activities to be implemented as a
community recovers from a disaster.
Hazard Mitigation Plan: A hazard mitigation plan is a collaborative document that identifies
hazards that could affect a community, assesses vulnerability to hazards, and represents
consensus decisions reached on how to minimize or eliminate the effects of hazards.
Hazardous Material: A hazardous material is a substance or combination of substances that (1)
can cause or contribute to an increase in mortality or serious irreversible or incapacitating
reversible illnesses, or (2) pose a present or potential hazard to human life, property, or the
environment. Hazardous materials could cause these effects because of their quantity,
concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics.
Hydraulics: Hydraulics is the branch of science or engineering that addresses fluids (especially
water) in motion in rivers or canals, works and machinery for conducting or raising water, the
use of water as a prime mover, and other fluid-related areas.
Hydrology: Hydrology is the analysis of waters of the earth. For example, a flood discharge
estimate is developed by conducting a hydrologic study.
Intensity: For the purposes of this plan, intensity refers to the measure of the effects of a hazard.
Landslide: Landslides can be described as the sliding movement of masses of loosened rock and
soil down a hillside or slope. Fundamentally, slope failures occur when the strength of the soils
forming the slope exceeds the pressure, such as weight or saturation, acting upon them.
Landslide Deposit: Earthen materials deposited through the landsliding process.
Liquefaction: Liquefaction is the complete failure of soils, occurring when soils lose shear
strength and flow horizontally. It is most likely to occur in fine grain sands and silts, which
behave like viscous fluids when liquefaction occurs. This situation is extremely hazardous to
development on the soils that liquefy, and generally results in extreme property damage and
threats to life and safety.
Magnitude: Magnitude is the measure of the strength of an earthquake, and is typically
measured by the Richter scale. As an estimate of energy, each whole number step in the
magnitude scale corresponds to the release of about 31 times more energy than the amount
associated with the preceding whole number value.
Mitigation: A preventative action that can be taken in advance of an event that will reduce or
eliminate the risk to life or property.
City of Ferndale                                  2-4                                    Safety Element
DRAFT February 2013
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP): In 1968, Congress created the NFIP in response to
the rising cost of taxpayer-funded disaster relief for flood victims and the increasing amount of
damage caused by floods. The Mitigation Division is the FEMA section that manages the NFIP
and oversees the floodplain management and mapping components of the program. Nearly
20,000 communities across the United States and its territories participate in NFIP by adopting
and enforcing floodplain management ordinances to reduce future flood damage. In exchange,
NFIP makes federally backed flood insurance available to homeowners, renters, and business
owners in these communities. FEMA contracted the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to map the
floodplains, floodways, and floodway fringes.
Peakload Water Supply: The supply of water available to meet both domestic water and fire
fighting needs during the particular season and time of day when domestic water demand on a
water system is at its peak.
Planning Area: The geographical area covered in a General Plan element. For this element, the
Planning Area extends approximately one half mile to the east and west of the city boundary,
north to the Salt River, and includes the immediate steep slope areas to the south of town.
Preparedness: Preparedness refers to actions that strengthen the capability of government,
citizens, and communities to respond to disasters.
Recovery: Recovery refers to actions taken by an individual or community after a catastrophic
event to restore order and community lifelines.
Risk: Risk is the estimated impact that a hazard would have on people, services, facilities, and
structures in a community. Risk measures the likelihood of a hazard occurring and resulting in an
adverse condition that causes injury or damage. Risk is often expressed in relative terms such as
a high, moderate, or low likelihood of sustaining damage above a particular threshold due to
occurrence of a specific type of hazard. Risk also can be expressed in terms of potential
monetary losses associated with the intensity of the hazard.
Risk Assessment: Risk assessment is the process of measuring potential loss of life, personal
injury, economic injury, and property damage resulting from hazards. This process assesses the
vulnerability of people, buildings, and infrastructure to hazards and focuses on (1) hazard
identification; (2) impacts of hazards on physical, social, and economic assets; (3) vulnerability
identification; and (4) estimates of the cost of damage or costs that could be avoided through
mitigation.
Sedimentation: The process by which soil particles are suspended in water and redeposited
further downstream.
Seiche: An earthquake-induced wave from oscillation in an enclosed body of water.
Seismic Induced Landslides: Slope failure caused by an earthquake.
City of Ferndale                                  2-5                                  Safety Element
DRAFT February 2013
Stafford Act: The Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act, Public
Law 100-107, was signed into law on November 23, 1988. This law amended the Disaster Relief
Act of 1974, Public Law 93-288. The Stafford Act is the statutory authority for most federal
disaster response activities, especially as they pertain to FEMA and its programs.
State Responsibility Area: Section 4102 of the Public Resources Code (PRC) defines "state
responsibility areas" as those areas of the state for which the State has the financial responsibility
of preventing and suppressing fires. The SRA roughly corresponds to areas outside incorporated
cities with vegetated lands that have watershed value.
Stream Bank Erosion: Stream bank erosion is common along rivers, streams and drains where
banks have been eroded, sloughed or undercut. However, it is important to remember that a
stream is a dynamic and constantly changing system. It is natural for a stream to want to
meander, so not all eroding banks are “bad” and in need of repair. Generally, stream bank
erosion becomes a problem where development has limited the meandering nature of streams,
where streams have been channelized, or where stream bank structures (like bridges, culverts,
etc.) are located in places where they can actually cause damage to downstream areas. Stabilizing
these areas can help protect watercourses from continued sedimentation, damage to adjacent land
uses, control unwanted meander, and improvement of habitat for fish and wildlife.
Subsidence: The gradual, local settling or sinking of the earth’s surface with little or no
horizontal motion (subsidence is usually the result of gas, oil, or water extraction,
hydrocompaction, or peat oxidation, and not the result of a landslide or slope failure).
Wildland Fire: A fire occurring in a suburban or rural area which contains uncultivated lands,
timber, range, watershed, brush or grasslands. This includes areas where there is a mingling of
developed and undeveloped lands.
City of Ferndale                                  2-6                                    Safety Element
DRAFT February 2013

3.0      Setting and Context
Much of Ferndale is situated on an alluvial plain created by Francis Creek as it leaves the steep
terrain to the south and flows northerly across the Salt River and Eel River flood plains, Figure 1.
This places the City just above the flood plain of the Eel River with prime agricultural lands to
the west, north and east and steep forest lands to the south. Ferndale’s location makes the city
susceptible to geologic, flood and fire hazards, and risks associated with transportation and
storage of hazardous materials. The combination of sound planning practices, continued public
education, and community preparedness will minimize risks to the community and protect the
health, safety, and welfare of Ferndale residents and visitors.
The Disaster Mitigation Act (DMA; Public Law 106-390) is federal legislation enacted to
promote proactive pre-disaster planning as a condition of receiving financial assistance under the
Robert T. Stafford Act. The DMA emphasizes planning for disasters before they occur. It
established a Pre-Disaster Mitigation Program and new requirements for the national post-
disaster Hazard Mitigation Grant Program. The DMA encourages state and local authorities to
work together on pre-disaster planning. The enhanced planning network helps local
government’s articulate accurate needs for mitigation, resulting in faster allocation of funding
and more cost-effective risk-reduction projects. A planning partnership made up of the County of
Humboldt, local cities, and special purpose districts worked together to create the Humboldt
Operational Area Hazard Mitigation Plan (HMP), fulfilling the DMA requirements for all
participating partners, including the City of Ferndale.
This element further addresses safety issues for the Ferndale Planning Area, which extends
approximately one half mile to the east and west of the city boundary, north to the Salt River,
and includes the immediate steep slope areas to the south of town (City of Ferndale 1975). The
following presents an overview of geologic, flood, fire, and other potential hazards in the
Ferndale Planning Area.
Geologic & Seismic Hazards
The western portions of Humboldt County, and adjoining offshore areas, are regions of moderate
to high seismicity. Cape Mendocino (southwest of Ferndale) experiences the highest
concentration of earthquake events in the continental United States (Humboldt County 2012).
The area near Cape Mendocino is a complex region where three crustal plates, the Pacific Plate,
the Gorda Plate, and North American Plate intersect to form the Mendocino Triple Junction.
Seismic hazards in the Planning Area include earthquake ground shaking, surface fault rupture,
liquefaction, and tsunami potential. Geologic hazards in the Planning Area not specifically
related to earthquakes include landslides and soil stability.
Historically, earthquakes have caused extensive damage to structures in Ferndale. The 1906 San
Francisco Earthquake damaged more than 40 structures in Ferndale’s downtown and toppled 98
percent of the town’s chimneys (Dengler 2008). On January 22, 1923, a 7.2 earthquake, centered
off Cape Mendocino, caused damage to Ferndale structures. On April 25 and 26, 1992, a series
of three earthquakes (a 7.2-magnitude main shock and two strong aftershocks measuring
magnitude 6.5 and 6.7) struck about 35 miles south of Eureka, causing the brick facade of Valley
Grocery to collapse and damage to an estimated 80 percent of the other downtown buildings
City of Ferndale                                 3-1                                   Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

                                                                           (Christensen 2011).
                                                                           Damages in Ferndale
                                                                           were estimated at $10.4
                                                                           million (NOAA). On
                                                                           January 9, 2010 a
                                                                           magnitude 6.5 earthquake
                                                                           occurred about 25 miles
                                                                           offshore of Ferndale, it
                                                                           was the largest local
                                                                           earthquake since the
                                                                           1992 Cape Mendocino
                                                                           Earthquakes.
                                                                           Flooding & Drainage
                                                                           Hazards
            Valley Grocery after 1992 Cape Mendocino Earthquakes.          Flood related hazards in
                 Photo credit: Lindie Brewer, U.S. Geological Survey.      the Planning Area
                                                                           include river and creek
flooding and drainage system overflows. Francis Creek runs through the heart of the city and
presents a periodic flooding problem in the business district and in the residential area along
Main Street to the north. Flood prone areas have been mapped by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA). The maps provide the basis for regulating flood plains in
conformance with the National Flood Insurance Program. The City has adopted flood plain
regulations (Floodplain Management Ordinance 08-02) in order to continue participation in the
federal flood insurance program. Drainage management becomes increasingly important as new
development converts additional areas in a watershed to impermeable surfaces. These
impervious surfaces reduce infiltration and convey stormwater faster, increasing peak flows.
Increased peak flows can accelerate erosion or require the conversion of natural drainage ways
into higher capacity conveyances that can more rapidly transport stormwater.
The Eel River has flooded a number of times. In 1955, 1964 and 1986 floods caused extensive
damage in the region; although damage was catastrophic elsewhere, these floods did not affect
Ferndale's business district (Schneider 1995). In January of 1995 Francis Creek burst out of its
banks throughout downtown Ferndale causing flooding along Main Street, damaging businesses
and homes, and killing livestock.
Fire Hazards
The City of Ferndale faces an ongoing threat from urban and wildland fire, caused by human
activity and natural conditions. Fires in the historic district along Main Street pose a risk due to
the proximity of the buildings to each other; many of the buildings share walls and are
constructed of wood and other combustible materials. Wildland fire is a threat to the hillside
areas in southern Ferndale where the wildland and residential areas intermix. The potential for
wildland fires arises from the combination of ground cover and vegetation, the combustibility of
building materials, ground slope, weather patterns, and adequacy of access, water supply, and
water pressure. Structures built with combustible materials, such as wood siding, shake roofs,
and surrounded by flammable landscaping heighten the vulnerability of residents.
City of Ferndale                                                 3-2                    Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013
City of Ferndale General Plan Safety Element:
Figure 1 - Location Map
                   City Limits
                   Proposed Planning Area
0                             1,000           2,000 Feet
                                                           °
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Fulmor Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Agg ler Ln
                                                                     Dillon Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Bertelsen Ln
                           side Rd
                     River
                                      Port Kenyon Rd
                                                                                                                                                                  Wastewater
                                                                                                                                                                  Treatment                                                            Salt River                                              þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               211
                                                                                                                                                                    Facility
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Market St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       21
                                                                    Bush St
                                                                                              Rasmussen Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Hw
                                                                                                                                                 California St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     t at
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    S
                Meridian Rd                                                                                                                                      Van Ness Ave                           n
                                                                                                                                                                                                              St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ambrosini Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ai
                                                                                                                                                                                                    M                                                                                 W illia m s C re e k
                                                                                                                             Humboldt County
                                                                                                                                                                                     ee
                                                                                                                               Fairgrounds                                          Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                        k
                                                                                                                                                                                   cis
                                                                                                                                                                         Fra
                                                                                                                                                                             n
                                                                                                                    Arlington Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ambrosini Ave
                                                                                                                                                                          Howard St
            Cente
                 r ville
                                                                                                                    5th St
                                      Rd
       mar Rd
    Bec
                                                                                                                                     Fern
                                                                                                                                          Av
                                                                                                                                            e                                            Cream Ct
                                                                                                                                                                     Herber t St
                                                                                                                             A St A St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Coppin i Rd
                                                                                                             Shaw Ave                 3rd St
                                                                                                                             4th St
                                                                                                                                                                                              Mc Kinley Ave
                                                                                                    Oc       ea
                                                                                                                nA                            W                                                                                   Rose Ave
                                                                                                                   ve                          as
                                                                                                                                          Br
                                                                                                                  e                         ow                to
                                                                                                                Av         cis             S n St
                                                                                                                                            t             hing
                                                                                                        Wildca      Be         St                                    n
                                                                                                                                                                       St
                                                                                                              t   Fr   rd
                                                                                                                    an    in g                      fS
                                                                                                                                                Bluf
                                                                                                                                                                 t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Bluff     Rd
                                                                                                                                               Lore                                                                                                                 Grizzly
                                            eek                                                                                                         nzen
                                                                                                                                                             R         d
                                                                                     lot Ln
                                           s Cr
                                                                                   me
                                       R ea
                                                                                 Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                              Russ
                                                                                                                                                                                              Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               lli
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Wi
                                                                                 t   Rd                                                                                                                                                                                         am
                                                                              ca                                                                                                                                                                                                   sC
                                                                         li d
                                                                        W                                                                                                                                                                                                                k
                                                                                                                                                                           ne                                                                                                        ree
                                                                                                                                                                         ge                                                                                                              Rd
                                                                                                                                                                       Eu
Location                                                                                                                                                                                 St
Map
                                Humboldt
                                                                    M attole
                                 County
                 Detail
                 Area                                                  Rd
                                                             d
                                                       Wild
                                                            cat                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sources: City Boundaries - Planwest Partners Inc.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Imagery - Bing Maps Aerial
                                                                R                                                                                                                                                                                                                Roads - US Census TIGER data
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (http://www.census.gov/geo/www/tiger/)

Hazardous Materials
Hazardous materials have the potential to cause injury, and can include flammable liquids and
gases, poisons, corrosives, explosives, radioactive materials, and improperly used medical
supplies and wastes. The clean-up (remediation) and monitoring of hazardous waste is regulated
by a series of federal, state and local agencies, including the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, Cal EPA, the State Department of Toxic Substance Control (DTSC), the State Water
Resources Control Board (SWRCB) and the Humboldt County Division of Environmental
Health’s Certified Unified Program Agency (CUPA). DTSC currently has no listed hazardous
waste sites in Ferndale (California 2012). However, SWRCB has identified eight contamination
sites in Ferndale involving issues of leaking underground storage tanks (LUST’s). LUST’s are
typically associated with past automobile-related activities.
CUPA monitors facilities handling or producing hazardous materials in Ferndale. CUPA lists 45
such facilities in or near the Planning Area; the majority are associated with the agricultural
industry, including approximately 20 dairies. Because of a general lack of significant industrial
operations, Ferndale does not currently experience a significant threat from hazardous materials
use or storage. The transport of hazardous materials, particularly along the S.R. 211/ Main Street
corridor, presents possible hazards in the event of a materials leak or if a transport truck
experiences an accident.
City of Ferndale                                   3-4                                   Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

4.0      Geologic & Seismic Hazards
Primary seismic hazards in the Planning Area include earthquake ground shaking, surface fault
rupture, liquefaction, and tsunami potential. Geologic hazards not specifically related to
earthquakes include landslides and soil stability.
The severity of the impact of an earthquake on a community depends on the intensity and
duration of ground shaking and on the occurrence of other seismically-induced phenomena.
Factors related to severity include the magnitude of the seismic event, the distance between the
community and the event fault, and on local geologic and soil conditions. The greatest source of
earthquake damage is caused by ground shaking, particularly horizontal ground acceleration. The
City is susceptible to ground shaking caused by multiple nearby earthquake fault zones including
the Little Salmon, Russ, Bear River, and Mendocino fault zones.
The Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act (formerly the Alquist-Priolo Special Studies
Zone Act), signed into law in December 1972, requires the delineation of zones along active
faults in California. The purpose of the Alquist-Priolo Act is to regulate development on or near
active fault traces to reduce the hazard of surface fault rupture and to prohibit the location of
most structures for human occupancy across these traces. Cities and counties must regulate
certain development projects within the zones, which includes the withholding of permits until
geologic investigations demonstrate that development sites are not threatened by future surface
displacement. Surface fault rupture is not necessarily restricted to the area within an Alquist-
Priolo Zone. The City of Ferndale is not located within an Alquist-Priolo Fault Rupture Zone.
The closest Alquist-Priolo Zone is the Little Salmon Fault Zone located approximately 6 miles
northeast of Ferndale.
Some soils in the Planning Area may be subject to liquefaction as a result of seismic activity.
Liquefaction occurs when earthquakes cause soils to become almost like quicksand and lose their
ability to support structures. Fine unconsolidated sand or silt saturated with water is particularly
subject to liquefaction; Ferndale’s location on an alluvial plain means it may be underlain by
layers of such materials and thus subject to potential liquefaction during a strong earthquake.
Liquefaction may result in sinking, tilt, distortion, or destruction of buildings and bridges,
rupture of underground utility lines, and ground surface cracking and spreading. A majority of
the Planning Area is located in a potential liquefaction area (see Figure 2).
Soils in the Planning Area may also be subject to the sudden or gradual sinking of land, called
Ground settlement. Ground settlement may be caused by water removal or by gradual
settlement of unconsolidated alluvial deposits or artificial fill. Earthquakes may also cause
ground settlement. Because the sedimentary materials underlying Ferndale may contain layers of
unconsolidated material, there is potential in the Planning Area for ground settlement during
strong seismic shaking. Ground settlement may lead to tilting of buildings or differential
settlement of structures, and has been a major source of property damage in other areas of the
world. Geologic information is not sufficient to determine whether or not the alluvial areas of
Ferndale would be subject to substantial ground settlement in the event of an earthquake.
City of Ferndale                                  4-1                                   Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

Figure 2 - Potential Liquefaction
                                                            Dillon Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            er
                                                                                                                                                                                              Bertelse                                                    gl
                                                                                                                                                                                                              n Ln                                     Ag
                                side Rd
                         R iver
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Fulmor Rd
                             Port Kenyon Rd
                                                                        Sa lt R
                                                                                i   ve r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               211
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Market St
                                                                                     Rasmussen Ln
                                                                                                                                             California St
                                                           Bush St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   gh
               Meridian Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Perry Slou
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   St
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ai n
                                                                                                                                                                                                              M
    Damon Ln                                                                                                                                                 Van Ness Ave                                     Ambrosin i Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                  ee
                                                                                                                                                                                    k
                                                                                                                                                               Fra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ambrosini Ave
                                                                                                                                                                   nc
                                                                                                       Arlington Ave                                                  is
                     Cen ter
                             v       ille Rd                                                                    5th St
                                          Oeschger Rd
                                                                                                                                                               Herbert St
                                                                                                                                                                                          C re am Ct
                                                                                                                A St
                                                                                                           Shaw Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Coppini Ln
                                                                                                           Oc                                           t                                 Rose Ave
                                                                                                                                                                            Sch ley Ave
                                                                                                                ean                               S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Will
                                                                                                                         Av           ng
                                                                                                            e              e
                                                                                                       Av
                                                                                                                           Be
                                                                                                                              rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          iams Creek
                                                                                                    dca                          i
                                                                                                       t                                                                                  Grant Ave
                                                                                           W il
                                                                                                                                                                                Blu ff S            C rowle
                                                                                                                                                                                              t                                                                                             d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Blu ff R
                                                                                                                               E ugen e St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ve                                        Griz zly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  yA
                                          eek
                                        s Cr
                                       R ea
                                                                            Rd
                                                                            at
                                                                        ildc
                                                                        W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    l l ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Wi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             kR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      d
                                                               le R d
                                                           Matto
               City Limits
               Planning Area
               Potential Liquefaction Area                                                                                                                                                                                                             Source: City Boundaries - Planwest Partners Inc.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Roads - US Census TIGER data
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (http://www.census.gov/geo/www/tiger/)
0                            2,000                      4,000 Feet
                                                                            °                                                                                                                                                                                  Liquefaction Boundary - Humbolt CDSD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (http://co.humboldt.ca.us/planning/maps/)

Earthquakes can trigger a sudden mass downslope movement of material, called a slope failure
or landslide. Landslides may also be triggered by other, non-seismic events or conditions, and
are most common on steep natural or artificial slopes with high water content. Landslides may be
rapid, as in a rock-fall or debris flow, or very slow and gradual, as in a creep. Cutting away the
toe of slope in grading for site development or road construction may trigger slope failure, as
might adding weight to an area by fill, construction, or water from very heavy rain. In general,
continued modification of the topography by further cut and fill would increase the landslide
potential in areas such as the hilly southern end of the Planning Area. A landslide may cause
rocks to fall onto roadways, buildings, utilities, and other developments below the slope,
potentially causing both physical harm and property damage. In general, slopes steeper than
about 15 degrees are less stable and thus more prone to landslides. A majority of the Planning
Area is relatively flat and therefore not susceptible to landslides. The southern portion of the
Planning Area contains steeper slopes with moderate instability (see Figure 3).
            1992 Cape Mendocino Earthquake. Landslide on Mattole Road. Many small landslides occurred
            along Mattole Road between Ferndale and Petrolia. The slides hampered rescue and relief efforts.
                                 Photo credit: Lindie Brewer, U.S. Geological Survey
The oscillation produced by an earthquake may generate a wave, known as a seiche, within
enclosed or restricted bodies of water such as lakes or reservoirs. There are no lakes or reservoirs
within close enough proximity to the City of Ferndale to present a likely hazard.
A tsunami is a large sea wave generated by any large-scale disturbance of the ocean floor that
occurs in a short period of time, such as an earthquake, volcanic eruption, or coastal landslide,
which can cause a sudden displacement of water. Though local earthquakes may cause tsunamis,
most past tsunamis in California were associated with distant earthquakes that traveled great
distances across the Pacific Ocean basin. The north western portion of the Planning Area is
located in a tsunami inundation and evacuation area (see Figure 4).
City of Ferndale                                           4-3                                               Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013
Figure 3 - Soil Instability
                                                       Dillon Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             er
                                                                                                                                                                                 Bertelse                                                g gl
                                                                                                                                                                                                 n Ln                                  A
                            side Rd
                     R iver
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Fulmor Rd
                         Port Kenyon Rd
                                                                      Sa lt R
                                                                              iv   er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              211
                                                                                                                                                                                     Market St
                                                                               Rasmussen Ln                                      California St
                                                      Bush St                                                                                                                                                                                                                Perry Slou
           Meridian Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                    St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        gh
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mai n
Damon Ln                                                                                                                                         Van Ness Ave                                    Ambrosini Ln
                                                                                                                                                                       re e
                                                                                                                                                                           k
                                                                                                                                                            is C
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ambrosini Ave
                                                                                                                                                  Fra
                                                                                              Arlington Ave                                          nc
                 Center
                        vil      le Rd                                                               5th St
                                      Oeschger Rd
                                                                                                                                                   Herbert St
                                                                                                                                                                             Cre am Ct
                                                                                                     A St
                                                                                                Shaw Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Coppini Ln
                                                                                                Oc                                    St                                     Rose Ave
                                                                                                                                                                Schley Ave
                                                                                                     ean
                                                                                                              Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               iams
                                                                                                                             g
                                                                                                e               Be
                                                                                                                e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Will
                                                                                              Av                  rd
                                                                                                                    in
                                                                                    Wi l
                                                                                        dc a                                                                                 Grant Ave
                                                                                            t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            C r ee k
                                                                                                                                                                    Bluff S            C rowle
                                                                                                                                                                                 t                                                                            d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Bluff R
                                                                                                                    Eugen e St
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ve                                       Grizzly
                                                                                                                                                                                                   yA
                                     eek
                                 Re a
                                     s Cr
                                                                           d
                                                                          tR
                                                                      ildc
                                                                           a
                                                                      W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   l l ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Wi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            kR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     d
                                                            dRd
                                                     Maatttot o
                                                     M
              City Limits                                     l elR
                                                                  e
              Planning Area
    Soil/Slope Stability Zones
              Relatively Stable
              Moderate Instability
              High Instability                                                                                                                                                                                                         Source: City Boundaries - Planwest Partners Inc.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Roads - US Census TIGER data
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (http://www.census.gov/geo/www/tiger/)
0                        2,000                      4,000 Feet
                                                                          °                                                                                                                                                                    Soil Instability Boundaries - Humbolt CDSD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (http://co.humboldt.ca.us/planning/maps/)

Figure 4 - Tsunami Evacuation Area
                                                          Dillon Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          er
                                                                                                                                                                                         Bertelse                                                      ggl
                                                                                                                                                                                                  n        Ln                                        A
                               side Rd
                         R iver
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Fulmor Rd
                             Port Kenyon Rd                                     i v er
                                                                      S alt R                                                                                                                                                                                            þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         211
                                                                                                                                                                                             Market St
                                                                                  Rasmussen Ln                                           California St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               gh
                                                         Bush St
               Meridian Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Perry Slou
                                                                                                                                                                                                            St
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mai n
    Damon Ln                                                                                                                                             Van Ness Ave                                    Ambrosini Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                  ee
                                                                                                                                                                                     k
                                                                                                                                                                   nc is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ambrosini Ave
                                                                                                                                                            F ra
                                                                                                    Arlington Ave
                     Center
                            vil    le Rd                                                                     5th St
                                      Oeschger Rd
                                                                                                                                                           Herbert St
                                                                                                                                                                                     Cre am Ct
                                                                                                             A St
                                                                                                        Shaw Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Coppini Ln
                                                                                                        Oc                                    St                                     Rose Ave
                                                                                                                                                                        Schley Ave
                                                                                                             ean
                                                                                                                      Av          ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ia ms Cre ek
                                                                                                      e                 e
                                                                                                    Av
                                                                                                                        Be
                                                                                                                           rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Will
                                                                                                 dca                          i
                                                                                                    t                                                                                Grant Ave
                                                                                       Wil
                                                                                                                                                                            Bluff S            C rowle
                                                                                                                                                                                         t                                                                         Bluff               Rd
                                                                                                                            Eugen e St
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ve                                            Grizzly
                                                                                                                                                                                                           yA
                                      eek
                                    s Cr
                                   Re a
                                                                          Rd
                                                                          at
                                                                      ildc
                                                                      W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ll i a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Wi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 d
                                                               Rd
                                                        Matto
                                                              le
                 City Limits
                 Planning Area
                 Tsunami Evacuation Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Source: City Boundaries - Planwest Partners Inc.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Roads - US Census TIGER data
                                                                          °
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (http://www.census.gov/geo/www/tiger/)
0                        2,000                      4,000 Feet                                                                                                                                                                                  Tsunami Evacuation Area - Humboldt CDSD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (digitized by Planwest Partners Inc.)

MINIMIZING RISKS
To reduce the hazards associated with seismic activity, the City requires that all new
development and significant renovations abide by the most recently adopted City and State
seismic and geotechnical requirements to protect injury and structural damage due to geologic
and seismic hazards.
Historically, the greatest structural damage from earthquakes has been to unreinforced masonry
buildings, especially in areas of artificial fill or water soaked alluvium. Appropriate earthquake
design for projects in Ferndale should be in accordance with the California Building Code
seismic standards.
In areas of potential slope instability, appropriate geotechnical investigation and slope stability
analyses should be performed for both static and dynamic (earthquake) conditions. For deeper
slides, mitigation typically includes such measures as buttressing slopes or re-grading the slope
to a different configuration. Protection from rock falls or surface slides can often be achieved by
protective devices such as barriers, retaining structures, catchment areas, or a combination of
these. The runout area of the slide at the base of the slope and the potential bouncing of rocks
must also be considered. If it is not feasible to mitigate unstable slope conditions, building
setbacks should be imposed.
A considerable part of the City is in a potential liquefaction area and is already built upon,
mostly with residential and commercial development. A nearby moderate to strong earthquake
could cause extensive damage to buildings and infrastructure and injury to occupants. Since
retrofitting measures are generally not feasible due to cost, the City should be prepared to
respond to damage and disruption in the event of an earthquake. Future construction of critical
structures should be preceded by borings sufficient to assess liquefaction potential.
In the event of a large earthquake or tsunami warning, residents in the tsunami evacuation area
located in the southern portion of the Planning Area should evacuate to higher ground as fast as
possible. Due to the low population density and the multiple access routes in this area there is not
a defined evacuation route or gathering site.
City of Ferndale                                     4-6                                 Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013
5.0      Flooding & Drainage Hazards
Primary flood related hazards in the Planning Area include river and creek flooding and drainage
system overflows, mostly due to storm waters. Annual average rainfall in Ferndale is 40 to 60
inches, with 80% of that falling in the six-month period of November through April (Humboldt
County 2007).
Ferndale and parts of the Planning Area have historically experienced storm water and drainage
issues. Runoff associated with heavy winter rains has caused chronic flooding and sedimentation
problems in the relatively flat terrain in the City, as well as in the area north of the City near the
Salt River. The City has recognized that continued growth can only take place in or adjacent to
those portions of the city experiencing chronic flooding, and that management of storm water
runoff is in the public interest (City of Ferndale 2004).
Drainage management becomes increasingly important as new development converts additional
areas in a watershed to impermeable surfaces. Though Ferndale is growing at a relatively slow
rate, each additional unit adds impervious surfaces to the City’s total. These impervious surfaces
reduce infiltration and convey stormwater faster, increasing peak flows. Increased peak flows
can accelerate erosion or require the conversion of natural drainage ways into higher capacity
conveyances that can more rapidly transport stormwater.
To address these issues, the City Council formed a Drainage Committee in 1989. In 1990 the
City adopted a Drainage Master Plan, updated in 2003, which recognized the need to complete
many major drainage improvements within the City limits. The Plan established a list of
recommended drainage improvement projects, addressed drainage revenues and the drainage fee
rate structure, and recommended changes to the City’s drainage ordinance to better address the
City’s current needs. The Drainage Master Plan also recognized the limits imposed by both the
Salt River and the Eel River estuary, in that these areas greatly influence drainage within the City
(City of Ferndale 2004).
There are three storm drainage watersheds that affect Ferndale and the Planning Area: the
Francis Creek Watershed, the East Side Drainage Watershed, and the West Side Drainage
Watershed. These in turn contribute to the Salt River Watershed and then on to the Eel River
Watershed (City of Ferndale 2004).
Francis Creek's flood carrying capacity is restricted by culverts, bridges, sediment build-up, and
debris (see Figure 5). Sediment erosion in the upland areas south of Ferndale contributes to the
flooding problem by filling local streams and the Salt River with silt, reducing their capacity to
carry peak storm runoff. While flooding and sedimentation are natural processes, the frequency
and rate of sediment deposition have increased because of land use activities in the Wildcat Hills
(City of Ferndale 2004).
Flooding from Francis Creek has been historically documented at regular intervals and varying
intensities. In the winter of 1995-96, Francis Creek overflowed its banks, flooding Main Street
and spreading silt over the city's streets and sidewalks and causing extensive damage to
buildings.
City of Ferndale                                  5-1                                     Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E                                                                                                           S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AV                                                                                                             NE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ON                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     YON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          VA                                                                                                                                                                                K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 KEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                L IN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     E                                                                                                                                          CR
                                                                                                                                                                                                               CENTERVILLE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RG E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                HA   AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SC   SW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              T O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PORT            IS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AD)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               IV A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             FR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (PR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ST.                                                                                                                                                                                         .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TH                                                                                                                                                                                          ST                                                                    S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5                                                                                                                                                                                       NI                                                                         R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       IF                                                                                       ND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                C   AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            WE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           WA        T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               NE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SEEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LA                                                                                                                                                                                                    '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    S                                                                                                                                                                                                       TM         Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AW                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EA     I L IT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               T R      C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ND                                                                                                                                                                                                  FA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         OU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          GR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              IR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ST                                                                                                                                          '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TH                                                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               FA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E.                                                                5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1   0'                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          OM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FR   S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 UND
                                                                                                                                               WILD                                                                                       SH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              G   RO
                                                                                                                                                    CAT                                                                                                       5'             .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       IR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       W                                  AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  EY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       XL                                                                                                                                                                                              T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    N                          GT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PI                                                                                                                                                                                     NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                L IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .                                                                                                                                                               TO                                                           AR                                                                                                              E.
                                                                                                      FRA                                                                                                                                 TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            E.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S                                                                                                                                                                      AV
                                                                                                         NC
                                                                                                           IS                                                                                                                                             AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4                                                                                                                                                                                    SC
                                                                                                                ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AL              E                                                                                                                                                            SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AW                                                                                                                                                       E
D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SH                ST
HE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RD               SH                                                      '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3                                            T                      10
RS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AM                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             UR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SI   CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CR
    TE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           EE
     WA
                                                                                                                                                                 AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   K
                                                                                                                                                                    .
         K
                                                                                                 'S
                                                                                            EN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E.
         EE                                                                          EM                                                                     OC                                                                                                                                      IS                                                                                                                                                               .                              AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ST
                                                                                                                                                                                              BR
          CR                                                                F IR             RK                                                                                                                                                                                                    C                                                                                                           N                                        IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                OW                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .   E.
                                                                                                                                                              EAN
                                                                                        PA                                                                                                        N                                                                                              AN                                                                                                                                                   MA                                                                         ST
              S                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 R                                                                                                                                                                                                    ON                                    AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               F                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ON
              CI                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   D   IS                                                               E.
                                                                                                                                         ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              GT
                                                                                                                      CL
               AN                                                                                                                          .                                                                                                                                            MAIN                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MA                                                                  .
                                                                                                                        EV                                                                                                                                                                          ST.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ON                              ST       AV                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           VANSTO
                                                                                                                                                                        BE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L IN                                                                                                                                                                       ST
                  FR                                                                                                                                                             RD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             YS                        LN
                                                                                                                          EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ET
                                                                                                                            AN    EU                                                  ING                                                                               E.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                AR                                                         CO                      ON                                                                          RK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .                                                                                                        L IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AVE.
                                                                                                                              D                                                              ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                  .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NN                                                                                                                  MA
                    ES                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LT
                                                                                                                                    GE
                                                                                                                                      NE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ST                                                                                             TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 5 - Ferndale Drainage Systems
                       UD                                                                                         HAR
                                                                                                                     RIS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TO
                                                                                                                        ON                                                                                                                                         HA
                       CL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             W                                                                                                                                                                                  RD                                                                                                                                                                                                             FE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FERN AVE.
                         IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LEWIS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .                                                                                                                                                                                                                       WA                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IDG
                                                                                                                                                          CR                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E
                                                                                                                                                               AIG                                                            ST                                                                                                                                            ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   T                                                                                         HO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   HIG
                            EA                                                                                                                                          ST
                                                                                                                                                                             .                                                                                                                                                                                   ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        HW
                              AR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             HE                        LL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           T      FA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OU                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                 E                                                                                                                                                                                       GT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4   0'
                                 AG                                                                                                                                                                               HI                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       E                      CHANNEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     N
                                   A IN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E.                                                                                                                                                        INAG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AV                                        '                                                                                                                                                                            '
                                                                                                                                                                 EM                                           WA
                                     DR                                                                                                                            ER                                           S                                                                                                                                                      10                                                                                                DE                                                                         50
                                                                                                                                                                     SO                                                                                        '                                                                   Y                                                                                                                               SI
                                                                                                                                                                       N                                                                                  15
                                                                                                                                                                                       ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                                                                                         .                                                                                                                                         WE                '                                                                                                ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DE                                                                                                           EA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                              '                                                                                                               '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              OS
                                                                                                                                                                                                         25                                                                                                              20                                                                                '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BR
                                                                                                                                     S T.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E.                                                                                        T
                                                                                                                                    FF                                                                                                                                                    AV                                                                                      UR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CO
                                                                                                                                   BLU                                                                                                                                                        SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            E.                                                 RO                                                            E.                         M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Y                                                                                                                          AV                         EA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 H           LE
                                                                                                                                                                                                              SC                                                                                                                                                  Y                         CR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ON                                         5'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TS                                                                                  WE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DE
                                                                                                                                                                                               E.
                                                                                                                                                                                             AV                                                                                                                                                                                          Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        EN
                                                                                                                                                                                                          T                                                                                                                                                           BS
                                                                                                                                                                                                        AN                                                                                                                                                          CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5'                    JA
                                                                                                                                                                                                      GR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         EY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               KI
                                                                                                                                                          PARCELS                                                                         MC                                                   DROP              INLET
                                                                             E                                                                            CREATED
                                                                              DG                                                                          SINCE      1990                                                                                                                      DRAIN             PIPE
                                                                               RI
                                                                                                                                                          EASEMENT
                                                                                     OF                                                                                                                                                                                                        FLOW              DIRECTION
                                                                                        P                                                                 CITY      LIMITS
                                                                                        TO                                                                                                                                                                                                     SWALE
                                                                                            TO                                                            DRAINAGE               SYSTEM BOUNDARY
                                                                                                                                                                                          E.
                                                                                             H                                                                                         AV
                                                                            Designed:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             File Name:                                                                                  Job No.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BAR IS ONE INCH ON
         SPENCER ENGINEERING &                                                                   J. BROWN                                                                                   PREPARED FOR:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FRANCIS-1a                                          ORIGINAL DRAWING                         03106
         CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT, INC.                                      Drawn:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  FIGURE 6. FRANCIS CREEK DRAINAGE
                    1585 HEARTWOOD DRIVE, SUITE F McKINLEYVILLE, CA 95519                        J. BAKER                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Date:                                                  0                            1"      Sheet No.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               IF NOT ONE INCH ON
                       TELEPHONE (707) 839-4336   FAX (707) 839-4012        Checked:
                                                                                                                                                                                 CITY OF FERNDALE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  THIS SHEET, ADJUST                           15
                                                                                             T. S. KELLY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CITY OF FERNDALE                                                                                                                                                  8/27/03                                         SCALES ACCORDINGLY
Spurred by this flood damage, the City obtained funding from the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), Caltrans, and the state Office of Emergency Services for the
Francis Creek Hazard Mitigation Project, a $3 million public works project consisting of
removing or widening bridges and widening the creek bed to allow for higher flow rates without
flooding. The project began in the year 2000 and was completed just before the extreme storm
events of December 16 and 27, 2002. The December 16 storm produced peak flows in Francis
Creek that were estimated to be at least 850 cubic feet per second (cfs). The December 27 storm
was even greater; over 8 inches of rain fell on the Francis Creek watershed in a 24 hour period,
producing flows in Francis Creek estimated to be at least 1,000 cfs. Francis Creek was able to
handle the December 16 storm flow without any problems. At least one foot of clearance was
reported at all creek banks and bridges. The December 27 storm event produced some minor
overtopping of Francis Creek; but no property damage was reported (City of Ferndale 2004).
The East Side Drainage System (see Figure 5) consists of a network of street gutters, storm
sewers, culverts, and drainage channels that convey runoff to a natural low profile drainage
swale referred to as the East Side Channel. The East Side Channel lies about 2,000 feet east of
Francis Creek and flows north to Market Street and Van Ness Street where it converges with a
County maintained ditch. This Channel drains the easterly portion of the City and collects
overflows from both Francis Creek to the west and Williams Creek to the east (City of Ferndale
2004).
The flood mitigation projects completed on Francis Creek in 2000-2002 was intended to alleviate
some of the previous flooding problems experienced in East Side Drainage watershed (City of
Ferndale 2004). However, sedimentation in Williams Creek continues to cause flooding.
The West Side Drainage System (see Figure 5) consists of a network of street gutters, drainage
channels, and culverts. The west side drainage area is absent of any storm sewers except for the
former Navy housing and a small internal drainage system at the County Fairgrounds. The
remaining acreage contains a series of drainage channels all running northerly to Port Kenyon
road (City of Ferndale 2004).
According to the City of Ferndale 2004 Drainage Master Plan, the West Side drainage channels
are draining at maximum capacity and any increase in storm water will only contribute to
additional unmanaged run-off. In addition, the drainage ditches are densely vegetated, especially
during the spring months. This vegetation significantly decreases the hydraulic efficiency of the
channels and their capacity to convey stormwater runoff (City of Ferndale 2004).
The Salt River Ecosystem Restoration Project is a multi-year, multi-agency, landowner-driven
endeavor that addresses drainage issues in the Salt River Watershed. Prompted by the
increasingly frequent flooding, reduced drainage capacity, and sediment deposition that has
negatively impacted water quality and agricultural endeavors, the Salt River Ecosystem
Restoration Project includes a large tidal wetland restoration component that will improve the
health of the estuary system while also improving the hydrology of the river.
City of Ferndale                                 5-3                                 Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013
The Humboldt County Resource Conservation District (HCRCD) is overseeing the Salt River
restoration project, managing relations between the many agencies and property owners
involved, and procuring funding. The project would also involve channel restoration for lower
Francis Creek, with other improvements on Williams, Coffee and Reas creeks (HCRCD 2010).
                                   Salt River Ecosystem Restoration Project.
                                         Photo Credit: NCIWMP 2009.
The Eel River experiences periodic flooding which affects the Planning Area. The 1955 and
1964 floods caused extensive damage to the floodplain, although Ferndale’s historic and
business districts were not affected (Schneider 1995). Ferndale resident Viola Russ McBride
(1906-96) wrote the following of the 1964 flood:
         “Although Ferndale had been spared, it had become a ghost town. The dairy ranchers
         who supported the town had been all but ruined. Store after store was empty. Buildings
         were for sale for almost nothing. The old Red Front Store, now Abraxas, sold for less
         than $1,000!” (Ferndale Enterprise 2012).
The Eel River and other flood prone areas have been mapped by FEMA. The maps provide the
basis for regulating flood plains in conformance with the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP). The National Flood Insurance Act, adopted by the U.S. Congress in 1968, made
federally subsidized flood insurance available to property owners if their communities participate
in the NFIP. A community establishes its eligibility to participate in the NFIP in two ways: by
adopting and enforcing floodplain management measures to regulate new construction and by
ensuring that substantial improvements within Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA’s) are
designed to eliminate or minimize future flood damage.
An SFHA is an area within a floodplain having a 1 percent or greater chance of flood occurrence
within any given year. SFHAs are delineated on flood hazard boundary maps issued by FEMA
for individual communities. The Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 and the National Flood
Insurance Reform Act of 1994 make flood insurance mandatory for most properties in SFHAs.
City of Ferndale                                      5-4                            Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

Flood Insurance Rate Maps, also prepared by FEMA, delineate potential flood zones. Flood
hazards related to storm events generally are described in terms of 100- or 500-year flood. A
100-year flood is defined as a major flood event that has a one percent or greater chance of
occurring during any one year. Flood hazard planning practices addresses such storms, as well
as 500-year events. As implied, the 100- and 500-year floods are the largest flood events that
may be expected to occur within 100-year and 500-year periods, respectively. These floods are
considered severe but ones which can be reasonably predicted and therefore reasonably
mitigated.
Figure 6 shows the extent of flooding potential in the Planning Area. The northern portion of the
Planning Area is within the 100-year and 500-year flood zones, as are portions of the Planning
Area along Reas, Williams, and Francis creeks. Sea level rise due to global warming is expected
to expose more of the City to flood hazards. In particular, the 100-year and 500-year flood zones
are expected to extend farther south into the City (Pacific Institute 2009).
The hazards associated with dam inundation or failure are not considered a significant threat to
Ferndale (Humboldt County 2007). Dam inundation occurs when structural damage to a dam
results in a flood, and can be caused by earthquake, erosion, design flaw, or storm water
overflow. Scott Dam, which creates Lake Pillsbury on the Eel River, is located more than 100
miles southeast of the City. Over this distance, water surges created by dam failure would
disperse considerably before reaching the Planning Area (Humboldt County 2007). Although
failure of this dam would increase water levels downstream, it is expected that the levels would
remain below the 100-year flood level and damage would be minor (Humboldt County 2007).
The County maintains an emergency response plan for Scott Dam.
City of Ferndale                                5-5                                   Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013
Figure 6 - Flooding Hazards
                                                    Dillon Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            er L
                                                                                                                                                                                  Bertelse                                              g gl
                                                                                                                                                                                                 n Ln                                 A
                        rside Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Fulmor Rd
                  R ive
                      Port Kenyon Rd
                                                                     S alt R
                                                                               ive r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           211
                                                                                                                                                                                     Market St
                                                                                Rasmussen Ln                                      California St
                                                   Bush St                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Perry Slou
        Meridian Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                    St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       gh
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mai n
                                                                                                                                                  Van Ness Ave                                   Ambrosini Ln
                                                                                                                                                                              k
                                                                                                                                                                        re e
                                                                                                                                                           cis
                                                                                                                                                               C
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ambrosini Ave
                                                                                                                                                    Fra
                                                                                                  Arlington Ave                                         n
              Center
                     vil      le Rd                                                                        5th St
                                 Oeschger Rd
                                                                                                                                                    Herbert St
                                                                                                                                                                              Cre am Ct
                                                                                                           A St
                                                                                                      Shaw Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Coppini Ln
                                                                                                      Oc                               St                                     Rose Ave
                                                                                                                                                                 Schley Ave
                                                                                                         ean
                                                                                                             Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ams
                                                                                                                           ng
                                                                                                      ve       e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Willi
                                                                                                                     rd
                                                                                                  A                 Be
                                                                                                                        i
                                                                                               dca
                                                                                                  t                                                                           Grant Ave
                                                                                      Wil
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Creek
                                                                                                                                                                     Bluff S           C rowle
                                                                                                                                                                             t                                                                              d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Bluff R
                                                                                                                     Eugen e St
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ve                                     Grizzly
                                                                                                                                                                                                   yA
                                 eek
                                s Cr
                              Re a
                                                                         Rd
                                                                     ildc
                                                                         at
                                                                     W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ll i a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Wi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             kR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  d
                 City Limits                     Maatttot o
                                                 M
                                                         l elRedRd
                 Planning Area
                 FEMA Floodway
    FEMA Flood Zones
                 100 Year Flood Zone
                 500 Year Flood Zone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Source: City Boundaries - Planwest Partners Inc.
0                     2,000                    4,000 Feet
                                                                         °                                                                                                                                                                    Roads - US Census TIGER data
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (http://www.census.gov/geo/www/tiger/)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Flood data - FEMA Q3 (msc.fema.gov)

MINIMIZING RISKS
The City requires that all new development and significant renovations abide by the most
recently adopted City, State, and Federal flooding and drainage requirements to protect injury
and structural damage due to floods.
To prepare and mitigate hazards from flooding, both Humboldt County and the City of Ferndale
participate in the National Flood Insurance Program. In order to maintain compliance with the
requirements of the program, the City has encoded floodplain management regulations in
Ordinance 08-02. The Ordinance specifies flood damage prevention measures for the regulation
of land use and development in areas subject to flood inundation and establishes a development
permit for any development within an area of special flood hazard, as defined in the Ordinance.
Property owners in potential flood areas can make modifications to their houses to reduce the
impacts of flooding. FEMA has identified several flood protection measures that can be
implemented by property owners to reduce flood damage. These include installing waterproof
veneers on the exterior walls of buildings; putting seals on all openings, including doors, to
prevent the entry of water; raising electrical components above the anticipated water level
improvements; and installing backflow valves that prevent sewage from backing up into the
house through the drainpipes.
The City should continue to improve and maintain storm drain systems to convey water flows
and minimize damage from flood events as suggested by the Drainage Master Plan. The Plan
established a list of recommended drainage improvement projects, addressed drainage revenues
and the drainage fee rate structure, and recommended changes to the City’s drainage ordinance
to better address the City’s current needs.
City of Ferndale                                 5-7                                  Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

6.0      Fire Hazards
Fire hazards fall into two general categories: wildland fires, which emanate from forest,
grassland, or coastal scrub; and structural fires, which damage homes and workplaces. Both
bring risk of spreading to other areas. In general, structural fire protection is the responsibility of
local agencies, such as fire protection districts and volunteer fire companies; wildland fire
protection is the responsibility of federal and state agencies.
Urban Fire Hazard
Structure fires account for a high percentage of the yearly losses in Ferndale. Structural fires are
especially an issue in high-density areas, where there is a higher potential for fire to spread from
one structure to the next. Furthermore, the narrow spaces between the structures and the property
lines in medium- to high-density areas provide limited room for emergency access. In the older
section of downtown Ferndale, including the Main Street Historic District, streets and alleys
make it difficult to maneuver and position response vehicles to be most effective in fighting a
fire. Structure fires in this older section — where many buildings date from the late 1800’s to
                                                                     1930s, were built to older
                                                                     building standards and fire
                                                                     codes, are very close together,
                                                                     and are made from non-fire
                                                                     resistive construction materials
                                                                     with no internal sprinklers and
                                                                     other fire safety systems in
                                                                     place — present higher risks.
                                                                     Founded in 1897, the Ferndale
                                                                     Volunteer Fire Department
                                                                     (FVFD) is responsible for the
                                                                     preservation and protection of
                                                                     life and property for the City of
                                                                     Ferndale and the surrounding
                    Nilsen Barn Fire. Christmas night, 2007.          rural area. The Ferndale Fire
                            Photo by Jim Richards.                    Protection District (FFPD) is a
                                                                      special district responsible for
providing fire protection services, through the FVFD, to the City of Ferndale and the
unincorporated communities of Grizzly Bluff, Arlynda Corners, Centerville, Port Kenyon,
Wildcat Ridge, and the remainder of the Eel River bottoms south of the Eel River. The FFPD
was formed in 1934 and was subsequently reorganized under the provisions of the California
Health and Safety Code in January 1964 (LAFCo 2008).
The active powers of the FFPD include structural fire protection and suppression, rescue, and
emergency medical services. Latent powers include water supply and storage for fire suppression
purposes. While the FFPD is responsible for structural fire protection and emergency medical
responses, CDF retains responsibility for grass and forest fires. The FFPD has joint responsibility
for grass and forest fires within the District through a mutual aid agreement with the California
Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (CAL FIRE). The FFPD also has mutual aid
City of Ferndale                                          6-1                             Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

agreements with the Loleta and Fortuna
Fire Protection Districts. These mutual aid
agreements allow the districts to enter into
agreements for services, including
emergencies which have the potential to
overwhelm the resource capabilities within
a single district. This enables the FFPD to
maintain preparedness for a disaster
beyond their capacity, without the need to
expand and create an additional facility.
The FFPD has a district boundary of 44.2
square miles and a total response area of
115.7 miles. The District’s current
boundaries encompass the area from the
Pacific Ocean on the west to the Eel River               The historic Ferndale Fire Hall, built in 1910.
                                                      Photo courtesy of Matt Knowles, Aesthetic Design &
on the north and east, and to Upper Bear                                 Photography
River Road on the southern border. This
encompasses all of the City and Planning Area. The FVFD has one rescue truck, three fire
engines (pumpers), two water tenders, a utility truck and other assorted equipment (FVFD 2012).
The Department also has 12 volunteers trained for Firefighter 1 and Wildland fires, 4 first
responders, 10 EMTs, and 4 volunteers trained for Hazardous Materials. The largest facilities
within the FFPD include downtown Ferndale, the Humboldt County Fairgrounds, and Ferndale’s
Elementary and High Schools. Water wells serving the FFPD are owned by a private water
company, and within the FFPD water resources have not been identified as deficient (LAFCo
2008).
Wildland Fire Hazard
Residential development in areas with high risk for wildfire has complicated the fire-protection
mission of federal, state and local agencies. Decades of wildland fire-suppression has led to
increasing fire fuel levels, percentages of dead fire fuel per wildland acre, and fuel ladders that
allow fires to reach large conflagration sizes quicker and more frequently. Wildfire protection
agencies are experiencing a change in the type and effects of wildland fire. Though fires are not
necessarily larger, they are burning much more intensely, are more costly to control, and create
greater risks and losses to the resources and citizens in the wildland areas.
A review of past urban/wildland interface fires in the United States shows many common
contributors to major loss of life, property, and natural resources. The most common
characteristics of these fires include:
        Poor access for emergency and evacuation vehicles;
        Hot, windy, dry conditions;
        Sloping topography;
        A buildup of flammable vegetation;
        Lack of defensible space;
        Use of combustible construction materials;
City of Ferndale                                  6-2                                               Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

        Lack of public education and information;
        Inadequate developer planning; and,
        Underequipped and undertrained firefighters (IAFC and WFCA1996).
Steeply sloped hills covered with coniferous forest and understory are located within and around
the southern portion of the Planning Area. Specifically, the forested slopes south of Centerville
Road west of the City and south of Bluff Road east of the City have considerable fuel loads.
Prevailing winds from the west have potential to spread wildfire from those areas into Ferndale.
The Humboldt County Fire History map 1908-2001, prepared by Humboldt County Community
Development Services in October 2002, indicates that there have been no major wildfires in the
Planning Area in the last century. According to the Humboldt County Community Development
Services Department (now the Building and Planning Department), the entire Planning Area is
within a High Fire Rating Zone (see Figure 7).
The Humboldt County Fire Safe Regulations are contained in Title III - Division 11, Land Use
and Development, are known as the "SRA Fire Safe Regulations" and constitute the wildland fire
protection standards of the County for lands within State Responsibility Areas (SRA).
CAL FIRE has responsibility for wildland fires on SRA’s, which includes most of the steeply
sloped and forested areas in the southern portion of the Planning Area. When staffed, CAL FIRE
provides emergency response for wildland fires, structure fires, vehicle accidents and medical aid
calls, and support for local fire agencies as needed. CAL FIRE and the Forest Service are at
peak staffing from July through October. During the off-peak part the year, CAL FIRE responds
as available (Humboldt County 2011).
The wildfire hazard in the Planning Area has been analyzed using the methodology of CAL
FIRE’s Fire and Resource Assessment Program (FRAP). This method takes into account fuels,
terrain, weather, and other relevant factors. These zones, referred to as Fire Hazard Severity
Zones, provide the basis for application of various mitigation strategies to reduce risks to
buildings associated with wildland fires. Specifically, the zone determines the requirements for
unique building codes designed to reduce the ignition potential to buildings. According to the
2007 FRAP map, the southern portion of the Planning Area that is within the SRA is a High Fire
Hazard Severity Zone.
In 2006, the Humboldt County Board of Supervisors approved the Master Fire Protection Plan
(MFPP), as a resource to assist in the development of appropriate policies in the County General
Plan. The MFPP was developed for use as a framework for fire coordination, prevention, and
protection throughout the county. The MFPP also makes significant findings and
recommendations relating to fire protection capability, fire safe education, fire risk and hazard
assessment, fire risk reduction and management, community preparedness and response, and
fiscal issues relating to fire protection.
The MFPP Plan contains a wildland fire risk/hazard assessment that was prepared for eleven fire
planning compartments covering the entire County using the Risk Assessment and Management
System (RAMS) computer model. Planning compartments were developed based on watershed
City of Ferndale                                 6-3                                    Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

Figure 7 - Fire hazards
                                                     Dillon Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      er
                                                                                                                                                                            Bertelse                                               ggl
                                                                                                                                                                                           n Ln                                  A
                            side Rd
                     R iver
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Fulmor Rd
                         Port Kenyon Rd
                                                                 S alt R
                                                                           iver
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        211
                                                                                                                                                                                    O
                                                                                                                                                                               Market St
                                                                            Rasmussen Ln                                 California St
                                                    Bush St
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pe rry Slou
           Meridian Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                              St
                                                                                                                                                                                           M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    g
                                                                                                                                                                                            ai
                                                                                                                               O                                                               n
Damon Ln
                                                                                                                               O Van
                                                                                                                                  O
                                                                                                                                     Ness Ave
                                                                                                                                              O                                            Ambrosini Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                             O
                                                                                                                                                                       k
                                                                                                            O OO                                               Cr ee    O                                 O
                                                                                                                                                    c is
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ambrosini Ave
                                                                                                                                         Fra                           O
                                                                                            Arlington Ave                                    n
                                                                                                   O        O                            O O
                                                                                                                                                                                                         O
                                                                                                5th St
                 Center                                                                                                                            O
                        vil      le Rd                                                             OO O
                                                                                                   O O                                        O
                                                                                                       O
                                    Oeschger Rd
                                                                                                                                             Herbert St
                                                                                                                                                                       Cre am Ct
                                                                                                   A St                                  O
                                                                                                        O     O      O O
                                                                                              Shaw Ave                O
                                                                                            O O        O O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Coppini Ln
                                                                                                            O    Rose
                                                                                                                          O
                                                                                                        O               Ave
                                                                                           O O c ea             O O
                                                                                                                                                          Schley Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ia ms
                                                                                                   nA O O
                                                                                               e O ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Will
                                                                                            Av      O O     j
                                                                                                            k
                                                                                                          O O
                                                                                                         St
                                                                                  Wi l
                                                                                      dc a      Be
                                                                                                     O         OGrant O
                                                                                                                         Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Creek
                                                                                          t     O  rd
                                                                                                     in
                                                                                                        g                 OC
                                                                                                      O        Bluff S       rowle
                                                                                                                       t                                                                                                                                d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Bluff R
                                                                                                            Eugen e St
                                                                                                                                                                                               ve                                       Grizzly
                                                                                                                                                                                             yA
                                    eek
                                   s Cr
                                 R ea
                                                                     tR
                                                                       d
                                                                 ildc
                                                                      a
                                                                 W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ll i a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Wi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      kR
                           City Limits                                                                                                                                                                                                              ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               d
                           Planning Area
       Fire Ratings
                           Low
                           Moderate
                           High
           j
           k               Fire Station
           O               Fire Hydrants                                                                                                                                                                                         Source: City Boundaries - Planwest Partners Inc.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Roads - US Census TIGER data
0                        2,000                    4,000 Feet
                                                                     °
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (http://www.census.gov/geo/www/tiger/)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Fire Ratings - Humboldt CDSD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (http://co.humboldt.ca.us/planning/maps/)

and planning boundaries and were designed to include areas with similar fire planning
characteristics. The Planning Area is located within the Humboldt Bay Planning Compartment,
which extends from Trinidad in the north to Rio Dell and Carlotta in the south.
The RAMS analysis evaluated five factors that contribute to the overall risk of catastrophic fire.
The five factors are:
        fire-related fuels hazard and topography;
        resources and economic assets at risk;
        wildland ignition risk;
        wildfire history; and
        fire protection capacity.
Based on the RAMS analysis, the risk of catastrophic fire for the Humboldt Bay Planning
Compartment is considered moderate.
Property damage from wildfires can be severe and can significantly alter entire communities.
Structures, above-ground infrastructure, critical facilities and natural environments are
vulnerable. Some land uses are more vulnerable to wildfire, such as single-family rural
residential, while others are less vulnerable, such as agricultural land, gravel mining, and
cemeteries. Critical facilities that are of wood frame construction are especially vulnerable
during wildfire events.
MINIMIZING RISKS
Ferndale has adopted the 2010 California Fire Code. These provisions include construction
standards and sprinkler and fire hydrant requirements in new structures and remodels, road
widths and configurations designed to accommodate the passage of fire trucks and engines, and
requirements for minimum fire flow rates for water mains.
Providing Ferndale residents, property owners, and business operators with a better education
about fire risks and the potential liabilities they face is a proven low cost method to prepare for –
and even avoid – fires. The City and the FFPD could facilitate this effort. The FFPD could
undertake a proactive and aggressive approach with the owners of private properties who fail to
meet minimum maintenance standards from a fire hazards standpoint in its role as enforcement
agency for the fire code.
Adopting an annual and ongoing clean-up program to minimize or eliminate fire fuel
accumulations on City-owned properties and in the public rights-of-way would allow the City to
reduce fire risk while setting an example for other property owners by proactively addressing its
own fire safety hazards.
Developing policies to protect existing water supplies, develop additional water supplies and
maintain and/or enhance the integrity of the delivery systems would ensure access and
availability of water supply in case of a fire.
City of Ferndale                                   6-5                                  Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

7.0      Hazardous Materials
This section focuses on those hazards associated with the use, exposure, storage, or release of
hazardous materials; provides an overview of federal, state, and local hazardous material
regulations; and describes existing known hazardous materials in the Planning Area.
The California Health and Safety Code Section 25501 defines a Hazardous Material as "any
material that because of its quantity, concentration, or physical or chemical characteristics poses
a significant present or potential hazard to human health and safety or the environment if
released into the work-place or environment." Hazardous materials may be associated with
transportation accidents or occur in a fixed production or storage facility. Both accidental and
sabotage-related releases are possible. Short-term and long-term contamination of an affected
area is possible depending upon the situation.
Regulatory Setting
The storage and clean-up (remediation) of hazardous sites is regulated by a series of federal, state
and local agencies, including the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, California
Environmental Protection Agency, the State Department of Toxic Substance Control, the State
Water Resources Control Board, and the local Certified Unified Program Agency (CUPA).
The Humboldt County Health Department, Division of Environmental Health is the CUPA with
oversight of hazardous materials for Humboldt County. The purpose of the CUPA program is to
provide hazardous material information about facilities to emergency responders and the general
public. Chapter 6.95 of the California Health and Safety Code requires that facilities which use
or store hazardous materials at or above reporting thresholds submit a Hazardous Materials
Business Plan (HMBP) containing detailed information on the storage of hazardous materials at
the facility to CUPA. The intent of the Business Plan is to satisfy federal and state Community
Right-To-Know laws and provide detailed information for use by emergency responders. All
persons at the facility qualified to serve as emergency coordinators are required to be thoroughly
familiar with the contents and use of the HMBP, with the operations and activities of the facility,
and with the locations of all hazardous materials records maintained by the facility. Inspections
are conducted periodically to verify a facility’s inventory and other information on the Business
Plan. Facilities that are not required to complete a HMBP are still required to register their
hazardous materials with CUPA. CUPA monitors facilities that handle, generate, or store
hazardous materials. Such sites within or near the Planning Area are listed in Figure 8
CUPA has a Hazardous Materials Area Plan (HMAP) that covers the County, including the City
of Ferndale and its surroundings. The HMAP establishes the following:
        Policies, responsibilities, and procedures required for protecting the health and safety of
         Humboldt County’s population, the environment, and the public and private property
         from the effects of hazardous materials incidents;
        Emergency response organization for hazardous materials incidents occurring within
         Humboldt County; and
        Operational concepts and procedures associated with the Eureka Fire Departments
         Regional Hazardous Materials Response Team (EFD HMRT).
City of Ferndale                                  7-1                                   Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

Figure 8 - Hazardous Material Facilities in the Planning Area
FACILITY ID    FACILITY NAME AND SITE ADDRESS                                    CITY         STATUS
FA0004839      Alexandre Acres 210 Sage RD                                       Ferndale     Active
FA0000616      Asbury Environmental Services - Chico II, LLC 989 Milton Ave      Ferndale     Active
FA0000189      AT & T Mobility (CA253) - Ferndale (99397) 989 Milton AVE Site A  Ferndale     Active
FA0000159      AT & T Mobility (CA254) - Eel River Sawmill (99391) 110 Weymouth  Ferndale     Active
FA0004558      Bluff
               Bancrest Dairy 509 Coppini LN                                     Ferndale     Active
FA0004546      Boldrini Dairy 225 Sage RD                                        Ferndale     Active
FA0004561      Brazil Dairy 5736 Grizzly Bluff RD                                Ferndale     Active
FA0004671      Bunker Hill Ranch 655 Bear River Ridge RD                         Ferndale     Active
FA0004550      Cahill Dairy 1073 Fulmore AVE                                     Ferndale     Active
FA0000670      City of Ferndale - Public Works Yard 48 Francis St                Ferndale     Active
FA0005045      City of Ferndale - Wastewater Treatment Plant 606 Port Kenyon RD  Ferndale     Active
FA0000641      Citizens Telecom - Bunker Hill Microwave Site Bear River Ridge Rd Ferndale     Active
FA0004789      Coffee Creek Dairy 2824 Grizzly Bluff RD                          Ferndale     Active
FA0004573      Coppini Lane Jerseys 720 Coppini LN                               Ferndale     Active
FA0004691      Darren Hansen Dairy 3784 Grizzly Bluff RD                         Ferndale     Active
FA0000820      Del Oro Water Company 995 Eugene St                               Ferndale     Active
FA0000819      Del Oro Water Co - Van Ness Ave Well 1400 Van Ness Ave            Ferndale     Active
FA0000808      Dennis DelBiaggio 3078 Grizzly Bluff Rd                           Ferndale     Active
FA0000837      Diamond Point Dairy 1312 Pleasant Point Rd                        Ferndale     Active
FA0004791      Diamond R Ranch Inc 100 Price Creek Rd                            Ferndale     Active
FA0001092      Fernbridge Tractor & Equipment 20 Depot Rd                        Fernbridge   Active
FA0004692      Fern Valley Goats 2027 Waddington RD                              Ferndale     Active
FA0000644      Frontier Telecommunications Co of CA 550 Shaw Ave                 Ferndale     Active
FA0001382      HCDPW - Ferndale Maintenance Station Arlington St & 5             Ferndale     Active
FA0001564      Humboldt County Fair Association 1250 5th St                      Ferndale     Active
FA0001572      Humboldt Creamery - Fernbridge Facility 572 Highway 1 HWY         Fortuna      Active
FA0001670      Jack Tipple Motors Inc 524 Main St                                Ferndale     Active
FA0001814      L & M Renner Inc - Fernbridge Cardlock 597 Fernbridge Dr          Fernbridge   Active
FA0001836      Larry Denning DDS 460 Ocean Ave                                   Ferndale     Active
FA0004840      Larry Nicholson Dairy 4431 Grizzly Bluff RD `                     Ferndale     Active
FA0004624      Leonardi Dairy 1291 Waddington RD                                 Ferndale     Active
FA0001917      Lost Coast Communications 982 Bear River Ridge RD Site 2          Ferndale     Active
FA0004780      Miranda Dairy 965 Waddington RD                                   Ferndale     Active
FA0002457      PG & E - Eel River Substation 295 Substation Rd                   Ferndale     Active
FA0004599      Pleasant Point Dairy 890 Pleasant Point RD                        Ferndale     Active
FA0004793      Radelfinger Dairy 2001 State Highway 211 HWY                      Ferndale     Active
FA0002587      Redding Dairy 387 Price Creek School Rd                           Ferndale     Active
FA0002610      Redwood Broadcasting Co MW 655 Bear River Ridge Rd                Ferndale     Active
FA0004662      Regli Jersey's Dairy 500 Witman LN                                Ferndale     Active
City of Ferndale                                        7-2                                Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013
FACILITY ID    FACILITY NAME AND SITE ADDRESS                                       CITY          STATUS
FA0004607      Robert Hansen Dairy 6950A Grizzly Bluff RD                           Ferndale      Active
FA0004838      Shinn Dairy 1990 Waddington RD                                       Ferndale      Active
FA0003292      The Farm Shop 650 Herbert St                                         Ferndale      Active
FA0004850      Tom Losa Dairy 199 Saottini LN                                       Ferndale      Active
FA0004697      Vevoda Dairy 255 Price Creek School RD                               Ferndale      Active
FA0004694      William Tunzini Dairy 487 Aggler LN                                  Ferndale      Active
Source: Humboldt County Division of Environmental Health (Humboldt County’s Certified Unified Program Agency
or CUPA). Received August 14, 2012.
Existing Conditions
Because of a general lack of significant industrial operations, Ferndale does not currently
experience a significant threat from hazardous materials use or storage. The transport of
hazardous materials, particularly along the S.R. 211/ Main Street corridor, presents possible
hazards in the event of a materials leak or if a transport truck experiences an accident.
This section includes a summary of known regulated hazardous material sites currently listed
within the Planning Area. There are numerous agencies with oversight of hazardous materials,
each with a slightly differed jurisdiction or purview. Databases regarding hazardous and toxic
materials use and storage are maintained by the following agencies:
         Cal-DHS - California Department of Health Services
         Cal-EPA - California Environmental Protection Agency
         CIWMB - California Integrated Waste Management Board
         CORRACTS - Corrective Action Report
         DOG - California Division of Oil and Gas
         DTSC - Department of Toxic Substances Control
         HCDEH - Humboldt County Department of Health and Human Services, Division of
          Environmental Health
         NPL - Environmental Protection Agency’s National Priorities List
         ODW - Cal-DHS, Office of Drinking Water
         OEHHA - Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment
         RCRIS-TSD - Resource Conservation and Recovery Information System
         RWQCB - Regional Water Quality Control Board, North Coast Region
         SWRCB - California (State) Water Resources Control Board
As mentioned in the previous section, CUPA monitors facilities that handle, generate, or store
hazardous materials (see Figure 8). CUPA lists 45 such facilities in or near the Planning Area;
the majority are associated with the agricultural industry, including approximately 20 dairies.
The Department of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC) lists sites that have known contamination or
sites for which there may be reasons to investigate further. It also identifies facilities that are
authorized to treat, store, dispose or transfer hazardous waste. The DTSC has no listed sites within
the Planning Area (DTSC 2012).
City of Ferndale                                     7-3                                       Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

The State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB) lists sites that have underground storage
tanks containing hazardous materials. These tanks are typically associated with past automobile-
related activities, such as service stations and automobile repair shops. SWRCB has identified
over 36 sites in the Planning Area that involve issues of leaking underground storage tanks
(LUST’s). The primary risk LUSTs pose is leaking gasoline and diesel fuel hydrocarbons and
related compounds into the soil and groundwater. Most of the sites have undergone successful
remediation, which usually involves removal of the underground tanks and any contaminated
soil. There are currently eight open LUST cases in the Planning Area (see Figure 9). These
remaining sites are monitored by SWRCB.
Hazardous Material Incident Response
The primary responder for hazardous material-related calls within the Planning Area is the
Ferndale Volunteer Fire Department (FVFD). Several members of the Ferndale Volunteer Fire
Department have training and certifications in hazardous materials incident response, including
Hazardous Materials Technician, Hazardous Materials Decontamination, Meth Lab Fire Scene
Preservation, and Hazardous Materials: First Responder Awareness/Operations.
The Eureka Fire Department’s Regional Hazardous Material Response Team (HMRT) was
established in 1993 to respond to emergencies involving hazardous materials. The HMRT is
funded primarily through a Joint Powers Agreement (JPA) between Humboldt County, Del
Norte County, City of Eureka, City of Crescent City, City of Arcata, City of Blue Lake, City of
Ferndale, City of Rio Dell, and City of Trinidad. The JPA establishes the Humboldt/Del Norte
Hazardous Material Response Authority (HMRA). The HMRA Board consists of elected
officials of each member agency and meets quarterly to provide oversight to the Team.
CUPA provides staff functions for the HMRA. CUPA is the regulatory authority relative to
hazardous materials and supports the HMRT at emergency incidents. The two agencies maintain
a close working relationship to ensure public safety and effective response to emergencies.
The HMRT consists of twelve members of the Eureka Fire Department, each of which is
certified as Hazardous Material Specialists by the State of California. HMRT members are
“non-dedicated,” meaning that they have other duties within the fire department but also function
as hazardous material specialists. The HMRT meets monthly for training and members are
required to maintain their skills and competencies to fulfill their mission. The HMRT also
conducts quarterly drills at various facilities within its response area to maintain skills and to
interface with local industry. All members of the Eureka Fire Department are trained and State
certified to the First Responder Operational and Decontamination for Hazardous Materials (City
of Eureka 2012).
City of Ferndale                                  7-4                                    Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

Figure 9 - Leaking Underground Storage Tanks (LUSTs) in the Planning Area
FACILITY ID     SITE NAME                        CLEANUP STATUS                 ADDRESS              CITY
T0602300448     Bank Of America                  Completed - Case Closed        394 Main Street      Ferndale
T0602300180     Bar Ale Of Humboldt              Completed - Case Closed        989 Milton Ave       Ferndale
T0602393478     Bar Ale Of Humboldt              Open - Verification Monitoring 989 Milton Ave       Ferndale
T0602311174     Candy Stick Gallery              Completed - Case Closed        361 Main St          Ferndale
T0602300182     Citizen's Mortuary               Completed - Case Closed        470 Ocean Ave        Ferndale
T0602300409     Crane Residence                  Completed - Case Closed        117 Berding St       Ferndale
T0602300230     Farley Property                  Completed - Case Closed        1677 Market St       Ferndale
T0602300264     Farm Shop, The                   Completed - Case Closed        817 Rose Ave         Ferndale
T0602300284     Fern Cafe                        Completed - Case Closed        606 Main St          Ferndale
T0602300029     Ferndale Elementary              Completed - Case Closed        164 Shaw Ave         Ferndale
T0602300220     Ferndale High School /Bus        Completed - Case Closed        1231 Main St         Ferndale
                Garage
T0602300262     Ferndale Motors                  Open - Site Assessment         638 Main St          Ferndale
T0602300043     Ferndale Museum                  Open - Site Assessment         515 Shaw Ave         Ferndale
T0602300232     Ferndale Public Works Dept.      Completed - Case Closed        48 Francis St        Ferndale
T0602300340     Ferndale Union High School       Completed - Case Closed        1231 Main St         Ferndale
                Gym
T0602300509     Ferndale Veterans Memorial       Open - Site Assessment         1100 Main St         Ferndale
                Bldg
T0602300390     Fuller Property                  Completed - Case Closed        1050 Van Ness        Ferndale
T0602300126     HCDPW Ferndale Maint. Station    Completed - Case Closed        Arlington St         Ferndale
T0602300299     Laffranchi Refrigeration         Completed - Case Closed        520 Mckinley Ave     Ferndale
T0602300474     Linos Service                    Open - Inactive                318 Main St          Ferndale
T0602300072     Lorenzo's Gas & Grocery          Open - Site Assessment         1392 Main St         Ferndale
T0602300484     Mary Gomes Trust                 Completed - Case Closed        1154 Port Kenyon     Ferndale
T0602300445     Mcbride Estate                   Completed - Case Closed        951 Van Ness         Ferndale
T0602300063     Nilsen Company                   Completed - Case Closed        424 Main St          Ferndale
T0602300274     Nobles Grocery                   Open - Site Assessment         2028 Market St.      Ferndale
T0602300164     Peers Motor Sales                Completed - Case Closed        580 Main St          Ferndale
T0602300500     Private Res.                     Completed - Case Closed        Private Res.         Ferndale
T0602326726     Private Res.                     Completed - Case Closed        Private Res.         Ferndale
T0602330151     Private Res.                     Completed - Case Closed        Private Res.         Ferndale
T0602350415     Private Res.                     Completed - Case Closed        Private Res.         Ferndale
T0602393589     Private Res.                     Open - Verification Monitoring Private Res.         Ferndale
T0602300392     Rutherford Residence             Completed - Case Closed        563 Ocean Ave        Ferndale
T0602300070     Silva, Maurice                   Completed - Case Closed        1348 Lincoln St      Ferndale
T0602300046     Tipple Motors, Jack              Completed - Case Closed        524 Main St          Ferndale
T0602300749     Us Bank Ferndale                 Completed - Case Closed        330 Ocean Ave        Ferndale
T0602300335     Wiser, Ray                       Completed - Case Closed        942 Main St          Ferndale
Source: State Water Resources Control Board Geotracker 2012
City of Ferndale                                     7-5                                      Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013
MINIMIZING RISKS
The City of Ferndale has adopted Humboldt County's Integrated Waste Management Plan
(IWMP). The goals of the IWMP are to reduce the amount of household hazardous waste
generated through reuse and recycling, diversion from landfills, promoting alternatives to toxic
household products and educating the public regarding household hazardous waste management.
Requiring that all land uses that transport, generate, use, handle, store, dispose of, and/or emit
hazardous materials or waste be in compliance with all applicable, federal, state, County and
local hazardous materials safety laws and regulations, as well as enforcing all building and fire
codes adopted by the State, will minimize potential harm to the public from hazardous materials.
Continuing to coordinate with the County, the Regional Water Quality Control Board,
Environmental Protection Agency, and State Department of Toxic Substance Control would
minimize the risk of hazardous materials impacting people and property from sites that store,
handle and/or use hazardous materials above local, State, and Federal thresholds.
The Ferndale Volunteer Fire Protection District’s continued maintenance of state-of-the art first
responder equipment and trained personnel within the Ferndale Volunteer Fire Department
would help to minimize the impacts of hazardous material releases within the Planning Area.
City of Ferndale                                 7-6                                     Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

8.0      Acceptable Risk
The General Plan Safety Element establishes mechanisms to reduce the risk of bodily harm and
property damage from natural and human-caused hazards. Hazards are an unavoidable aspect of
life, and the Safety Element does not eliminate risk. Instead, the Element contains policies to
minimize the effects of hazards and hazardous events and acknowledge an acceptable risk level.
The Element takes a two-tiered approach to minimizing risk associated with natural and man-
made hazards. On one level, the Element examines ways in which the community can prepare
for and respond to the effects of hazardous events. For example, citizens may utilize sandbags
during a 100-year storm event to prevent flooding damage to an existing building. Community-
level response to hazardous events will be covered in Chapter 9.0 Emergency Preparedness.
On another level, the Element establishes land use and development policies to prevent or
minimize the effects of hazards. For instance, the City may regulate what type of land use is
allowed in a 100-year floodplain, prohibiting such uses as power plants or hazardous material
storage. The City may also require mitigation for development that is allowed in the floodplain.
The following are typical policies for flooding hazards:
         Review all proposed development to ensure that structures designed for human
         occupancy are accessible in the event of a 100-year storm and are protected from the 100-
         year storm by setting lowest habitable floor elevations one foot above the floodplain.
         Request a drainage study of proposed development in the 100-year floodplain to ensure
         adequate protection and that implementation of the development will not create new
         downstream flood hazards.
Using information on the potential for man-made or natural hazards from chapters 4.0-7.0 of this
Element, the City may establish policies such as these to prevent or mitigate damage from
hazardous events before those events occur. High-level hazards that present the greatest risk to
life and property are generally addressed by City policies. Lower-level hazards, with less risk of
causing catastrophic damage, are generally addressed at the neighborhood and individual levels.
In order to develop effective policies, an acceptable level of risk above which City action is
required to provide protection to life and property must be established.
This section defines the term ‘acceptable risk’ as the level of risk that a majority of citizens and
insurance companies will accept without asking for governmental action to provide protection.
Using this definition, various structures and land uses were classified according to how the
population of Ferndale would be affected in the event of loss or failure of each facility, and a
level of acceptable damage was established for each facility type. This information was used to
identify optimal locations for the various land uses in relation to Ferndale’s hazard areas.
Regulating land use and development accordingly will enable the City to avoid or mitigate the
effects of natural hazards in order to protect lives and property.
City of Ferndale                                  8-1                                    Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

Risk Determination
The idea of risk evaluation is the central concept in planning for safety. The concept can be
applied to all kinds of hazards, both natural and man-made. Although a hazard-free environment
will never exist, an important initial step is to determine a level of acceptable risk. This involves
determining the degree of risk, deciding how much risk is acceptable, and implementing
measures to reduce the negative effects to a lower level.
The criteria for determination of risk are based on:
        Reduction or prevention of bodily harm
        Reduction or prevention of property damage
        Reduction or prevention of economic and social dislocations
Based on these criteria a risk may be categorized as acceptable, unacceptable, or avoidable. The
determination of acceptable and unacceptable risk requires judgments based on weighing several
factors including the nature of the hazard, the frequency or risk of a damaging event associated
with the hazard, and the relative number of persons exposed to the risk. The degree or intensity
of any specific hazard is a major consideration in public mitigation efforts. Thus, hazards with a
high life-loss potential are less acceptable than hazards which primarily affect property, and
hazards which could impact the entire community are less acceptable than hazards which may
impact relatively few persons. Only minimal risk to critical facilities and functions (including
water supply, emergency services, evacuation routes, and medical and mass care facilities) is
considered acceptable since these facilities and functions are critical to disaster recovery for
entire communities.
The Council on Intergovernmental Relations (CIR) has composed Safety Element guidelines.
Central to these guidelines is the concept of acceptable risk. CIR defines acceptable risk as the
level of risk below which no specific action by local government is deemed necessary, other than
making the risk known and suggesting remedial measures for the public to take if they desire on
their own to lessen the risk.
Critical Facilities
The determination of acceptable risk from hazardous events involves differentiating among man-
made structures according to their potential effect on the loss of life and their importance in
terms of emergency response and continued community functioning. If essential services are not
functional after a disaster, the magnitude of the disaster can be much larger.
The term “critical facilities” is used to describe those structures or land uses which are especially
important for the preservation of life, the protection of property, and the continuing functioning
of society. For the purposes of planning for hazard avoidance or mitigation, structures,
occupancies, and land uses in the Ferndale Planning Area are classified as indicated in Figure 10.
Classes 1-A through 3-B in this table are considered to be critical facilities.
These critical facilities are vital to the community's ability to respond to a major disaster and to
minimize loss of life and property. At minimum, all structures which could have a significant
effect on the loss of life should be designed to remain standing in the event of a major disaster,
City of Ferndale                                   8-2                                   Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

even if rendered useless. Critical facilities, on the other hand, should not only remain standing,
but in the event of a disaster should be able to operate at peak efficiency.
Risk Ratings
Figure 10 lists structures and land uses for the purpose of risk classification. Figure 11 classifies
the structures, occupancies, and land uses as described in Figure 10 and establishes general levels
of acceptable risk in terms of risks to health and safety, risks to continuity of service, and risks of
fire or structural damage. The column in Figure 11 titled “Level of Acceptable Risk” identifies
the general levels of risk that are considered appropriate for each category of structure,
occupancy, or land use. Tolerance levels for risk range from “near zero” for facilities whose
failure might be catastrophic, such as nuclear plants and natural gas transmission lines, to “high”
for open space lands with no development and low intensity occupancy. Exposure of the critical
facilities to frequent or occasional hazard is not tolerable because the possibility of injuries to
persons, losses of life and property, or disruption of disaster response capabilities could be so
great in the event of damage to any of these facilities. On the other hand, a greater probability of
damage to non-critical facilities can be tolerated because exposure to the hazard either affects
relatively few people or properties, or causes relatively little personal injury or property damage.
The basic premise for this table is that the City wishes to avoid all loss of life from foreseeable
hazards, and to prevent personal injury and reasonably avoidable property damage.
Acceptable damage to facilities is correlated with risk levels and provides a guide to structural
design requirements for all facilities and fire resistant characteristics for buildings in the several
risk classes. Figure 12 provides a general guide to siting development with respect to the various
hazard areas.
City of Ferndale                                  8-3                                     Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

                      Figure 10 – Risk Classifications of Structures, Occupancies, and Land Uses
                       CLASS           GENERAL CATEGORY                GENERAL EXAMPLES*                 PLANNING AREA EXAMPLES
                        1-A       Facilities whose failure        Nuclear reactors, large dams        None
                                  might be catastrophic
                         1-B      Facilities whose                Power plants, power intertie        Water/wastewater treatment
                                  continuing function is          systems                             systems
                                  critical
                         2-A      Facilities critically needed    Hospitals, fire stations,           City Hall
CRITICAL FACILITIES
                                  for services after disaster     telephone exchanges                 Fire Hall
                                                                                                      Telecommunications systems
                         2-B      Critical transportation         Regional highways, bridges,         State Route 211, Wildcat Road
                                  links                           rail lines, overpasses, tunnels
                         2-C      Major local utility lines       Power substations, gas and          Wastewater treatment lines
                                  and facilities                  water mains                         Del Oro Water Co. lines
                        2-D       Small dams                      Small dams                          None
                        3-A       High occupancy                  High-rise apartments and            Ferndale High and Elementary
                                  structures                      offices, schools                    School
                         3-B      Facilities highly desirable     Schools, churches                   Schools, County Fairgrounds
                                  for shelter after disaster
                         3-C      Local roads, utilities, and     Local roads, local utility lines    Local roads and bridges, local
                                  communication facilities                                            utility lines, telephone services,
                                                                                                      roadways that could slide out
                         4-A      Medium occupancy                Most commercial and                 Navy Housing complex
                                  structures                      industrial buildings,
                                                                  apartments
                         4-B      Low occupancy                   Single family homes                 Single family homes
                                  structures
                         5-A      Open space lands, high          Recreation areas, orchards,         Fireman’s Park
                                  intensity occupancy or          vineyards
                                  development
                         5-B      Open space lands with no        Grazing lands, forest               Ferndale Bottoms
                                  development, low
                                  intensity occupancy
                      *Some of the general examples given in this table are for purposes of illustration only, and are not anticipated in
                      the Planning Area
                                   Adapted from Town of Woodside General Plan 2012 Natural Hazards and Safety Element
                      City of Ferndale                                         8-4                                         Safety Element
                      DRAFT April 2013

                      Figure 11 – Levels of Acceptable Risk for Structures, Occupancies, and Land Uses
                      CLASS      GENERAL CATEGORY          POPULATION              ACCEPTABLE DAMAGE TO FACILITY             TOLERANCE
                                                           AFFECTED IN                                                       FOR RISK*
                                                            EVENT OF
                                                             FAILURE
                       1-A     Facilities whose               Vast          None which would result in exposing              Near Zero
                               failure might be                             affected population to death or injury
                               catastrophic
                       1-B     Facilities whose                Vast         None which would impair facility or              Extremely
                               continuing function is                       disrupt function                                    Low
                               critical
                       2-A     Facilities critically       Substantial      None which would impair facility or              Extremely
                               needed for services                          disrupt function                                    Low
                               after disaster
CRITICAL FACILITIES
                       2-B     Critical                    Substantial      Minor non-structural; facility should               Low
                               transportation links                         remain operational and safe, or be
                                                                            susceptible to quick restoration of service
                       2-C     Major local utility         Substantial      Minor non-structural; facility should               Low
                               lines and facilities                         remain operational and safe, or be
                                                                            susceptible to quick restoration of service
                       2-D     Small dams                   Moderate        None which would expose "downstream"             Extremely
                                                                            population to injury                                Low
                       3-A     High occupancy                 Varies        No structural damage; minor                         Low
                               structures                                   nonstructural damage, but structures
                                                                            should remain safe and usable
                       3-B     Facilities highly              Varies        No structural damage; minor                         Low
                               desirable for shelter                        nonstructural damage, but structures
                               after disaster                               should remain safe and usable
                       3-C     Local roads, utilities,      Moderate        Damage should be susceptible to                  Moderate
                               and communication                            reasonably rapid repair (or utility shut-
                               facilities                                   off)
                       4-A     Medium occupancy             Moderate        Structural integrity must be retained;              Low
                               structures                                   damage should not unduly endanger
                                                                            safety of occupants.
                       4-B     Low occupancy                   Few          Structural integrity must be retained;            Ordinary
                               structures                                   damage should not unduly endanger
                                                                            safety of occupants.
                       5-A     Open space lands,              Varies        Structural integrity must be retained;           Moderate
                               high intensity                               damage should not unduly endanger
                               occupancy or                                 safety of occupants.
                               development
                       5-B     Open space lands, no            Few          Not applicable                                      High
                               development, low
                               intensity occupancy
                      *Levels of acceptable risk range from lowest to highest as follows: Near Zero, Extremely Low, Low, Ordinary,
                      Moderate, and High
                                   Adapted from Town of Woodside General Plan 2012 Natural Hazards and Safety Element
                      City of Ferndale                                       8-5                                         Safety Element
                      DRAFT April 2013

                      Figure 12 – Location of Structures and Land Uses in Relation to Defined Hazard Areas
                                                                                                                             HAZARDS
                                                                       FIRE                            FLOOD                     EARTH                                                  LANDSLIDES
                                                                                                                                SHAKING
                                                                                                                              LIQUEFACTION AREA                     RELATIVELY STABLE
                                                          HIGH FIRE HAZARD   LOW FIRE HAZARD   100 YEAR FLOOD                                         TSUNAMI
                                                                                                                                                                                                        HIGH INSTABILITY
                                                                                                                OCCASIONAL                                                                MODERATE
                                                                                                                 FLOODING                                                                 INSTABILITY
                                                                ZONE              ZONE              ZONE                                          EVACUATION AREA
                      CLASS    GENERAL CATEGORY
                       1-A Facilities whose failure         OK                 OK                  X               X                      X           X                   OK                M                      X
                            might be catastrophic
                       1-B Facilities whose                 OK                 OK                  X               X                      X           X                   OK                M                      X
                            continuing function is
                            critical
                       2-A Facilities critically            OK                 OK                  X               X                      X           X                   OK                M                      X
CRITICAL FACILITIES
                            needed for services
                            after disaster
                       2-B Critical transportation          OK                 OK                 M               M                    M             M                    OK                M                      X
                            links
                       2-C Major local utility lines        OK                 OK                 M               M                    M             M                    OK                M                      X
                            and facilities
                       2-D Small dams                       OK                 OK                 M               M                    M             M                    OK                M                      X
                       3-A High occupancy                   OK                 OK                 X               X                    M             X                    OK                M                      X
                            structures
                       3-B Facilities highly                OK                 OK                  X               X                   M              X                   OK                M                      X
                            desirable for shelter
                            after disaster
                       3-C Local roads, utilities,          OK                 OK                 M               M                    M             M                    OK                M                      X
                            and communication
                            facilities
                       4-A Medium occupancy                 OK                 OK                  X               X                   M              X                   OK                M                      X
                            structures
                       4-B Low occupancy                    OK                 OK                 M                X                   M             M                    OK                M                      X
                            structures
                       5-A Open space lands,                OK                 OK                 M               M                    M             M                    OK                M                      X
                            high intensity
                            occupancy or
                            development
                       5-B Open space lands, no             OK                 OK                OK              OK                 OK              OK                    OK               OK                 OK
                            development, low
                            intensity occupancy
                      OK – Use usually OK without special design or construction measures required
                      M – Use may be appropriate if mitigating measures are taken adequate to the function of structure or occupancy
                      X – Use is usually NOT APPROPRIATE in a location with these characteristics
                                    Adapted from Town of Woodside General Plan 2012 Natural Hazards and Safety Element
                      City of Ferndale                                                         8-6                                                                                        Safety Element
                      DRAFT April 2013

MINIMIZING RISKS
Regulating land use and development using the risk assessment completed in this Safety Element
will enable the City to avoid or mitigate the effects of natural hazards in order to protect lives
and property.
Designating and constructing development on lands in such a manner that levels of acceptable
risk defined in Figure 11 are not exceeded will enable the City to avoid or mitigate unacceptable
damage to lives and property. Development in hazardous areas should, in general, be limited to
structures and improvements which would not threaten human life or cause substantial financial
loss in the event of damage. Where hazards are identified, mitigating measures should be taken
at the time of development. Mitigation measures could include providing adequate fire egress
from the development and ensuring that there are no lengthy, one-way streets. Development
should provide adequate water supplies, roads which are suitable for the safe passage of
emergency vehicles, and legible street name signs and house numbers.
City of Ferndale                                 8-7                                    Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013
9.0      Emergency Preparedness
Emergency preparedness involves the community in planning to identify resources, provide
public awareness, and formulate plans for emergency situations. The goal is for government,
businesses, and local groups to coordinate emergency response, ensure the functioning of critical
facilities, facilitate post-disaster relief, and expedite recovery operations.
Emergency preparedness improves the ability of local forces, such as the Ferndale Volunteer Fire
Department, the Ferndale Police Department, City staff, and local citizens, to deal with
emergencies quickly and effectively. Major disasters and emergencies also require outside
assistance, from nearby cities, the County, the State, or from federal sources.
Whenever other agencies are involved, coordination is critical. The ability of the City and
neighboring jurisdictions to prepare for and respond to emergency conditions in a coordinated
manner is essential to the community’s health and safety. Wildfires can ignite in neighboring
jurisdictions and spread quickly into Ferndale. Hazardous material spills or explosions outside
of City limits can affect Ferndale residents. Other municipalities, public and private utilities and
transportation systems, hospitals, and special districts provide vital resident-serving services that
are highly vulnerable to earthquakes and other hazards. This regional interdependence of
medical, transportation, communications, emergency response, and other systems necessitates
active coordination and a consistent level of mitigation and preparedness.
It is well documented that community preparation reduces the risks associated with a major
disaster. Neighborhoods and businesses need to be trained on how to prepare for and respond to
a major disaster. When Ferndale citizens are prepared, the risk to life and property from a major
disaster is significantly reduced. A major focus of the City’s mitigation efforts should be the
preparation and training of the community to help itself.
Emergency Management Hierarchy
An emergency management hierarchy has been established to assist in the event that local
governments require aid in dealing with emergencies (see Figure 13). At the federal level, the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) oversees United States government response
efforts. At the state level, the California Emergency Management Agency (Cal EMA) oversees
state organization response efforts. At the county level, the Operational Area (OA) oversees
coordinated response for the county and the cities and special districts within. This hierarchy is
in place to assist the organization and movement of resources to areas of need. At each level -
federal, state, and local - the response organization has the statutory power to requisition
resources and assistance from other governmental entities at that level (OES 2003).
The response hierarchy works in the following manner: When a city or special district cannot
effectively handle a crisis with their own available resources and organization, they request
county OA assistance. The county OA provides whatever available resources and assistance
which can be mobilized locally from county assets and from other cities and special districts
within the county. Should additional resources and assistance not available locally be needed,
the county OA will request help from the Cal EMA. The state, in turn, will provide whatever
resources and assistance that can be procured from state assets. FEMA is contacted when the
City of Ferndale                                    9-1                                 Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

state needs assistance to handle the crisis. In California, Cal EMA is divided into three response
support regions. The Coastal Region is comprised of the sixteen coastal counties from Del Norte
to Monterey. Any assistance requests from the Humboldt County OA go directly to the Coastal
Region which immediately canvasses the sixteen coastal counties for needed resources and
assistance. Should more assistance be needed, the Coastal Region contacts the Cal EMA in
Sacramento which, in turn, canvasses the other Regions in the State (OES 2003).
                         Figure 13 – Emergency Management Hierarchy
                               FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
                            CALIFORNIA EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
                          COASTAL REGION EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
                           HUMBOLDT COUNTY OFFICE OF EMERGENCY SERVICES
                                FERNDALE OFFICE OF EMERGENCY SERVICES
                       Source: Humboldt County Office of Emergency Services 2003.
The Humboldt County Office of Emergency Services (OES) manages the county OA response
from the county Emergency Operations Center (EOC). The EOC contains an extensive and
varied communications system that allows for instant information transfer anywhere inside and
outside the county. The EOC can operate independently of external power sources. Previously
identified and trained personnel with expert knowledge and expertise from county departments,
state and federal agencies, and other local governments, agencies, and organizations meet and
efficiently coordinate the county OA response from the EOC. All responders are trained in the
use of the National Incident Management System, the Standardized Emergency Management
System, and in the Incident Command System to best facilitate a coordinated response from all
levels of government (OES 2003).
City of Ferndale Emergency Operations
Under the emergency management hierarchy described above, the City serves as first responder
in the event of a local emergency. The City is charged with the responsibility to provide
effective emergency preparedness operations under State law and Federal Emergency
Management Administration (FEMA) directives (Woodside 2012). This responsibility requires
the City to ensure the effective direction of resources involved in preparing for and responding to
situations associated with natural disasters, man-made technological incidents, or national
defense emergencies. The City must be prepared to respond to emergencies that might occur
within its limits and must be able to assess whether it is capable of responding effectively.
City of Ferndale                                  9-2                                  Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

The City accomplishes this in part through its Emergency Operations Plan (EOP), prepared in
2004 and updated in 2006 by the County OES for the City of Ferndale. The EOP identifies the
City’s emergency planning, organization, policies, procedures, and response to extraordinary
emergency situations associated with natural disasters, technological incidents, and national
security emergencies. The plan also addresses integration and coordination with other
governmental levels when required (OES 2006). Figure 14 shows Ferndale’s emergency
management organization as per the EOP.
                Figure 14 – City of Ferndale Emergency Management Organization
                                      Director of Emergency Services
                                                   City Manager
                                                                         Special Staff
                                                                    Public Information Officer
                                                                           Liason Officer
             Emergency Services Coordinator                                Safety Officer
                                                                           EOC Security
                                                                     Agency Representatives
                              Planning/Intelligence                                     Finance/Administration
   Operations Section                                       Logistics Section
                                     Section                                                    Section
         Fire & Rescue Branch      Situation Analysis            Communications                   Time Unit
           Law Enfocement                                                                     Compensation &
                                     Documentation                Transportation
                Branch                                                                              Claims
             Construction
                                    Advance Planning                 Personnel                 Purchasing Unit
         Engineering Branch
          Health & Welfare                                             Supply
                                   Technical Services                                           Recovery Unit
                Branch                                             Procurement
            Air Operations           Demobilization                   Facilities                  Cost Unit
             Staging Area
                                   Damage Assessment             Resource Status
               Manager
City of Ferndale                                        9-3                                          Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

                         Source: Humboldt County Office of Emergency Services 2006.
The Ferndale EOP establishes the emergency management organization required to mitigate any
significant emergency or disaster affecting the City; identifies the responsibilities, policies and
procedures required to protect the health and safety of residents and property and to minimize the
environmental effects of natural and technological emergencies and disasters; and establishes the
operational concepts and procedures associated with field response to emergencies, City
Emergency Operations Center (EOC) activities, and the recovery process (OES 2006).
The EOP is based on the functions and principles of the California Standardized Emergency
Management System (SEMS), the California Incident Command System, and the National
Incident Management System (NIMS), which identifies how the Ferndale emergency operational
system fits in the overall California emergency management system during response and
recovery operations (OES 2006). Figure 15 depicts the five levels of emergency response
organization under SEMS.
                     Figure 15 - Standardized Emergency Management System
                            Five Level Emergency Response Organization
                                  CALIFORNIA EMERGENCY OPERATIONS CENTER
                                                 The State
                               COASTAL REGION EMERGENCY OPERATIONS CENTER
                                                The Region
                              HUMBOLDT COUNTY EMERGENCY OPERATIONS CENTER
                                           The Operational Area
                                   FERNDALE EMERGENCY OPERATIONS CENTER
                                        The Local Government Level
                    FIELD INCIDENT COMMAND POSTS / DEPARTMENTAL OPERATIONS CENTERS
                                              The Field Level
                              INCIDENT                                 INCIDENT
                         Source: Humboldt County Office of Emergency Services 2006.
Under the EOP, the City’s response to disasters is based on four phases:
        Increased readiness;
        Initial response operations;
        Extended response operations; and
        Recovery operations.
City of Ferndale                                   9-4                                  Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

During each phase, specific actions are taken to reduce and/or eliminate the threat of specific
disaster situations. In coordination with the City and Incident Commanders, the OES
Coordinator will determine the phase and initiate the appropriate level of alert for response
agencies, including the activation of the Emergency Operations Center (EOC) as required.
Ferndale EOC is located in the City Hall at 834 Main Street (OES 2006).
According to the EOP, the overall objective in managing emergency operations is to ensure that
effective direction is maximized for those emergency forces involved in preparing for and
responding to situations associated with natural disasters, technological incidents, or national
defense emergencies. The specific purposes of the EOC are to facilitate overall management and
coordination of emergency operations; coordination and liaison with appropriate federal, state,
and other local government agencies and private sector resources; management of mutual aid
resources; establishment of priorities; and collection, evaluation, and dissemination of damage
information and other essential data (OES 2006).
Emergency Management Authority
The following provides emergency management laws and authorities for conducting and/or
supporting emergency operations (OES 2006):
City
        Ordinance No. 267 adopting the City of Ferndale Emergency Organization and Functions
         by the City of Ferndale City Council dated June 3, 1974.
        Ordinance No. 462 adopting City of Ferndale Emergency Procedures for expenditures
         and delegating of power to the City Manager dated April 9, 2002.
        Resolution No. 04-30 of the City of Ferndale, City Council adopting the City of Ferndale
         Emergency Operations Plan dated November 4, 2004.
County
        Ordinance No. 2203, relating to Emergency Organization and Functions of the Humboldt
         County Disaster Council, by the Board of Supervisors, dated March 21, 2000.
        Resolution No. 370 of the Board of Supervisors of the County of Humboldt relative to
         Workers’ Compensation Insurance for Registered Volunteer Disaster Service Workers,
         dated June 27, 1949.
        Resolution of the Board of Supervisors of the County of Humboldt adopting the
         California Disaster and Civil Defense Master Mutual Aid Agreement dated December 1,
         1950.
        Resolution of the Board of Supervisors of the County of Humboldt adopting the
         Humboldt County Emergency Operations Plan dated June 25, 2002.
State
        California Emergency Services Act (California Government Code, Title 2, Division 1,
         Chapter 7).
        Standardized Emergency Management Systems regulations (California Code of
         Regulations, Title 19, Division 2, Chapter 1 and California Government Code § 8607).
City of Ferndale                                 9-5                                   Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

        Hazardous Materials Area Plan Regulations (California Code of Regulations, Title 19,
         Division 2, Chapter 4, Article 3, § 2720 – 2728 and California Health and Safety Code,
         Division 20, Chapter 6.95, § 25503.5).
        California Department of Water Resources Flood Control (California Water Code § 128).
        Orders and Regulations, which may be selectively promulgated by the Governor during a
         STATE OF EMERGENCY.
        Orders and regulations, which may be selectively promulgated by the Governor during a
         STATE OF WAR.
Federal
        Federal Civil Defense Act of 1950 (Public Law, as amended).
        Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act of 1988 (Public Law
         93-288, as amended).
        Army Corps of Engineers Flood Fighting (Public Law 84-99).
Community Emergency Preparedness Training (CERT)
Despite extensive local, state, and federal planning and coordination, emergency services may be
overwhelmed in the immediate aftermath of a major disaster. First responders may be hindered
by impassable roads, offline utilities, damaged communications facilities, and lack of personnel.
Depending on the severity of the emergency, it could take several days before basic services are
restored. Emergency preparedness planning recognizes that residents must be prepared to be
self-sufficient for 72 hours or more after the occurrence of a major disaster.
Formed in 2011 in response to this need for community self-sufficiency, Humboldt State
University’s Regional Training Institute (RTI) is an information center for disaster preparedness
training. With a focus on regional
coordination, RTI provides educators,
individuals, neighborhood groups,
businesses and social groups the tools
necessary to strengthen their disaster
response capabilities. RTI offers a
Community Emergency Response Team
(CERT) course with the goal of helping
citizens become self-sufficient in the event
of a major disaster by acquiring hands-on
disaster training. CERT is based on a
foundation of training modules that educates individuals about disaster preparedness for hazards
that may impact their area, and trains them in basic disaster response skills, such as fire safety,
light search and rescue, team organization, and disaster medical operations. Using the training
learned in the classroom and during exercises, CERT members can assist others in their
neighborhood or workplace following an event when professional responders are not
immediately available to help. CERT members also are encouraged to support emergency
response agencies by taking a more active role in emergency preparedness projects in their
community (RTI 2013).
City of Ferndale                                 9-6                                    Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

The CERT concept was developed and implemented by the Los Angeles City Fire Department
(LAFD) in 1985. The Whittier Narrows earthquake in 1987 underscored the area-wide threat of
a major disaster in California. Further, it confirmed the need for training civilians to meet their
immediate needs. As a result, the LAFD created the Disaster Preparedness Division with the
purpose of training citizens and private and government employees (FEMA 2012). The success
of the LAFD training program prompted FEMA to adopt and expand the CERT program in
1993, making the training available nationally. Since then, communities in 28 States and Puerto
Rico have conducted the training (FEMA 2012).
There is currently only one CERT program within 20 miles of Ferndale. The Eel River Valley
CERT program, started in 2009 with funding from a federal Readiness and Emergency
Management for Schools (REMS) grant, serves the Fortuna Union Elementary School District
(ERV-CERT 2011), as well as covering Carlotta, Ferndale, Fortuna, Hydesville, Loleta, Rio
Dell, and Scotia (Citizen Corps 2013). The group held CERT training courses from May 2010 to
January 2011 to achieve the following goals:
        To expand the number of school personnel and community members trained to respond
         to emergencies
        To assist local schools during emergencies
        To be an advocate for emergency preparedness in the Eel River Valley and beyond
        To support the work of first responders during disasters
        To support the development and continued existence of other CERT programs in
         Humboldt County (ERV-CERT 2011)
Eel River Valley CERT is part of the Eel River Valley Emergency Preparedness Team (ERV-
EPT), a multi-agency team of volunteers working to enhance emergency preparedness in the Eel
River Valley. Participating agencies include Humboldt County Sheriff’s Office of Emergency
Services; Cal Fire; St. Joseph Hospital; Redwood Memorial Hospital; City Ambulance;
Volunteer Fire Departments, including Fortuna, Ferndale, Scotia, and Rio Dell; Police
Departments, including Fortuna, Ferndale, and Rio Dell; Ferndale Mayor and City Manager;
Loleta CSD; Humboldt County Dept. of Health & Human Services; North Coast Schools'
Insurance Group (NCSIG); Eel River Valley Readiness and Emergency Management for Schools
(ERV-REMS); Eel River Valley schools, including: Academy of the Redwoods, Fortuna Middle
School, Fortuna High School, Ferndale Elementary, Ferndale H.S., Toddy Thomas Middle
School, Loleta Elementary, Fortuna Elementary (South), Rio Dell Elementary; and community
groups, including Loleta Chamber of Commerce, Loleta Community Church, Loleta Community
Resource Center, Fortuna Community Services, and Hydesville Community Church.
City of Ferndale                                  9-7                                   Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

MINIMIZING RISK
Taking a three-tiered approach to emergency preparedness will best enable the City to prepare
for adequate emergency response and recovery, ensure the continued functioning of critical
facilities, and facilitate post-disaster relief and recovery operations. On a broad level,
coordinating with other agencies, from FEMA to neighboring jurisdictions, is key to ensuring
that the City will have the resources it needs in the event of a major disaster. On a local level,
planning for disaster response, including such measures as continuing to refine and update the
City’s EOP, will facilitate coordination among first-responders and City staff, thus streamlining
the response to and recovery from an emergency. And finally, training the citizens of Ferndale
on how to prepare for and respond to all types of disaster will greatly reduce loss of life and
property in the initial hours of a major disaster.
City of Ferndale                                    9-8                                 Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

10.0 Goals, Policies and Implementation Programs
NOTE: To be developed per schedule.
SCOPE: Goals, policies, and implementation programs will be developed to provide a policy
basis for measures Ferndale can take to prevent loss of life, reduce injuries and property damage,
and minimize economic and social dislocations which could result from earthquake, fire, or other
natural and man-made disasters. The contract planner and City staff will work with the Planning
Commission and City Council to craft policies and implementation strategies for reduction of
risk and mitigation or abatement of those hazards and for emergency preparedness and disaster
response through land use planning. Policies may address the intensity of development in
hazardous areas, clearly define the scope of hazard mitigation measures by type of land use,
requirements (if any) for geotechnical and geologic investigations to mitigate geologic hazards
and clear procedures for geotechnical and geologic report review.
City of Ferndale                               10-1                                   Safety Element
DRAFT February 2013
11.0 References
California Department of Toxic Substances Control. 2012. Hazardous Waste and Substances
Site List. Available from: http://www.dtsc.ca.gov/SiteCleanup/Cortese_List.cfm. Retrieved 8
August 2012.
Christensen, Arne. 2011. The April 1992 Mendocino Triple Junction Earthquakes. Chronicling
the Nisqually Earthquake and Other Northwest Quakes. Nisqually Multimedia. Retrieved 14
January 2012.
Citizen Corps. 2013. Eel River Valley (CA) CERT. Available from:
http://www.citizencorps.gov/cc/showCert.do?id=45688&cert=. Retrieved 7 January 2013.
City of Eureka. 2012. City of Eureka Website – Regional Hazardous Materials Response Team.
Available from: http://www.ci.eureka.ca.gov/depts/fire/operations/hmrt.asp. Retrieved 29
October 2012.
City of Ferndale Drainage Master Plan Update. 2004.
City of Ferndale General Plan Public Safety Element. 1975.
Dengler, Lori. 2008. "The 1906 Earthquake on California’s North Coast". Bulletin of the
Seismological Society of America 98 (2): 918–930. doi:10.1785/0120060406. Retrieved 14
January 2011.
Department of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC). 2012. EnviroStor Database. Available from:
http://www.envirostor.dtsc.ca.gov/public/. Retrieved on 30 October 2012.
Edwards, Andrew. 2002. Waterworld: An odyssey through the Eel River lowlands. The North
Coast Journal. Available from: http://www.northcoastjournal.com/121902/news1219.html.
Retrieved 28 August 2012.
Eel River Valley Community Emergency Response Team Programs (ERV-CERT). 2011.
Available from: http://www.humboldt.k12.ca.us/ervrems/CERT/cert.html. Retrieved 7 January
2013.
Eel River Valley Emergency Preparedness Team (ERV-EPT). 2010. Available from:
http://www.humboldt.k12.ca.us/ervrems/ervept/ervept.html. Retrieved 11 January 2013.
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 2012. Community Emergency Response
Teams. Available from: http://www.fema.gov/community-emergency-response-teams.
Retrieved 7 January 2013.
Ferndale Enterprise. 2012. Ferndale’s history began in wilds and willows. Souvenir Edition.
Available from: http://www.scribd.com/doc/89537021/Souvenir-Edition-2011-12. Retrieved 7
September 2012.
City of Ferndale                               11-1                                Safety Element
DRAFT February 2013

Humboldt County General Plan. 2012. Part 4 Chapter 14 Safety Element. Planning
Commission Approved Draft.
Humboldt Office of Emergency Services (OES). 2003. An Overview. Available from:
https://co.humboldt.ca.us/sheriff/oes/. Retrieved 4 January 2013.
Humboldt County Office of Emergency Services (OES). 2006. Humboldt Operational Area
City of Ferndale Emergency Operations Plan.
Humboldt County Operational Area Hazard Mitigation Plan (HMP). 2007.
Humboldt County Resource Conservation District (HCRCD). 2010. Salt River Ecosystem
Restoration Project Summary of Progress 2010. Available from:
http://humboldtrcd.org/2010SaltRiverProjectSummary.pdf. Retrieved on 31 August 2012.
Humboldt Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCo). 2008. Ferndale Fire Protection
District Municipal Service Review. Adopted 2008.
Humboldt State University Regional Training Institute (RTI). 2013. Available from:
http://www.humboldt.edu/rti/. Retrieved in 8 January 2013.
International Association of Fire Chiefs and Western Fire Chiefs Association (IAFC and
WFCA). 1996. Development Strategies in the Wildland/Urban Interface.
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). "Natural Hazards Images". Cape
Mendocino, California Earthquakes, April 25 & 26, 1992. National Geophysical Data Center.
Retrieved 6 August 2012.
North Coast Integrated Water Management Plan (NCIWMP). 2009. North Coast IRWMP
> Implementation Projects > Salt River Ecosystem Restoration. Available from:
http://www.northcoastirwmp.net/Content/10394/preview.html. Retrieved August 30, 2012.
Pacific Institute. 2009. California Flood Risk: Sea Level Rise Ferndale Quadrangle. Available
from: http://www.pacinst.org/reports/sea_level_rise/hazmaps/Ferndale.pdf. Retrieved on 31
August 2012.
Schneider, Keith. 1995. A Flooded Town Asks, ‘Why Us?’ The New York Times. Available
from: http://www.nytimes.com/1995/01/16/us/a-flooded-town-asks-why-
us.html?pagewanted=all&src=pm. Retrieved 8 August 2012.
State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB). 2012. Geotracker. Available from:
http://geotracker.waterboards.ca.gov. Retrieved 31 October 2012.
Town of Woodside. 2012. General Plan 2012 Natural Hazards and Safety Element. Available
from: http://www.woodsidetown.org/planning/general-plan-2012-1. Retrieved 17 December
2012.
City of Ferndale                               11-2                               Safety Element
DRAFT February 2013

10.0 Goals, Policies and Implementation Programs
Safety Element goals and policies provide a policy basis for measures Ferndale can take to
prevent loss of life, reduce injuries and property damage, and minimize economic and social
dislocations which could result from earthquake, fire, or other natural and man-made disasters.
Policies address the intensity of development in hazardous areas, define the scope of hazard
mitigation measures by type of land use, requirements for geotechnical and geologic
investigations to mitigate geologic hazards and clear procedures for geotechnical and geologic
report review. The contract planner and City staff worked with the Planning Commission, City
Council, and agency representatives to craft policies and implementation strategies for reduction
of risk and mitigation or abatement of those hazards and for emergency preparedness and
disaster response through land use planning.
Goals are general statements of community values or aspirations. They define the ends toward
which the City will address its efforts.
Policies are more precise expressions of the community’s position on particular issues, or how
particular goals can be reached. Polices may include guidelines, standards, objectives, maps,
diagrams, or a combination of these components.
Implementing Programs present specific actions that the City or other identified entity will
undertake to address policy issues and move closer to the community’s goals. These might
include ongoing programs sponsored by the City (e.g., a Community Emergency Response Team
program), discrete time-specific actions (e.g., adopt an ordinance), or further planning action
(e.g., develop a specific plan).
GOAL 1 - Geologic and Seismic Hazards
Minimize the risk to public health and safety and loss of social, economic, and environmental
welfare resulting from seismic and geologic activities.
     Policies
     Policy 1.1     Update City zoning regulations for seismic setbacks, structural requirements,
                    and hillside development standards.
     Policy 1.2     Require geotechnical evaluation for development projects with the potential
                    for geological hazards, such as slope failures or soil subsidence.
     Policy 1.3     In areas with identified geologic hazards, development shall conform to
                    geotechnical report mitigation measures and/or project and site modifications
                    to respond to site-specific hazards and conditions.
     Policy 1.4     Improve drainage, plant soil-stabilizing vegetation, and provide structural
                    reinforcements in landslide-prone areas.
     Policy 1.5     Collect and maintain current geologic data to identify hazardous areas.
     Policy 1.6     Ensure that public facilities are structurally sound and able to withstand
                    seismic shaking and the effects of seismically-induced ground failure.
City of Ferndale                                  10-1                                  Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

         Implementation Programs
         Program 1.a    Require development applications for projects on slopes of 30% or more
                        to submit a geologic investigation and report by a qualified engineering
                        geologist. The report shall address potential for slope failure, soil
                        subsidence and related geologic events, and recommend measures to
                        minimize hazards.
         Program 1.b    Prohibit development on excessively steep hillsides where slope stability
                        mitigations are not deemed feasible by the City Engineer and where a
                        significant hazard to Ferndale residents may result.
         Program 1.c    Where known landslide areas exist, require mitigation actions for slope
                        stability. This can include, with affected property owner support,
                        landslide repair extending beyond the boundaries of a proposed
                        development project site. Encourage planting of vegetation on unstable
                        slopes to protect structures at lower elevations. Native plants may be
                        required for landscaping in areas with landslide potential to eliminate the
                        need for supplemental watering and to reduce the risk of landslide.
         Program 1.d    Enforce California Building Code requirements, including seismic design
                        provisions, as part of building permit issuance and inspection.
         Program 1.e    Review existing critical and emergency structures identified in Figure 10
                        for any significant siting, design, or construction problems that would
                        make them vulnerable in an earthquake, and incorporate findings of the
                        review into the City’s Emergency Operations Plan and long-term
                        programs for upgrading or relocating vulnerable facilities.
         Program 1.f    Monitor new building materials used for earthquake stability and
                        incorporate such materials into plan checks when applicable.
         Program 1.g    Adopt the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.
GOAL 2 - Flood Protection
Reduce the risk to life and minimize physical injury, property damage, and public health hazards
from the effects of flooding.
     Policies
     Policy 2.1     Participate with a national flood insurance program.
     Policy 2.2     Work with the County and the United States Army Corps of Engineers to
                    receive and implement updated flood control measures and information.
     Policy 2.3     Assess and keep appraised of the potential risks to persons and property from
                    flooding within the City, including updated floodplain mapping.
     Policy 2.4     Periodically update the City of Ferndale Drainage Master Plan.
     Policy 2.5     Implement a public outreach program to increase public awareness of
                    stormwater management issues and techniques for stormwater management.
     Policy 2.6     Inform citizens of potential risks associated with flooding within the City and
                    provide preparation and response guidance.
City of Ferndale                                  10-2                                  Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

     Policy 2.7    Require development in areas subject to flooding to minimize or eliminate
                   flooding hazards.
     Policy 2.8    Encourage development to balance or enhance the natural landscape features
                   of a site to reduce impervious surfaces.
     Policy 2.9    Utilize flood control methods that are consistent with Regional Water Quality
                   Control Board Policies and Best Management Practices.
         Implementation Programs
         Program 2.a   In conjunction with the FEMA mandated updates to the Humboldt
                       Operational Area Multi-Agency Multi-Hazard Mitigation Plan (HMP),
                       identify funding sources for and facilitate mapping of the City’s flood
                       zones.
         Program 2.b Complete and implement provisions of the HMP, consistent with FEMA
                       requirements.
         Program 2.c Coordinate with FEMA and other agencies in the evaluation and
                       mitigation of future flooding hazards that may occur as a result of sea
                       level rise.
         Program 2.d Ensure that local regulations comply with FEMA standards.
         Program 2.e Coordinate flood hazard mitigation efforts with the County to seek
                       compliance with the Disaster Management Act 2000 to ensure eligibility
                       for funding through FEMA grant programs.
         Program 2.f Request that the County refer development projects located within the
                       City’s watersheds to the City for comment. Continue to comment on
                       County projects with the potential to increase runoff and flood hazards
                       within the City. Standardize mitigation requirements to offset cumulative
                       impacts of individual projects with potential to increase runoff and flood
                       hazards within the City.
         Program 2.g Evaluate the compatibility of critical, essential, high occupancy, and
                       normal to low risk uses in areas within the 100-year floodplain during the
                       review of all discretionary and ministerial actions.
         Program 2.h Pursue sources of funding to ensure ongoing maintenance of the City’s
                       storm drains.
         Program 2.i Construct levees surrounding at-risk facilities.
         Program 2.j Perform preventative maintenance to maintain flow capacity of Francis
                       Creek.
         Program 2.k Identify areas subject to flooding, steps to reduce potential property
                       damage, and flooding emergency evacuation procedures on the City’s
                       website.
         Program 2.l Review development plans of existing sites to ensure necessary upgrades
                       are provided to the City’s storm drainage system.
         Program 2.m Review development proposals to ensure that structures designed for
                       human occupancy are accessible during and protected from a 100-year
                       storm by elevating lowest habitable floor one foot above the floodplain.
City of Ferndale                                10-3                                  Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

         Program 2.n    Request a drainage study for development in the 100-year floodplain to
                        ensure adequate protection and no net increase in downstream flood
                        hazards.
         Program 2.o    Require that development comply with Regional Water Quality Control
                        Board discharge permit requirements.
GOAL 3 - Wildland and Urban Fires
Prevent the loss of lives, injuries, and property damage due to wildland and urban fires.
     Policies
     Policy 3.1    Coordinate with the Ferndale Volunteer Fire District to maintain adequate fire
                   protection staffing levels, equipment and facilities to reduce risks to persons
                   and property within the City from urban and wildland fires. Mitigate impacts
                   of new development on the city’s ability to maintain adequate service levels.
     Policy 3.2    Ensure adequate water supplies for fire suppression within the City.
     Policy 3.3    Require fire safe construction practices, through site design, landscaping and
                   building materials, clear and legible street and address signs, and sprinklers.
     Policy 3.4    Reduce fire hazard risks in existing developments by promoting defensible
                   space standards.
     Policy 3.5    Provide fire safety information to residents, business owners, and the
                   construction, insurance, real estate, landscaping and building supply
                   industries. This could include information about non-combustible roofing,
                   fire safe construction, adequate emergency water supplies, visible address and
                   road identification/signage, road clearances, and emergency evacuation
                   procedures.
     Policy 3.6    Disseminate fire prevention education programs to neighborhoods, businesses,
                   and schools. Foster a proactive fire prevention approach, emphasizing the
                   relationship between fire prevention/hazard reduction and forestry and
                   ecological restoration.
     Policy 3.7    Promote CAL FIRE and Humboldt Fire Safe Council goals and objectives.
     Policy 3.8    Promote smoke detector and fire extinguisher installation and maintenance in
                   all habitable structures.
         Implementation Programs
         Program 3.a    Request annual fire hydrant flow pressure and volume tests, especially in
                        high fire hazard areas, by local water providers. System deficiencies shall
                        be addressed as soon as possible.
         Program 3.b    Study potential backup water supplies for emergency fire flow needs.
         Program 3.c    Require access for emergency vehicles and firefighting equipment on all
                        development projects.
         Program 3.d    Monitor new building materials used for fire resistance and incorporate
                        such materials into plan checks when applicable.
City of Ferndale                                 10-4                                  Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

         Program 3.e   Provide information on fire safe practices through the City’s website,
                       including fuel reduction and non-flammable landscaping.
         Program 3.f   Refer development proposals to the Ferndale Volunteer Fire Department
                       for comment on measures necessary to mitigate or reduce fire hazards.
         Program 3.g   Update and implement the City’s weed abatement regulations.
         Program 3.h   Participate in the planning efforts of and work cooperatively with the
                       Humboldt Fire Safe Council.
         Program 3.i   Require street signs and clear and legible addresses with Design Review
                       and building permits.
         Program 3.j   Require smoke detectors and fire extinguishers as a condition for building
                       permits.
GOAL 4 - Hazardous Materials
Protect people and property from risks associated with the use, transport, treatment and disposal
of hazardous materials and wastes.
     Policies
     Policy 4.1    Minimize exposure to known and suspected hazardous materials by routine
                   transport, use, disposal, or accidental release.
     Policy 4.2    Work with appropriate agencies to keep current on hazardous materials
                   transport, storage, treatment, and disposal regulations.
     Policy 4.3    Work with property owners and applicable regulatory agencies to identify and
                   eliminate hazardous waste releases.
     Policy 4.4    Inform the public about regulations for hazardous material and waste
                   transport, storage, treatment, and disposal.
     Policy 4.5    Encourage safe hazardous material and waste recycling and disposal.
     Policy 4.6    Ensure adequate fire protection service levels as necessary to reduce risks to
                   persons and property from hazardous materials spills or releases.
     Policy 4.7    Cooperate with other jurisdictions on regional hazardous materials use,
                   transport, treatment and disposal practices.
         Implementation Programs
         Program 4.a   Require that all land uses that generate, use, handle, store, dispose of,
                       and/or emit hazardous materials or waste be in compliance with applicable
                       laws and regulations.
         Program 4.b   Enforce adopted building and fire codes to minimize potential public harm
                       from hazardous material storage.
         Program 4.c   Update the Ferndale General Plan Transportation & Public Facilities
                       Element to designate City roadways used for hazardous materials
                       transport. If facilities such as schools, hospitals, child care centers, or
                       other facilities with special evacuation needs are located along these
City of Ferndale                                  10-5                                   Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

                       routes, post emergency response plans for unauthorized hazardous
                       materials release.
         Program 4.d Require that new facilities that produce, use, store, transport or dispose of
                       hazardous materials locate a safe distance from land uses that may be
                       adversely impacted by such activities. Conversely, do not allow new
                       sensitive facilities, such as schools, child-care centers, and senior centers,
                       to be located near existing sites that use, store or generate hazardous
                       materials.
         Program 4.e Require new industries that store and process hazardous materials to
                       provide a buffer zone at property boundaries sufficient for public safety.
         Program 4.f Coordinate with County, State, and Federal agencies to minimize exposure
                       to hazardous materials.
         Program 4.g Prohibit the siting of new hazardous waste repositories, incinerators, and
                       facilities within the 100‐year floodplain.
         Program 4.h Require fire safe design standards, including proper storage and use of
                       hazardous materials, for new development consistent with applicable state
                       and federal regulations.
         Program 4.i Post household hazardous waste drop-off dates and locations on the City’s
                       website.
         Program 4.j Support County efforts to sponsor household hazardous waste and e-waste
                       recycling and disposal drop-off days. Allow City property to be used for
                       drop-off and assist in promoting disposal and recycling opportunities.
         Program 4.k Seek Ferndale Volunteer Fire Department input for identifying measures
                       necessary to mitigate hazardous materials use and storage risks.
         Program 4.l Support the Ferndale Volunteer Fire Department’s efforts to maintain
                       state-of-the art first responder equipment and trained personnel for
                       hazardous spills and emissions response.
         Program 4.m Cooperate with the County to implement the Hazardous Materials Area
                       Plan and the Integrated Waste Management Plan.
GOAL 5 – Acceptable Risk
Reduce the effects of hazards and hazardous events to below the acceptable risk level.
     Policies
     Policy 5.1    Protect life and property through land use and development practices that
                   avoid or mitigate the effects of natural hazards.
     Policy 5.2    Land division and development shall be designed and constructed so that
                   acceptable risk levels as defined in Figure 11 are not exceeded.
     Policy 5.3    Map known areas and sources of risk and make this public information.
     Policy 5.4    Locate development, especially critical facilities, away from hazards as
                   determined in Figure 10 unless the hazards can be mitigated to the satisfaction
                   of responsible agencies.
City of Ferndale                                  10-6                                  Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

     Policy 5.5    Scale development proportionally to the level of acceptable risk for that
                   development as determined in Figure 11.
     Policy 5.6    Implement measures that reduce risk, including development guidelines,
                   building occupancy limitations, renovation, and demolition.
         Implementation Programs
         Program 5.a   Regularly review and update regulations to ensure applicable mitigation
                       measures are clearly defined; requirements for geotechnical and geologic
                       investigations to identify and mitigate geologic hazards are provided;
                       procedures for the review of geotechnical and geologic reports submitted
                       for development are provided; fire safety of building construction is
                       improved; and defensible space is defined and its benefits balanced with
                       City conservation goals.
GOAL 6 – Emergency Preparedness
Ensure that City staff and citizens are adequately prepared to respond to and recover from
natural or man-made disasters.
     Policies
     Policy 6.1    Establish and maintain an effective emergency response program appropriate
                   for potential events.
     Policy 6.2    Comply with NOAA requirements to maintain Storm Ready and Tsunami
                   Ready certificates.
     Policy 6.3    Provide guidance to citizens for preparing for and responding to emergencies.
     Policy 6.4    Designate, equip, and publicize locations of emergency assembly points
                   throughout the City.
     Policy 6.5    Coordinate with the Ferndale Volunteer Fire Protection District on emergency
                   access requirements and specifications.
     Policy 6.6    Utilize mutual aid agreements that provide public safety personnel in times of
                   emergency.
     Policy 6.7    Designate alternate routes to transport public safety employees from outlying
                   areas when main route is impassable.
     Policy 6.8    Ensure that public safety facilities, apparatus, and equipment are designed and
                   constructed adequately to efficiently operate paramedic, fire, and police
                   services in times of disaster.
     Policy 6.9    Make facilities and equipment needed by residents accessible as soon after a
                   major disaster as possible.
         Implementation Programs
         Program 6.a   Update and adopt the City of Ferndale Emergency Operations Plan (EOP).
                       Ensure that City departments have coordinated Standard Operating
City of Ferndale                                 10-7                                 Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

                     Procedures. Update Appendix C: Recovery Operations and include
                     measures to address post-disaster needs of the City’s residents and
                     businesses for inspections, debris removal, streamlined permit issuance for
                     rebuilding, and other essential services.
         Program 6.b Upgrade the City’s Emergency Operations Center (EOC) and train City
                     staff as needed. Review emergency equipment needs, such as a
                     defibrillator at City Hall, and prioritize acquisition. Incorporate
                     emergency preparedness expenditures into a long-term City Capital
                     Improvement Plan.
         Program 6.c Establish redundant communication capabilities throughout the city.
         Program 6.d Develop and implement consolidated emergency response programs and
                     plans for fire, flooding, seismic and other potential hazard events
                     contained in the City’s EOP. Distribute the plans to City departments,
                     emergency response providers and support groups.
         Program 6.e Maintain National Incident Management System and Incident Command
                     System training for City staff.
         Program 6.f Identify opportunities for training Ferndale citizens and staff on
                     community emergency response. Include the Humboldt County Office of
                     Emergency Services (OES) in training exercises.
         Program 6.g Involve the community, neighborhoods, and local businesses in disaster
                     response planning.
         Program 6.h Regularly update and publicize the City’s EOP to include evacuation
                     routes, emergency connectors, and emergency shelters in conformance
                     with state guidelines through the City’s website, local radio, local
                     newspaper, and other community outreach sources.
         Program 6.i Hold regular (at least one per year) emergency preparedness drills, and
                     include local Community Emergency Response Training (CERT) groups,
                     County OES and related emergency services agencies and groups.
         Program 6.j Promote awareness and caution among residents regarding possible
                     natural hazards, including landslides, earthquakes, flooding, and fire
                     hazards through creating and maintaining current website information.
         Program 6.k Support mutual aid agreements with local agencies and jurisdictions that
                     provide public safety personnel in times of emergency.
         Program 6.l Include a public safety “ingress” component to the City’s EOP.
         Program 6.m Conduct performance audits of public safety facilities and identify any
                     needed/corrective measures.
         Program 6.n Identify needed emergency supplies to assist Ferndale residents in the first
                     days following an emergency or major disaster.
         Program 6.o Use Capital Improvement Program or similar funding to establish a readily
                     accessible supply of funds for use by the City in times of an emergency or
                     major disaster.
City of Ferndale                               10-8                                   Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

11.0 References
California Department of Toxic Substances Control. 2012. Hazardous Waste and Substances
Site List. Available from: http://www.dtsc.ca.gov/SiteCleanup/Cortese_List.cfm. Retrieved 8
August 2012.
Christensen, Arne. 2011. The April 1992 Mendocino Triple Junction Earthquakes. Chronicling
the Nisqually Earthquake and Other Northwest Quakes. Nisqually Multimedia. Retrieved 14
January 2012.
Citizen Corps. 2013. Eel River Valley (CA) CERT. Available from:
http://www.citizencorps.gov/cc/showCert.do?id=45688&cert=. Retrieved 7 January 2013.
City of Eureka. 2012. City of Eureka Website – Regional Hazardous Materials Response Team.
Available from: http://www.ci.eureka.ca.gov/depts/fire/operations/hmrt.asp. Retrieved 29
October 2012.
City of Ferndale Drainage Master Plan Update. 2004.
City of Ferndale General Plan Public Safety Element. 1975.
Dengler, Lori. 2008. "The 1906 Earthquake on California’s North Coast". Bulletin of the
Seismological Society of America 98 (2): 918–930. doi:10.1785/0120060406. Retrieved 14
January 2011.
Department of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC). 2012. EnviroStor Database. Available from:
http://www.envirostor.dtsc.ca.gov/public/. Retrieved on 30 October 2012.
Edwards, Andrew. 2002. Waterworld: An odyssey through the Eel River lowlands. The North
Coast Journal. Available from: http://www.northcoastjournal.com/121902/news1219.html.
Retrieved 28 August 2012.
Eel River Valley Community Emergency Response Team Programs (ERV-CERT). 2011.
Available from: http://www.humboldt.k12.ca.us/ervrems/CERT/cert.html. Retrieved 7 January
2013.
Eel River Valley Emergency Preparedness Team (ERV-EPT). 2010. Available from:
http://www.humboldt.k12.ca.us/ervrems/ervept/ervept.html. Retrieved 11 January 2013.
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 2012. Community Emergency Response
Teams. Available from: http://www.fema.gov/community-emergency-response-teams.
Retrieved 7 January 2013.
Ferndale Enterprise. 2012. Ferndale’s history began in wilds and willows. Souvenir Edition.
Available from: http://www.scribd.com/doc/89537021/Souvenir-Edition-2011-12. Retrieved 7
September 2012.
City of Ferndale                               11-1                                Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

Humboldt County General Plan. 2012. Part 4 Chapter 14 Safety Element. Planning
Commission Approved Draft.
Humboldt Office of Emergency Services (OES). 2003. An Overview. Available from:
https://co.humboldt.ca.us/sheriff/oes/. Retrieved 4 January 2013.
Humboldt County Office of Emergency Services (OES). 2006. Humboldt Operational Area
City of Ferndale Emergency Operations Plan.
Humboldt County Operational Area Hazard Mitigation Plan (HMP). 2007.
Humboldt County Resource Conservation District (HCRCD). 2010. Salt River Ecosystem
Restoration Project Summary of Progress 2010. Available from:
http://humboldtrcd.org/2010SaltRiverProjectSummary.pdf. Retrieved on 31 August 2012.
Humboldt Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCo). 2008. Ferndale Fire Protection
District Municipal Service Review. Adopted 2008.
Humboldt State University Regional Training Institute (RTI). 2013. Available from:
http://www.humboldt.edu/rti/. Retrieved in 8 January 2013.
International Association of Fire Chiefs and Western Fire Chiefs Association (IAFC and
WFCA). 1996. Development Strategies in the Wildland/Urban Interface.
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). "Natural Hazards Images". Cape
Mendocino, California Earthquakes, April 25 & 26, 1992. National Geophysical Data Center.
Retrieved 6 August 2012.
North Coast Integrated Water Management Plan (NCIWMP). 2009. North Coast IRWMP
> Implementation Projects > Salt River Ecosystem Restoration. Available from:
http://www.northcoastirwmp.net/Content/10394/preview.html. Retrieved August 30, 2012.
Pacific Institute. 2009. California Flood Risk: Sea Level Rise Ferndale Quadrangle. Available
from: http://www.pacinst.org/reports/sea_level_rise/hazmaps/Ferndale.pdf. Retrieved on 31
August 2012.
Schneider, Keith. 1995. A Flooded Town Asks, ‘Why Us?’ The New York Times. Available
from: http://www.nytimes.com/1995/01/16/us/a-flooded-town-asks-why-
us.html?pagewanted=all&src=pm. Retrieved 8 August 2012.
State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB). 2012. Geotracker. Available from:
http://geotracker.waterboards.ca.gov. Retrieved 31 October 2012.
Town of Woodside. 2012. General Plan 2012 Natural Hazards and Safety Element. Available
from: http://www.woodsidetown.org/planning/general-plan-2012-1. Retrieved 17 December
2012.
City of Ferndale                               11-2                               Safety Element
DRAFT April 2013

               City of FERNDALE
Historical & Cultural Resources Element
                         Adopted May 2012
             Cover Photos & Illustrations:
Top left - Shaw House              Top right - Victorian Inn
Center – Main Street Illustration from City Letterhead
Bottom left - Ferndale Museum Bottom right - Gingerbread Mansion

           City of Ferndale
Historical & Cultural Resources Element
     Adopted by Resolution No. 2012-14
                   May 3, 2012
                    City Council
               Jeffrey Farley, Mayor
             Stuart Titus, Vice Mayor
                   Niels Lorenzen
                    Ken Mierzwa
                   John Maxwell
             Planning Commission
        Jorgen Von Frausing-Borch, Chair
                   Daniel Brown
                   Trevor Harper
                     Lino Mogni
           Design Review Committee
                Daniel Brown, Chair
                     Lino Mogni
                   Michael Bailey
                    Dane Cowan
                 Michael Sweeney
              City of Ferndale Staff
            Jay Parrish, City Manager
         Nancy Kaytis-Slocum, City Clerk
                   Prepared By
This document printed on 100% post-consumer recycled pape
                                                City of Ferndale
                   Historical & Cultural Resources Element
                                                 Table of Contents
              Preface
              Historical & Cultural Resources Element Preparation .................................. 1-1
         1.0 Introduction
              Purpose of Historical & Cultural Resources Element .................................... 1-3
              Economic Development and Historical Preservation .................................... 1-3
              Relationship to the Rest of the General Plan ..................................................... 1-4
         2.0 Historical & Cultural Setting and Context
              Native American (pre-1852) ................................................................................... 2-1
              Early Settlement (1850-1870’s) ............................................................................ 2-1
              Dairy Farming and Incorporation (1870s-Present) ....................................... 2-2
              Landscape ....................................................................................................................... 2-4
              Historic Preservation Law ........................................................................................ 2-4
              Historic Preservation Incentives ........................................................................... 2-5
         3.0 Historical Resources and Design Review
              Historical Resources ................................................................................................... 3-1
              Architectural Themes ................................................................................................. 3-1
              Historic Designations ................................................................................................. 3-7
              Design Review ............................................................................................................ 3-11
         4.0 Goals, Policies, and Implementation Strategies ........................................ 4-1
         5.0 References..................................................................................................................... 5-1
City of Ferndale                                                       i                        Historical & Cultural Resources Element
Adopted May 2012                                                                                                                                    TOC

                                        List of Tables
         Table 1. Designated Historic Resources...................................................................... 3-7
                                       List of Figures
         Figure 1. The Shaw House at 703 Main Street, Ferndale...................................... 3-2
         Figure 2. The Hart Home at 831 Main Street, Ferndale ........................................ 3-2
         Figure 3. The Alford-Nielson Home at 1299 Main Street, Ferndale ................. 3-3
         Figure 4. The Taubman Home at 1249 Rose Avenue, Ferndale......................... 3-3
         Figure 5. Ferndale Bank Building at 394 Main Street, Ferndale ....................... 3-4
         Figure 6. The Benemann House at 446 Eugene Street, Ferndale ..................... 3-4
         Figure 7. The New Hart Building at 399-405 Main Street, Ferndale .............. 3-5
         Figure 8. Ranch Style Home at 1274 Van Ness, Ferndale .................................... 3-5
         Figure 9. Ferndale Main Street Historic District ...................................................... 3-8
         Figure 10. Ferndale Design Control Zone ................................................................ 3-12
                                         Appendices
         Appendix A - Glossary of Terms Used in the California Register of Historical
                      Resources
         Appendix B - Online Resources for Historic Preservation in California
         Appendix C - Incentives for Historic Preservation in California
City of Ferndale                                ii                    Historical & Cultural Resources Element
Adopted May 2012                                                                                                          TOC
PREFACE
Historical & Cultural Resources Element Preparation
Managing historical resources important to the City
prompted the preparation of this element.
Community engagement and participation during
Element preparation and review was key to setting
direction for preserving existing resources and
maintaining the community’s vision for the future.
The Ferndale Planning Commission held a number of
study sessions and public meetings with the Design
Review Committee to gather input on historic
preservation goals. Public meetings were advertised
with notices in the Ferndale Enterprise, flyers,
information posted on the City website, and public
service announcements on a local radio station. The
community was encouraged to participate in these
meetings and to share their ideas about historic
preservation.
The Planning Commission and Design Review Committee held a public meeting that began
with an overview of the Element’s purpose and outline presented by the City’s Contract
Planner (CP). Then the executive director of the Humboldt County Convention and Visitors
Bureau spoke about the importance of tourism to the City and local economies and the
reasons why tourists come to Ferndale. Next a Design Review Committee Member and
historic restoration expert discussed the importance of maintaining materials and features
of historic structures. Then the meeting was opened up to gather input from attendees
about their historic preservation ideas. An overview of the next steps closed the meeting.
The CP and City staff worked with the Planning Commission, Design Review Committee,
and public input to craft goals and policies to protect historical and cultural resources that
will allow for the continued vitality of the town. The Draft Element was prepared based on
relevant research and input received and was presented to the Planning Commission for
review and action at a public hearing. Planning Commission requested revisions that were
incorporated and the Element was forwarded to the City Council, who conducted their own
public hearings prior to adopting this Element and the associated California Environmental
Quality Act document.
City of Ferndale                               1-1           Historical & Cultural Resources Element
Adopted May 2012                                                                        Introduction

                 This page intentionally left blank
City of Ferndale                1-2              Historical & Cultural Resources Element
Adopted May 2012                                                            Introduction
1.0 INTRODUCTION
The Historical & Cultural Resources Element of the City’s General Plan sets goals, policies
and implementation strategies for the City’s role in planning for the unique historical
aspects of Ferndale and its regional cultural setting in the Eel River Valley. This Element is
part of the City’s General Plan because preserving community character, history, and
architectural features is important to Ferndale. While not specifically mandated under
state planning law, 126 California counties/cities have historic preservation general plan
elements. Many of Ferndale’s most defining features are its buildings and public spaces.
Historical resources include individual structures, the National Register District along Main
Street, and the architectural themes found throughout the City. This element also sets
goals, policies, and implementation strategies for managing the qualifying historical
resources and better defining historic district maintenance.
Purpose of Historical & Cultural Resources Element
The purpose of the Historical & Cultural Resources Element is to preserve and enhance the
community’s historic resources for heritage tourism, economic development and a
continued source of community identity and pride. The Element also addresses new
development to ensure compatibility with existing historical resources and encourages
both public and private stewardship. Although the adopted General Plan contains historic
preservation goals and polices, the City felt it is important to develop a long-term plan to
integrate historic preservation within the context of land use development.
Historic Resources include sites, buildings, places, structures, objects, traditional cultural
properties, landscapes, and districts containing a concentration of resources.
Historic preservation is the protection, rehabilitation, restoration, and reconstruction of
historical and cultural resources. According to John Lawrence, Dean of the School of
Architecture at Tulane University, the basic intent of preservation is “not to arrest time but
to mediate sensitively with the forces of change, to understand the present as a product of
the past and a modifier of the future” (Bernstein 2002, p 6). Ferndale retains many
commercial and residential structures that are examples of the City’s early history. These
historic structures enhance community character and identity and are valued both
individually and as part of the whole town; which is one aspect of why Ferndale is such a
special place to both residents and visitors. Historic resource preservation is not only
educational, but also supports economic development by attracting heritage tourists for its
authentic streetscape.
Economic Development and Historic Preservation
Historic preservation is a sound investment, in that preserving a historic building or
resource is often more efficient and profitable than new construction. Groupings of
individual buildings increase value as well, through distinctive common characteristics
City of Ferndale                               1-3            Historical & Cultural Resources Element
Adopted May 2012                                                                         Introduction

associated with architectural styles and time periods. Studies have shown that property
values increase faster in historic districts than in non-historic areas (Bernstein 2002).
Promoting districts, such as Ferndale’s Main Street and distinctive individual buildings,
complements and enhances individual and community property values. Voluntary
preservation of historic and cultural resources can yield significant economic value to the
Ferndale community and the region, through heritage tourism as well as an increase in
property values.
The Element acknowledges that historic preservation requires a public and private
partnership with both monetary and nonmonetary contributions from the participating
parties. In economic terms, historic preservation has value in that the economic activity
stimulates a range of goods and services for sale and trade along with real estate and
tourism (Bernstein 2002). On the other hand, it is also a public good, with benefits for
government or nonprofit groups. This Element provides the policy and strategy to
maximize the value of these important resources, applying different methods for City
government, other local agencies, and building and property owners to work collectively
and cooperatively to build value for the community.
Relationship to the Rest of the General Plan
All general plan elements goals and policies must be internally consistent and are
interdependent and related to each other. No single element of the plan should be used in
isolation without consideration of all other component elements as an integrated general
plan. The Historical & Cultural Resources Element goals and policies were reviewed for
consistency with other general plan elements including but not limited to the following
Land Use and Unique Resources Element goals and policies:
     -   To encourage the maintenance and preservation of structures having Victorian,
         historic, or unique architectural features (Goal 2510.4).
     -   To preserve and protect the existing architectural and historic features of Ferndale
         and its surroundings (Goal 2550.2).
     -   Any alteration of buildings or new construction in the Central Business District
         should be in keeping with the existing Victorian architecture and historic features
         (Policy 2540.5).
     -   Design control should be maintained for the portion of the City with Victorian
         structures and Main Street (Policy 2560.6).
The existing areas surrounding the City, as shown on the General Plan Land Use Map, are
open agricultural/dairy lands to the north, east, and west and forested hillsides to the
south. These types of land use patterns, along with the low density of development allowed
outside the City boundary, help preserve historical and cultural resources by maintaining
the historical use of the agricultural lands.
City of Ferndale                                1-4          Historical & Cultural Resources Element
Adopted May 2012                                                                        Introduction

2.0 HISTORICAL & CULTURAL SETTING AND CONTEXT
Prior inhabitants, ancestors and historical figures have shaped the land and community of
Ferndale. Documenting and acknowledging their contributions is an important part of
preserving Ferndale’s history.
Native American (pre-1852)
Prior to European-American settlement, the north coast of California was sparsely
populated by Native Americans cultures. The most prominent tribe of the Humboldt Bay
region and south to the Eel River Valley was the Wiyot people. The region supported a pre
contact Wiyot population estimated at between 1,500 and 2,000 (Wiyot Tribe 2011). The
abundant terrestrial, riverine, estuarine, and marine resources sustained the Wiyot people
who lived in permanent villages along waterways which served as travel and trade routes.
Humboldt Bay was first visited by European-American settlers in 1849(Wiyot Tribe 2011).
Wiyot contact with white explorers and fur trappers prior to the California gold rush
changed the character of northwestern California forever and led to the decimation and
displacement of the Wiyot. From 1850 to 1865, the territory of the Wiyots became the
center for the largest concentration of European-Americans in California north of San
Francisco. The Wiyot were forcibly relocated to reservations at Klamath, Hoopa, Smith
River and Round Valley during this time period. Today, the Wiyots are, for the most part,
associated with three Humboldt Bay area Rancherias. They are involved in various tribal
economic projects and in the revitalization of cultural traditions such as languages, basket
weaving, ceremonies, and reclaiming ancestral lands (Wiyot Tribe 2011).
Cultural resources can include: archeological sites, waterways, travel routes, and cultural
landscapes. Many of these resources were lost before much was understood about the
culture, or disturbed by commercial, industrial and residential development from the
settlement period through the present day. No known significant Wiyot archaeological
sites or artifacts have been found within the city limits of Ferndale. But their connection to,
and influence on the development of the city, and its early residents, must be noted.
Early Settlement (1850-1870’s)
The first European-American settlers to the Eel River Valley arrived around 1850. Within a
few years the Gold Rush boom had subsided, and agricultural settlements were beginning
to spread out over the open lands around Humboldt Bay and into the interior prairies and
coastal valleys. The Eel River Valley was then characterized by small scattered settlements.
A number of small settlements were already developed prior to Ferndale’s initial
establishment including Arlynda Corners, Port Kenyon, Grizzly Bluff, and Centerville.
These small communities were situated in the outskirts of Ferndale and contributed to its
development and prosperity.
The original vegetation of the lower Eel River valley consisted of dense thickets of alder,
scattered forests of spruce and redwood, and fields of ferns, some taller than a man on a
horse. It was formidable land to farm, but represented abundant opportunities for hard
City of Ferndale                              2-1             Historical & Cultural Resources Element
Adopted May 2012                                                                     Setting & Context

working immigrants (Ferndale Chamber of Commerce 2011). Many early settlers devoted
their land to crops and orchards, but it became evident that the cleared land produced a
lush, natural pasturage that made the land ideal for dairying or cattle raising.
Seth Kinman was one of the original 12 men (including the
Shaw brothers discussed below) who in 1852-1853 spent the
winter in what became known as Fern Dale due to the
numerous huge ferns along Francis Creek. Kinman made his
claim in the vicinity of where Fern Cottage now stands, and
lived there until 1855 when he moved to Table Bluff. This is
where he made his home until he died in 1888 (Anonymous
2010). Kinman was arguably the most nationally known
resident of Humboldt County as he made several trips to the
East Coast to personally present chairs he made from elk horns
and grizzly bear skins to several presidents including James
Buchanan, Abraham Lincoln, Andrew Johnson and Rutherford                       Seth Kinman
B. Hayes. At various times, Kinman operated a “museum of
curiosities” in Eureka, San Francisco, Sacramento, and Los Angeles. In the 1880’s he ran
the Pioneer Saloon at the Table Bluff Hotel where he displayed his curiosities (Anonymous
2010). In 2010 the Ferndale Museum received a donation of several Kinman artifacts from
his great-great granddaughter.
The reason for Ferndale’s early prosperity was the same reason it came into being in the
first place; namely, agriculture and farming. In the summer of 1852, Willard Allard, Seth
Louis Shaw, and Stephen William Shaw were assessing the expanse of the Eel River Valley
                                                     from atop Table Bluff. They located two
                                                     claims in a level area at the base of the
                                                     hills, and by winter had cleared several
                                                     acres of land, built a road from the river,
                                                     and constructed a crude cabin. In 1854
                                                     Seth Louis Shaw began construction on
                                                     the first large house in the area, which
                                                     was completed in 1866. in 1860 Shaw’s
                 Shaw House circa late 1800’s
                                                     house became Ferndale’s first post office
                                                     (Ferndale Chamber of Commerce 2011).
Dairy Farming and Incorporation (1870s- Present)
Between 1852 and 1915 Ferndale was populated by Danes, Swiss, Canadians, Americans,
Italians, English, Chinese, Irish, Germans, Italian-Swiss, and Portuguese in various numbers.
They all pursued their individual businesses - dairying, cattle and sheep ranching, crop
growing, road building and the railroad. Dairy farming in the Eel River Valley began with
the Danes who arrived in the 1870’s and brought practices from their homeland. Each
small neighborhood of dairymen formed its own cooperative creamery. By 1890 there
were eleven separate creameries operating in the immediate Ferndale area (Ferndale
Chamber of Commerce 2011).
City of Ferndale                               2-2            Historical & Cultural Resources Element
Adopted May 2012                                                                      Setting & Context

Ferndale butter was considered the finest in the state, bringing premium prices in San
Francisco. Ferndale acquired its first nickname, 'Cream City.' Shortly after 1900 many of
the small creameries consolidated into larger creameries. The Central Creamery, located on
north Main Street, became the mother plant of the Golden State Creamery, one of the
largest in the state. Ferndale's pioneer creameries were responsible for a number of
innovations in dairy processing and dairy management which helped revolutionize the
dairy industry (Ferndale Chamber of Commerce 2011). Dairying is still one of the largest
local industries.
Dairying gave Ferndale a stable industry, but it was not the sole reason for the town's
growth and prosperity. During the last half of the 19th century, Ferndale became an
important transportation center. It had its own port for sea-going vessels on the Salt River
and was the terminus for stagecoach lines to the Bear River and Mattole regions to the
south, with other daily stages going to Eureka and towns to the north and east(Ferndale
Chamber of Commerce 2011).
The following figure shows an 1889 ‘Map of Ferndale’ by J.N. Lentell which shows all of the
streets, blocks and lots of the City at the time. Ferndale was incorporated in 1893. In 1911
Fernbridge was constructed, connecting Ferndale with the rest of the county. Prior to that
the only way to cross the Eel River was by ferry or temporary bridges during the summer
when the river was low.
Throughout the 20th century, the dairy industry remained strong and a mainstay of the
local economy as it moved to produce more value added products such as ice cream, butter,
and organic options.
City of Ferndale                                2-3          Historical & Cultural Resources Element
Adopted May 2012                                                                    Setting & Context

During the Cold War Years following World War II, housing was developed by the Navy in
support of the Centerville Naval Station. Many current residents of Ferndale were originally
stationed at the naval base and returned to Ferndale upon exiting the military or
retirement. Following closure of the Centerville base, the housing was utilized by the Coast
Guard for several more years. Most recently, the community voted to accept the housing
from the Navy and convert it to affordable housing for low and moderate income residents.
Over time the demographics of the Ferndale community have continued to change with
many people moving to Ferndale from out of the area slowly adding to the
multigenerational origins of native residents. Most recently, people of Hispanic origins
have moved here to work on the dairy farms, in construction trades, and other fields
adding many of their traditions (i.e., Cinco de Mayo) to the cultural diversity that makes up
modern Ferndale.
Landscape
The regional landscape played a significant role in Ferndale’s growth and development and
continues to be an important piece of the City’s character. Ferndale’s unique cultural
landscape represents the combined work of nature and humans. The City of Ferndale is
located on the southern edge of the Eel River Valley, just above the historical flood limits of
the Eel River. The City is situated on the alluvial plain created by Francis Creek, which runs
through the heart of the City. Francis Creek originates in steep, mountainous terrain to the
south and flows northerly to the Salt River. The City is surrounded by flat agricultural
lands to the west, north, and east, and forested mountainsides to the south. Ferndale’s rich
cultural landscape includes not only the natural elements, but also agricultural features
shaped by people over many generations including fields, barns, and homesteads.
 Historic Preservation Law
Federal
The primary federal statute that addresses historic preservation is the National Historic
Preservation Act (NHPA) 16 U.S.C. § 470 et seq. The NHPA sets forth a comprehensive
program to carry out the national policy of protecting America’s historic and cultural
resources. It provides the authority for a number of activities that implement the federal
historic preservation program, including (1) the National Register of Historic Places, (2)
the matching grants-in-aid program, encouraging preservation activities at the state and
local levels, (3) the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation, providing information on
historic properties, and (4) the “section 106” review process.
State
Public Resources Code section 5020 et seq. is California’s state historic preservation
statute. This statute does not prohibit local control of historic properties. Rather, it assists
local entities in encouraging historic preservation. Public Resources Code section 5020.1
established the California Register of Historic Resources, which is the authoritative listing
and guide to be used by cities to identify existing historic resources deserving of protection.
Once a historic site is included in the register, any project that may have an adverse impact
City of Ferndale                               2-4            Historical & Cultural Resources Element
Adopted May 2012                                                                     Setting & Context

on the site is subject to heightened scrutiny under the California Environmental Quality Act
(CEQA). CEQA defines historic resources more broadly than does federal law, and includes
both procedural and substantive project review requirements and imposes stricter
environmental review requirements than required for federal review under NEPA.
Historic Preservation Incentives
Effective preservation practices can have economic benefits for property owners, local
businesses and residents, in addition to maintaining a city’s distinctive character. A wide
variety of incentives have been created at the Federal and State levels. These include
federal tax credits for rehabilitation of qualified historical resources, property tax incentive
programs, alternative building codes, and tax deductions for preservation easements.
Incentives for historic preservation include, but are not limited to: Mills Act Property Tax
Abatement Program - The Mills Act is a state sponsored legislation that grants local
governments the authority to participate in a locally based preservation incentive program.
Private property owners receive property tax relief in exchange for agreeing to preserve,
rehabilitate, and maintain their historic properties for a specified period. The City could
create a Mills Act program by adopting an ordinance that meets State established program
standards. Private property owners would receive property tax relief in exchange for
agreeing by contract to preserve, rehabilitate, and maintain their historic properties for a
specified period. In exchange for the reduction in property taxes, the Contract requires the
property owner to agree to use the tax savings to finance certain property improvements.
The Mills Act Contract is for an initial period of ten years and is automatically renewed
annually. The Contract runs with the land and is transferred to future property owners.
Although the Mills Act Property Tax Abatement Program allows for both residential and
income producing properties to be eligible for tax relief, the City of Ferndale, in adopting
the program, may establish specific criteria of eligibility. Rehabilitation projects must
comply with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation.
Federal Rehabilitation Tax Cuts - This program fosters private sector rehabilitation of
historic buildings and promotes economic revitalization by providing tax credits to
property owners for qualified historic property rehabilitation projects. The Federal
Historic Preservation Tax incentives are available for buildings that are National Historic
Landmarks, that are listed in the National Register, and that contribute to National Register
Historic Districts and certain local historic districts. Properties must be income producing
and must be rehabilitated according to standards set by the Secretary of the Interior. The
Federal historic preservation tax incentives program (the 20% credit) is jointly
administered by the U. S Department of the Interior and the Department of the Treasury, in
partnership with the California State Office of Historic Preservation (OHP).
Charitable Contributions for Historic Preservation Purposes - The Tax Reform Act of 1986
retains the provisions established by Section 6 of the Tax Treatment Extension Act of 1980
(IRC Section 170) that permit income and estate tax deductions for charitable
contributions of partial interest in historic property. Generally, the IRS considers that a
donation of a qualified real property interest to preserve a historically important land area
or a certified historic structure meets the test of charitable contribution for conservation
purposes. For purposes of the charitable contribution provisions only, a certified historic
City of Ferndale                                2-5            Historical & Cultural Resources Element
Adopted May 2012                                                                      Setting & Context

structure need not be depreciable to qualify. It may be a structure other than a building
and may also be a remnant of a building such as a façade, if that is all that remains, and may
include the land area on which it is located. The IRS definition of historically important
land areas includes (Code of Federal Regulations at 26 CFR 1.170A-1-(d)(5)) :
  - Independently significant land areas including any related historic resources that
       meet National Register Criteria for Evaluation.
  - Land areas within registered historic districts including any buildings that contribute
       to the significance of the historic district; and
  -    Land areas adjacent to a property individually listed in the National Register of
       Historic Places (but not within a historic district) where physical or environmental
       features contribute to the historic or cultural integrity of historic property.
California Heritage Fund Grant - This is a program of the California State Office of Historic
Preservation. It provides grant funding for the acquisition, rehabilitation, restoration or
interpretation of historic properties that are listed on, or formally determined eligible for
listing in, the National Register of Historic Places or the California Register of Historical
Resources.
State Historical Building Code - One of California’s most valuable tools for the preservation
of historic resources is the State Historical Building Code (SHBC). While the California
Building Code (CBC, section 3403.5) makes provisions for the special treatment of qualified
historic buildings, the SHBC codifies this protection under statutory law and regulation.
The SHBC governs all other statues or regulations as they may apply to qualified historical
buildings (H&S 19956). The SHBC provides reasonable alternatives in situations where
strict compliance with established statues or regulations would impair the integrity or
significance of a historic resource or jeopardize its economic viability.
Certified Local Government - This program is a preservation partnership between local
governments, the State of California Office of Historic Preservation, and the Nation Park
Service’s National Historic Preservation Program focused on promoting historic
preservation. The benefits of becoming a CLG include but are not limited to: credibility,
technical assistance, streamlined environmental review, funding, and economic benefits.
To become a Certified Local Government (CLG) a community must address the following
minimum goals to demonstrate to the State and NPS that they are committed to historic
preservation.
  -    Establish a qualified historic preservation commission.
  -    Enforce appropriate State or local legislation for the designation and protection of
       historic properties. In most cases this is done in the form of a local ordinance.
  -    Maintain a system for the survey and inventory of local historic resources.
  -    Provide for public participation in the local historic preservation program, including
       participation in the National Register process.
  -    Follow any addition requirements as outline in the State's Procedures for
       Certification.
City of Ferndale                                  2-6          Historical & Cultural Resources Element
Adopted May 2012                                                                      Setting & Context

3.0 HISTORICAL RESOURCES AND DESIGN REVIEW
Historical Resources
This section defines what is (and what is not) a historical resource. This type of resource
can include sites, buildings, places, structures, objects, traditional cultural properties,
landscapes, or even districts containing a concentration of many or all of the above.
Definition of Terms
Historical Resources - This term includes properties that are:
        Listed in, or determined eligible by the State Historical Resources Commission for
         listing in the California Register of Historical Resources.
        Included in a public local register of historic resources.
        Determined by the City of Ferndale to be historically significant or significant in the
         architectural, engineering, scientific, economic, agriculture, educational, social,
         political, military, or cultural annals of California.
        That embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, region, or method of
         construction, or represents the work of an important creative individual, or
         possesses high artistic values.
        Yields information important in the prehistory or history.
(See the United States Secretary of Interior Standards for the Treatment of Historic
Properties with Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring, and Reconstructing
Historic Buildings and the Secretary of Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic
Properties with Guidelines for the Treatment of Cultural Landscapes.)
Period of Significance - The date or span of time within which significant events
transpired, or significant individuals made their important contributions.
Architectural Themes
Well known as the “Victorian Village,” Ferndale also contains a variety of other
architectural styles. Ferndale is known for well-preserved Victorian buildings, which are
also known as "Butterfat Palaces" due to their construction during an epoch wherein
considerable wealth was generated in the dairy industry, especially during the 1880s.
Victorian architecture refers collectively to several architectural styles employed
predominantly during the middle and late 19th century (1860-1900). Gothic Revival and
Italianate, while not uniquely Victorian, are part of revivals that began before the era; these
styles are associated strongly with the 19th century due to the large number of examples
that were erected during that period. A summary of the main architectural styles found in
Ferndale and identifying features of each style follows (Paradis).
City of Ferndale                                  3-1           Historical & Cultural Resources Element
Adopted May 2012                                                  Historical Resources & Design Review

Early National and Romantic Styles
Gothic Revival (1840-1890’s, Churches through 1940s) Identifying features include:
steeply pitched roof, cross-gabled, decorated verge boards, pointed-arch windows,
sometimes stained glass, like churches. Gothic window above entry, one-story porch with
flattened, Gothic arches. The first appearance of picturesque (asymmetrical and
unpredictable) floor plans, indicating the rise of the Romantic Era in America.
Figure 1 The Shaw House at 703 Main Street, Ferndale. Victorian Gothic Revival (Genzoli 1994).
Italianate (1850-1890) Identifying features include: 2 or 3 stories, rarely 1 story; low-
pitched roof, widely overhanging eaves; large, decorative brackets beneath eaves; tall,
narrow windows (most often on commercial buildings), commonly arched or curved
above; some with square cupola or tower (campanile), elaborate wrap-around porch (or
smaller entry porch) with decorative Italianate double columns and other details.
Figure 2 The Hart Home at 831 Main Street, Ferndale. Modified Italianate (Genzoli 1994).
City of Ferndale                                          3-2                Historical & Cultural Resources Element
Adopted May 2012                                                                Historical Resources & Design Review

Victorian-Era Styles
Second Empire (1860s - 1890s) Identifying features include: Italianate style/forms with
Dormer windows, sometimes a square (not round) tower, decorative brackets, molded
cornice, similar to Italianate detail on windows and doors, floor plan often includes
pavilions: outward projection of a building's center or side.
Figure 3 The Alford-Nielson Home at 1299 Main Street, Ferndale. Second Empire French (Genzoli 1994).
Queen Anne, Eastlake-Stick, Shingle (1880s - 1905) Identifying features include: Steeply
pitched, irregular roof shapes; dominant, front-facing gable; patterned shingles, bay
windows, picturesque massing (see Gothic Revival), polychromatic and decorative
ornamentation; partial or full-width porches of one story; multiple gables and dormers;
occasional towers and turrets, rounded or square. Differing wall textures are their
"hallmark." This is the most eclectic style of the Victorian era.
Figure 4 The Taubman Home at 1249 Rose Avenue, Ferndale. Queen Anne (Genzoli 1994).
City of Ferndale                                          3-3               Historical & Cultural Resources Element
Adopted May 2012                                                               Historical Resources & Design Review
Modern Styles
Neoclassical (1890-1940) Identifying features include: classical symmetry, full-height
porch with columns and temple front, and various classical ornament such as dentil
cornices. Basically, this is the revival of the Greek Revival style that dominated the first half
of the 19th century.
Figure 5 Ferndale Bank Building at 394 Main Street, Ferndale. Neoclassical.
Craftsman/ Bungalow (1900-1930) Identifying features include: Low-pitched, gabled
roof, wide overhang of eaves, exposed rafters (rafter tails) under eaves, decorative brackets
(knee braces or corbels), incised porch (beneath main roof), tapered or square columns
supporting roof or porch, 4-over-1 or 6-over-1 sash windows, hand-crafted stone or
woodwork, often mixed materials throughout structure. Bungalows can either be front-
gabled, side-gabled, or cross-gabled.
Figure 6 The Benemann House at 446 Eugene Street, Ferndale. Craftsman/ Bungalow.
City of Ferndale                                            3-4             Historical & Cultural Resources Element
Adopted May 2012                                                              Historical Resources & Design Review
Mission (1900-1940) The Mission style originated in southern California and was the first
style to diffuse eastward from the West. The style includes Mission-shaped dormers and/or
roof parapet; wide, overhanging eaves, exposed rafters, red-tiled roof, stucco walls, arched
windows/doors on ground level.
Figure 7 The New Hart Building at 399-405 Main Street, Ferndale. Mission.
Ranch Style (1940-1970) The ranch house is noted for its long, close-to-the-ground
profile, and minimal use of exterior and interior decoration. Features include: single story,
low pitched gable roof, deep-set eaves, horizontal, rambling layout: Long, narrow, and low
to the ground, rectangular, L-shaped, or U-shaped design, large windows: double-hung,
sliding, and picture, sliding glass doors leading out to patio, attached garage, simple floor
plans, emphasis on openness (few interior walls) and efficient use of space, and built from
natural materials: Oak floors, wood or brick exterior.
Figure 8 Ranch Style Home at 1274 Van Ness, Ferndale. Ranch Style.
Over the years, in many towns, countless historic buildings have been destroyed by fire. A
significant factor in the preservation of Ferndale’s historic buildings is the fact that the fire
station is located downtown enabling rapid response to fire hazard as witnessed by the
recent fires in the Candy Stick and Nilsen’s feed barn.
City of Ferndale                                           3-5            Historical & Cultural Resources Element
Adopted May 2012                                                            Historical Resources & Design Review

Churches and the Ferndale Cemetery
Ferndale is home to five churches which were constructed prior to 1940 and are still in use
today; three of which were constructed before 1900. Each of these churches was
established by a different group of immigrant based upon country and denomination.
        The First Congregational Church was built in the style of New England
         Congregational churches and was constructed in 1881. Over the years, this church
         has been the home of a variety of denominations to finally become a community
         church. It is known today as the Ferndale Community Church and is located on the
         corner of Main Street and Lewis Court (across Main Street from Shaw House).
        The Assumption Catholic Church was constructed in 1896 at its current location off
         the corner of Washington and Berding Streets.
        Our Savior’s Lutheran Church was constructed in 1899 on Shaw Avenue near 4th
         Street and has an 80 foot tall steeple.
        Saint Mary’s Episcopal Church was built in 1909 and is the oldest standing Episcopal
         structure between Garberville and the Oregon border. It is located on the corner of
         4th Street and Shaw Avenue, across from Our Savior’s Church.
        St. Mark’s Lutheran Church was constructed in its present location on the corner of
         Berding and Fern Streets in 1938 after moving from its original location between 3rd
         and 4th Streets.
                                                 The Ferndale Cemetery, located on a hill in
                                                 the southern part of the City, has historic
                                                 markers dating back to the last century.
                                                 Overlooking Ferndale and the Eel River Valley
                                                 to the east and the Pacific Ocean to the West,
                                                 the Cemetery is a popular tourist attraction. St
                                                 Mary’s Cemetery, located east on Bluff Road
                                                 from the Ferndale Cemetery, is dedicated to
                                                 the Catholic Assumption Church.
City of Ferndale                                 3-6           Historical & Cultural Resources Element
Adopted May 2012                                                 Historical Resources & Design Review

Historic Designations
State Historic Landmark
The City of Ferndale was designated as a State Historic Landmark (No. 883) in 1975 by the
California State Parks Office of Historic Preservation.
         “[This] pioneer agricultural community, settled in 1852, helped feed the booming
         population of mid-century San Francisco. Long known as “Cream City” Ferndale made
         innovative and lasting contributions to the dairy industry. Local creameries and the
         town’s role as a transportation and shipping center in the late 19 th and early 20th
         centuries, fostered prosperity that produced Ferndale’s outstanding Victorian Gothic
         residences and false-front commercial architecture.”
Main Street Historic District
The City of Ferndale’s Main Street was designated as a Historic District in 1994 by the
National Park Service and placed on the National Register of Historic Places.
         “Buildings within the City’s Main Street Historic District represent two distinct
         architectural periods: 1) the late Victorian era of the 19th century (1880-1900) and
         the early Modernistic period in the 20th century (1920-1936). Other styles include
         Italianate, Queen Anne, Neo-Classic, Bungalow, and Mission.”
The period of significance is 1872-1936 beginning with the construction of the earliest
extant building, the 1877 Alford’s Drug Store (Poppa Joe’s). The Main Street Historic
District includes 39 contributing buildings that best represent a particular architectural
style or are the works of local architect T.J. Frost. 13 buildings are considered non-
contributing. Since the Historic District was established in 1994, some of these non-
contributing structures may now qualify as contributing (current Red Front Store, Lentz’s
Department Store among others) because they are older than 50 years.
Historic districts are a concentration of historic buildings, structures, objects, or sites
within precise boundaries that share a common historical, cultural, or architectural
background. (See Figure 1 for current boundaries.) Individual resources within an historic
district may lack individual significance, but be considered a contributor to the significance
of the historic district. In terms of this assessment, significant resources that are
components of the district are referred to as “contributing.” “Non-contributing” sites,
although located in a district, do not possess integrity within the period of significance.
Currently, there are numerous historically significant structures (residential dwellings,
barns, and other agricultural outbuildings) scattered throughout the City limits which are
outside of the historic district and the Design Control Combining Zone (D-zone), but of
historical interest nonetheless.
City of Ferndale                                 3-7            Historical & Cultural Resources Element
Adopted May 2012                                                  Historical Resources & Design Review

                                           Ferndale Main Street Historic District
                 Historic District Boundary
                                                                                                                                   SHAMSI CT
                 APN Boundaries
                 Streams
                                                     A ST
                                                                                                                                                                                         LEW
                                                                                                                                                                                               IS A
                                                                                                        3RD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                   VE
                                5TH ST
                                                                                                                                                                           ST
                                                                                                                                                                        MA
                                                                                                                                                                           IN
                                                                                 SHAW AVE
                                                     PIXLEY
                                                                                                                                                W
                                                                                                                                                 AS                                  ST
                                                                                                                                                      HI                        DI
                                                                                                                                                        NG
                                                                                                                     ST
                                                                                                                                                                                   NG
                                                                                                                 N                                           TO
                                                                                                         AI
                                                                                                                                                                           BE
                                                                                                                                                               N              R
                                                                                                        M                                                          ST
                                                        k
                                                     ee
                                                   Cr
                                              is                     ST
       CA                                  anc                4T
         TA                              Fr                      H
                                                                                                                    O
           VE                                                                                                    BR
                                                                                                                          W
   WI                                                                                                                     N                                   City of Ferndale
      LD                                                                                                                      ST
                                                                                                                                                                                ST
                                                                                 OC                                                                                     CR
                                                                                   EA                                                                                      AI
                                                                                        N                                                                                     G
                                                                                            AV
                                                                                              E
                                              ST
                                  FR
                                     AN
                                        CI S                  EU
                                                                 G   EN                                                                                                                   LN
                                                                       ES                                                                                                            ON
                                                                         T                                                                                                        ER S
                                                                                                                                                                                EM
                                                                                                                                                   FR
                                                                                                                                                 UF
                                                                                                                                               BL
                                                                                                                                                      D
                                                                                                                                                                                           0        1,000   2,000 Feet
Map Compiled 30 August 2010
                                                                                                                                               °
Source: Imagery - 2009 USDA NAIP Imagery
        City Limits - Planwest Partners Inc.                                 0                    200                          400 Feet
         Historic District - Planwest Partners Inc.
         Streams - CA FRAP (frap.cdf.ca.gov)

      Table 1. Ferndale Main Street Historic District Contributing Buildings*
                                                         Year       Architectural       Year
                   Name                    Address
                                                         Built           Style         Listed
Alford House                          207 Francis St     1884          Victorian-       1994
                                                                    Second Empire
Masonic Temple                        212 Francis St     1891         Victorian -       1994
                                                                     Eastlake-Stick
Enterprise Office                     219 Francis St     1881         Victorian -       1994
                                                                      Commercial
                                                                      False Front
Faulkner House                        230 Francis St     1899          Bungalow         1994
Russ Bank Building                    290 Francis St and 1891         Victorian -       1994
                                      400 Ocean Ave                  Eastlake-Stick
Robert's Hotel/Ferndale Hotel         315 Main St.       1875          Victorian        1994
Taylor Building                       325-327 Main St    1898          Victorian        1994
Enterprise Building                   334 Main St        1923         Modernistic       1994
Post Office/ Drug Store Building      337 Main St        1889         Victorian -       1994
                                                                      Commercial
                                                                      False Front
M.H. Donnelly Building                341-353 Main St    1902         Victorian -       1994
                                                                      Commercial
                                                                      False Front
Loewenthal's Ferndale Reliable Store  344 Main St        1900         Victorian -       1994
                                                                      Commercial
                                                                      False Front
Brown's Office Building               350 Main St        1902         Victorian -       1994
                                                                      Commercial
                                                                      False Front
Rose Mullady's Millinery & Art Needle 358 Main St        1928         Victorian -       1994
Store                                                                 Commercial
                                                                      False Front
D.A. Bransetter Building              361 Main St        1902         Victorian -       1994
                                                                      Commercial
                                                                      False Front
Rings Pharmacy                        362 Main St        1896         Victorian -       1994
                                                                     Eastlake-Stick
Russ & Sons Meet Market               376 Main St        1900         Victorian -       1994
                                                                     Eastlake-Stick
Town Clock                            385 Main St        1923              n/a          1994
P.F. Hart Building                    393 Main St        1896         Victorian -       1994
                                                                     Eastlake-Stick
Ferndale Bank                         394 Main St        1911         Neoclassical      1994
New Hart Building                     399-405 Main St    1924           Mission         1994
Alford's Drug/Michel Drug Store       409 Main St        1877          Italianate       1994
Mullady Building                      424 Main St        1894         Victorian -       1994
                                                                      Commercial
                                                                      False Front
      City of Ferndale                         3-9        Historical & Cultural Resources Element
      Adopted May 2012                                      Historical Resources & Design Review
                                                                              Year        Architectural       Year
                    Name                                Address
                                                                              Built            Style         Listed
Masonic-Odd Fellows Hall                        425-431 Main St               1875          Victorian -      1994
                                                                                           Commercial
                                                                                            False Front
Meng Building                                   430-436 Main St               1891          Victorian -      1994
                                                                                           Commercial
                                                                                            False Front
Hart Theatre                                    441-451 Main St               1920         Modernistic       1994
Gill House/Blackburn Building                   444 Main St                   1876         Commercial        1994
                                                                                            False Front
Grangreen-Ward-Gill House                       452 Main St                   1870           Residence       1994
                                                                                             joined to
                                                                                             storefront
G.W. Williams Building                          455 Main St                   1888         Commercial        1994
                                                                                            False Front
Eel River & Southern Telephone Co.              460 Main St                   1924         Commercial        1994
Building                                                                                    False Front
Dahlquist Plumbing & Electrical Shop            468 Main St                   1936         Modernistic       1994
New York Cash Store/Red Star Clothing           475 Main St                   1898          Victorian -      1994
Store                                                                                     Eastlake-Stick
Gill Building/Hiller Building                   476 Main St                   1891         Commercial        1994
                                                                                            False Front
Paine Building                                  484 Main St                   1901           Victorian       1994
Old Red Front Store                             505 Main St                   1900           Italianate      1994
Kemp Building                                   513-525 Main St               1930            Mission        1994
Petersen's Service Station                      524 Main St                   1930         Modernistic       1994
R.H. Edwards Building                           535 Main St                   1901         Commercial        1994
                                                                                            False Front
Hiram Hatch Building                            543 Main St                   1901         Commercial        1994
                                                                                            False Front
Charles A. Doe Building                         561-563 Main St               1901         Neoclassical      1994
S&E Garage and Ford Dealership                  580 Main St                   1927         Commercial        1994
                                                                                            False Front
*According to Survey conducted for 1994 Main Street Historic District Designation
            Other Listed Historic Landmarks in Ferndale**
Shaw House                                      703 Main St                   1854             Gothic        1984
Berding House (Gum Drop Tree House)             455 Ocean Ave                 1875             Gothic        1983
Catholic Church of the Assumption               563 Ocean Ave                 1896         Queen Anne        1982
Rectory
Ferndale Public Library                         807 Main St                   1909         Neoclassical      1990
Alford-Nielson House                            1299 Main St                  1874          Victorian -      1986
                                                                                          Second Empire
** National Register of Historic Places
       City of Ferndale                                      3-10              Historical & Cultural Resources Element
       Adopted May 2012                                                           Historical Resources & Design Review
Design Review
The City adopted provisions by ordinance to preserve the City’s historic resources
including defining a Design Control Combining Zone (D-zone) and creating a design review
process. The D-zone is intended to be applied where the appearance and design of
buildings and structures form a substantial contribution to the desirability of the area and
to protect significant examples of early-California architecture and the overall Victorian
appearance of the area by regulating the design of buildings and structures (Ferndale
Zoning Ordinance Section 6.05). Design Review is required for external alterations to
structures located in the City’s Design Control Zone (Figure 2).
Design Review Use Permit applications are reviewed by the City’s Design Review
Committee members, which is made up of two Planning Commissioners and three
community members appointed by the City Council.
The Design Review procedures are established to:
        Ensure that new structures and/or modification, alteration, enlargement of existing
         structures occur in a manner consistent with Ferndale General Plan policies.
        Preserve the natural beauty of the town’s site and setting.
        Ensure that the architectural design of structures and their materials and colors are
         visually harmonious with and conceptually consistent in character and scale with
         surrounding area.
        Ensure that the design and location of signs and their material and colors are
         visually harmonious with surrounding development.
        Allow the City to make appropriate determination of environmental effects.
Design Review is currently guided by codes, ordinances, and procedures and could be
improved with the preparation of a historic preservation design manual. A historic
preservation design manual can include an illustrated guide of preservation codes and
ordinances which can be an effective tool in the design process and can assist owners of
historic properties in retaining the historic integrity of their properties. The format and
instructions should be understandable to property owners, rather than contractors,
developers or engineers. The manual could use local examples to help explain and resolve
issues related to historic preservation. It could explain the benefits of historic designation
and use photos and examples to explain in simple terms the Secretary of the Interior’s
Standards.
City of Ferndale                               3-11           Historical & Cultural Resources Element
Adopted May 2012                                                Historical Resources & Design Review

                                                                  Ferndale Design Control Zone
                Design Control Zone
                City Limits
                                                                                                                                  CALIFORNIA ST                                                                      MARKET ST
                Streams
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ·211
                                                   RASMUSSEN LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                         N
                                                                                                                                                                                                      MAI
                                                                                                                                                  VAN NESS AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AMBROSINI LN
                                                                             5TH ST
                                                                                      ARLINGTON AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                         HOWARD ST
               CE
                 NT
                   ER                                                                                                                             FER
                        V IL                                                                                                                          N
                               LE                                                                                                                         AV
                                  R   D                                                                                                                      E
                                                                                      A ST
                                                                                                                                                                            HERBERT ST
                                                                  SHAW AVE                                             Cr
                                                                                                                         ee
                                                                                             4TH ST
                                                                                                                           k
                                                                                                                 Fran
                                                                                                                     ci s
                                                                                                                              ST
                                                                                                                            ING
                                                                                                                    BE
                                                                                                                      RD                                   W
                                                                                                 OC                                                         AS
                                                                                        SS
                                                                                             T     EA                                                         HI
                                                                                                     N                                                           N   GT
                                                                                FR                        AV
                                                                                  AN                         E                                                         ON
                                                                                    CI                                      ST                                              ST
                                                                                                                    CR
                                                                                                                       AI G
                                                                                                                                                                                          GRANT AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                       LINCOLN ST
                                                    VE
                                                  TA
                                               DCA
                                           I L
                                          W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CROWLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BLUFF RD
                                                                                                                                                                                         °
Map Compiled 6 April 2011
Source: Imagery - 2009 USDA NAIP Imagery
        City Limits - Planwest Partners Inc.
                                                                                                      0              500                             1,000 Feet
        Design Control Zone - Planwest Partners
        Streams - CA FRAP (frap.cdf.ca.gov)

4.0 GOALS, POLICIES AND IMPLEMENTATION
         STRATEGIES
This section contains a resources preservation program for ongoing preservation,
maintenance, and rehabilitation of historical and cultural resources in Ferndale. The goals,
policies and strategies guide specific activities related to historic preservation and are
intended to encourage voluntary community participation and education. City staff,
Planning Commission, and Design Review Committee as applicable, are responsible for
implementing the goals, policies, and strategies at the direction of the City Council.
Goals are end results toward which effort is directed. They are expressed in general terms
and are timeless. In the context of this document goals are general statements of values or
aspirations held by the community in relation to each issue area. They are the timeless
ends toward which the community will address its efforts.
Policies are direction statements that guide future decisions with specific actions intended
to realize a goal. In the context of this document policies are more precise expressions of
the community’s position on particular issues, or how particular goals will be interpreted
or implemented. Polices may include guidelines, standards, objectives, maps, diagrams, or a
combination of these components.
Implementation Strategies present specific actions and practices that the city will
undertake to address policy issues and move closer to the community’s goals. These might
include ongoing programs sponsored by the city (e.g., a façade renovation program),
discrete time-specific actions (e.g., adopt an ordinance), or further planning action (e.g.,
develop a specific plan).
GOAL 1
Preserve Ferndale’s distinctive and valued historic district, structures, and sites representing
various periods of the City’s history.
Policy 1.1 - Use state recommended and federally established guidelines for designation of
              potential historic and cultural resources.
Policy 1.2 - Maintain a database of identified historic and cultural resources.
Policy 1.3 - Develop a program to identify and document historic buildings, structures, and
              sites. There shall be a clear process for both adding and removing identified
              resources.
Policy 1.4 - Encourage the use of the Secretary of Interior Standards and the State Historic
              Building Code as guidelines for the preservation and rehabilitation of historic
              properties.
Policy 1.5 - Encourage the City to apply for designation as a Certified Local Government.
City of Ferndale                                 4-1           Historical & Cultural Resources Element
Adopted May 2012                                                    Goals, Policies and Implementation

Implementation Strategies
Strategy 1.a - Maintain the City’s existing archival databases of identified historic and
                 cultural resources and update periodically.
Strategy 1.b - Provide links on the City’s website to historic preservation related websites
                 including but not limited to the California State Office of Historic Preservation
                 (http://ohp.parks.ca.gov/), the National Register of Historic Places
                 (http://www.cr.nps.gov/nr/index.htm) and the California Preservation
                 Foundation (http://www.californiapreservation.org/).
Strategy 1.c - Provide links on the City’s website to the State Historic Building Code
                 (http://www.chris.ca.gov/?page_id=21410) and Secretary of Interior’s
                 Standards (http://www.nps.gov/history/local-law/arch_stnds_8_2.htm).
Strategy 1.d - Conduct an annual Planning Commission and City Council study session to
                 review the Element strategies and progress.
Strategy 1.e - Review “non-contributing” buildings within the Historic District to determine
                 their possible status as “contributing” buildings.
GOAL 2
Highlight the City’s historic resources for promoting heritage tourism as a means of economic
development.
Policy 2.1 - Encourage the Ferndale Chamber of Commerce, Ferndale Museum, and other
              similar organizations to prepare informational materials related to Ferndale’s
              most significant historical resources.
Policy 2.2 - Recognize Ferndale’s historic and cultural resources as an asset and encourage
              programs that preserve, protect and promote these resources.
Policy 2.3 - Encourage the Ferndale Chamber of Commerce, Ferndale Museum, and other
              similar organizations to conduct events with heritage themes to attract
              tourists/ visitors to Ferndale.
Implementation Strategies
Strategy 2.a - The Ferndale Chamber of Commerce and the Ferndale Museum could
                 coordinate to produce a print color brochure to distribute to visitors. The
                 brochure could be a combination of the Museum’s website walking tour guide
                 and the Ferndale Enterprise’s print walking tour guide. Regularly scheduled
                 docent-led walking tours of the downtown area could be offered and a DVD of
                 the walking tour guide could be produced for sale.
City of Ferndale                                  4-2           Historical & Cultural Resources Element
Adopted May 2012                                                     Goals, Policies and Implementation

Strategy 2.b - Coordinate with the Ferndale Enterprise to start a “Historic Property of the
                 Month” newspaper feature. The City would request that the Enterprise
                 publish a monthly feature for little to no cost. The City would send out a
                 request to historic property owners within the City for a photo and
                 unique/little known facts about their property. The City would submit one
                 property each month to be featured in the Enterprise and on City’s website.
Strategy 2.c - The Ferndale Chamber of Commerce and the Ferndale Museum could
                 coordinate an annual event that emphasizes Ferndale’s history and historic
                 resources. The event could be a celebration of Ferndale’s birthday
                 (observance) and could coincide with the City’s existing July 4th Parade and
                 celebrations. The event could include historic home tours, historic car shows,
                 and other similar activities.
Strategy 2.d - Promote local participation in state and national events such as Historic
                 Preservation Week, an annual event held in May created in 1971 by the
                 National Trust for Historic Preservation, to foster public awareness of the
                 historical significance of the City’s historic resources.
Strategy 2.e - Consider establishing a vintage equipment/ furniture/ clothing rummage sale
                 with the opportunity for people to get their items appraised. This could be
                 conducted in coordination with Bargain Lovers Weekend.
GOAL 3
Educate the community and visitors about the value of the City’s historical resources through
promotional materials.
Policy 3.1 - Provide information and educational materials related to historic preservation
              to the public and work with other groups to sponsor preservation related
              trainings and workshops.
Policy 3.2 - Support and encourage the creation and distribution of educational and
              interpretive materials related to historic preservation for residents and visitors.
Policy 3.3 - Support the development and production of educational and interpretive
              materials that promote Ferndale’s history and historic resources.
Policy 3.4 - Encourage Ferndale Elementary and High School teachers and students to
              incorporate historic preservation in class instruction and assignments.
Implementation Strategies
Strategy 3.a - Develop a list of speakers with knowledge about Ferndale’s History and
                 historic resources. The list could be distributed to local schools and civic
                 organizations with the intent of educating students and the community about
City of Ferndale                                   4-3            Historical & Cultural Resources Element
Adopted May 2012                                                       Goals, Policies and Implementation

                 Ferndale’s history. Speakers who impersonate historic figures (for example
                 Seth Kinman) could be included on the list.
Strategy 3.b - Coordinate with the College of the Redwoods Historic Preservation and
                 Restoration Technology Program to assist in preservation related workshops
                 and to bring their interpretive display and other educational materials to
                 community events.
Strategy 3.c - Become a member of the California Preservation Foundation and budget for
                 at least one Planning Commission member to attend one conference/
                 workshop per year related to historic preservation.
Strategy 3.d - Obtain and/or develop informational brochures/ guides on preservation
                 incentives, protection of historic resources, and the design review process to
                 assist property owners.
GOAL 4
Guide new development design and context to be compatible with existing historic resources,
community character and livability of Ferndale. This guidance will minimize potential for
demolition of existing structures and sites through preservation practices.
Policy 4.1 - Support and encourage new construction that is compatible in scale and
              character with nearby cultural resources and historic districts.
Policy 4.2 - Effectively utilize the City’s Design Review process when permitting projects in
              the Design control combining zone. This process includes clear review and
              appeal procedures.
Policy 4.3 - Evaluate the need for a demolition permitting process. Take into consideration
              potential impacts resulting from demolition of historic resources and potential
              added expense and regulatory delay in issuing demolition permits.
Implementation Strategies
Strategy 4.a - Develop guidelines for new construction within the Main Street Historic
               District.
Strategy 4.b - Review demolition history within the City and determine if a demolition
               permit process should be established. Set clear review standards and establish
               findings required for demolition approval within the Design control zone.
City of Ferndale                                  4-4           Historical & Cultural Resources Element
Adopted May 2012                                                     Goals, Policies and Implementation

5.0 REFERENCES
[Anonymous]. 2010 July 25. Museum to receive Kinman artifacts. Times Standard, Eureka
CA.
Bernstein, Richard A., editor. 2002. A guide to smart growth and cultural resource
planning. Wisconsin Historical Society, Division of Historic Preservation.
<http://www.wisconsinhistory.org/hp/smartgrowth/SmartGrowthGuide.pdf>. Accessed
2012 January 12.
Ferndale Chamber of Commerce. 2011. Heritage and history, Victorian village of Ferndale.
<http://www.victorianferndale.com/history.htm>. Accessed March 14, 2011.
Genzoli, Marilyn. 1994. The Victorian homes of Ferndale. Ferndale: Ferndale Museum.
Paradis, Tom. Architectural styles of America. <http://architecturestyles.org/
author/twparadis/>. Accessed March 29, 2011.
Wiyot Tribe. 2011. <http://www.wiyot.com/cultural>. Accessed March 13, 2011.
City of Ferndale                             5-1             Historic & Cultural Resources Element
Adopted May 2012                                                                        References
Additional References
California Office of Historic Preservation. 2004. Incentives for historic preservation in
California: Technical assistance series #15. California Department of Parks and Recreation.
<http://ohp.parks.ca.gov/pages/1054/files/IncentivesBulletin.pdf>. Revised June 2009.
Accessed March 2011.
City of Eureka. 2003. City of Eureka Historic Preservation Element.
City of Ferndale. 1986. City of Ferndale General Plan.
City of Fortuna. 2007. City of Fortuna General Plan Background Report.
Mason, Randall. 2005. Economics and historic preservation: A guide and review of the
literature. University of Pennsylvania.
National Park Service. 1995. Secretary of the Interior’s standards for the treatment of
historic properties with guidelines for treatment of cultural landscapes. U.S. Department of
the Interior, National Park Service.
City of Ferndale                              5-2            Historic & Cultural Resources Element
Adopted May 2012                                                                        References

                        Appendix A -
A Glossary of Terms as used in the California Register of Historical
         Resources (Title 14, Chapter 11.5, Appendix A)
    A Glossary of Terms as used in the California Register of
    Historical Resources (Title 14, Chapter 11.5, Appendix A)
                                                   -A-
    Archeological District. An area defined by a significant concentration, linkage, or
continuity of sites.
    Archeological Site. A bounded area of a resource containing archeological deposits or
features that is defined in part by the character and location of such deposits or features.
    The Archeological Resources Protection Act of 1979 (16 U.S.C. 470aa). Provides for
protection of terrestrial and submerged archeological resources.                Authorizes criminal
prosecution for the excavation, removal, or damage of archeological resources on public or
Indian lands without appropriate permit. Governs the transportation of illegally obtained
materials, access to information, and the permitting process.
                                                   -B-
    Boundaries. Lines delineating the geographical extent or area of an historical resource.
    Building. A resource, such as a house, barn, church, factory, hotel, or similar structure,
created principally to shelter or assist in carrying out any form of human activity. Also, used to
refer to an historically and functionally related unit, such as a courthouse and jail or a house
and barn.
                                                   -C-
    California Historical Resources Information System (CHRIS). That collection of Site
Records, Historic Resource Inventory Forms, and all information on historical resources which
has been acquired and managed by the State Office of Historic Preservation since 1975. This
shall include the State Historic Resources Inventory, the California Archaeological Site
Inventory, properties listed in the National Register of Historic Places, California Registered
Historical Landmarks, California Points of Historical Interest, and the California Register of
Historical Resources.
    Conservation Easement. A less than fee simple interest in real property recorded as a
deed restriction which is designed to protect the historic, cultural, archeological, or ecological
characteristics of a property.        For purposes of the regulations in this chapter, it is
interchangeable with the term “Preservation Easement.”
    Cultural Heritage. Pertaining to the sum total of traditions, body of knowledge, etc.,
inherited as possessions, characteristics, or conditions expressing a traditional way of life
subject to gradual, but continuous modifications by succeeding generations.
    Cultural Resource. See Historical Resource.
    Culture. A linkage of people possessing shared values, beliefs, and historical associations
coupling social institutions and physical materials necessary for collective survival.
                                                   -D-
    Disclosure, archeological site. To make available any records that pertain to an
archeological site. However, “archeological site disclosure” need not take place if the
nomination of a resource to the California Register requires making known any records which
relate to archeological site information when those records are maintained by either the
Department of Parks and Recreation or the State Historical Resources Commission.
    District. A geographic area which possesses a significant concentration, linkage, or
continuity of sites, buildings, areas, structures, or objects which are united historically,
culturally, or aesthetically by plan, history, or physical development. For purposes of the
regulations in this chapter, this term is interchangeable with “Historic District.”
                                               82                                          10/28/99

     DPR Form 422. Department of Parks and Recreation Archeological Resources Inventory
Form Number 422.
     DPR Form 523. Department of Parks and Recreation Historic Resources Inventory Form
Number 523.
                                                      -E-
     Evaluation. A process carried out by the State Historical Resource Commission whereby
the significance and integrity of an historical resource is judged, thereby determining its
eligibility for listing.
                                                      -F-
     Footprint. The form or pattern made by the perimeter of a building or other resource.
Often used in connection with sketch maps or boundaries. A sketch map may show the
footprint of historic resources as they are found on a parcel of land.
     Formally Determined Eligible for Listing. An historical resource shall be considered
“formally determined eligible for listing” when the State Historical Resources Commission
accepts the nomination of the historical resource and designates the property as eligible for
listing in the California Register.
                                                      -G-
     Geographical Area. An area of land containing historical or archeological resources that
can be identified on a map and delineated by boundaries.
                                                      -H-
     Historic Context. An organizing structure for interpreting history that groups information
about historical resources sharing a common theme, geographical area, or chronology. The
development of “historic context” is a foundation for decisions regarding the planning,
identification, evaluation, registration, and treatment of historical resources based upon
comparative historic significance.
     Historic District. A geographic area which contains a concentration of historic buildings,
structures, or sites united historically, culturally, or architecturally. “Historic districts” are defined
by precise geographic boundaries. Therefore, “historic districts” with unusual boundaries
require a description of what lies immediately outside the area in order to define the edge of
the district and to explain the exclusion of adjoining areas.
     Historic Fabric. (1) With regard to an historic building, “historic fabric” means the
particular materials, ornamentation, and architectural features which are consistent with the
historic character of the building. (2) With regard to an historic district, “historic fabric” means
all sites, buildings, structures, features, objects, landscaping, street elements, and related
design components of the district which are consistent with the historic character of the district.
(3) With regard to an archeological district, “historic fabric” means sites, standing structures or
buildings, historic landscape (land disturbance such as grading or construction), features
(remnants of walls), and objects (artifacts) which are consistent with the historic character of
the district.
     Historic Integrity. The ability of a resource to convey its historical significance.
     Historic Resources Inventory Form (DPR Form 523). A document which describes the
characteristics and locations of buildings, structures, objects, and districts recorded for
inclusion in an Historic Resources Inventory.
     Historical Landmarks. See State Historical Landmark.
     Historical Resource. Any object, building, structure, site, area, place, record, or
manuscript which is historically or archaeologically significant, or which is significant in the
architectural, engineering, scientific, economic, agricultural, educational, social, political,
military, or cultural history of California.
                                                83                                                 10/28/99

     Historical Resources Inventory. A set of data, such as a list of historical resources,
generated through an Historical Resources Survey.
     Historical Resources Survey. The process of systematically identifying, researching,
photographing, and documenting historical resources within a defined geographic area.
                                                      -I-
     Identification.     The process by which information is gathered regarding historical
resources.
     Information Center. See Regional Information Center.
                                                     -L-
     Landscape, Cultural. A geographic area that (1) has been used, shaped, or modified by
human activity, occupation, intervention; or (2) possesses significant value in the belief system
of a culture or society.
     Landscape, Designed. A geographic area that (1) has significance as a design or work of
art; (2) was consciously designed and laid out by (a) a designer according to academic or
professional design standards, theories, or philosophies of landscape architecture; or (b) by an
amateur using a recognized style or tradition; (3) has an historical association with a significant
person, trend, or event in landscape gardening or landscape architecture; or (4) has a
significant relationship to the theory or practice of landscape architecture.
     Landscape, Rural. A geographic area that (1) has historically been shaped or modified by
human activity, occupancy, or intervention; (2) possesses a significant concentration, linkage,
or continuity of areas of land use, vegetation, buildings or structures, roads or waterways, or
natural features; or (3) provides a sense of place.
     Listed. A California Register historical resource shall be considered “listed” when (1) the
State Historical Resources Commission, after reviewing the nomination of the historical
resource, accepts it for listing in the California Register; or (2) it has been automatically “listed”
under Public Resources Code Section 5024.1 (d)(1) & (2).
     Local government. A public agency with land-use control authority over a designated
historical resource. Local governments may include special district, tribal, city, or county
governments.
                                                     -M-
     Manuscript. (1) Bodies or groups of personal papers. (2) Collections of documents
acquired from various sources according to a plan. (3) Individual documents acquired by a
manuscripts repository because of their special importance. (Society of American Archivists)
                                                   -N-
     National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA). (42 U.S.C. 4321-4347 (1969)
(amended)). Created a process by which to analyze significant environmental impacts,
including impacts to historical resources, for federally funded or licensed actions.
     National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (NHPA). (16 U.S.C. 470 (1966) (amended)).
Established the National Register of Historic Places. Created a partnership between federal,
state, and local agencies to extend the national historic preservation programs to properties of
state and local significance.
     National Register Criteria. The federally established standards for evaluating the
eligibility of properties for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places.
     National Register of Historic Places, The. (16 U.S.C. 470a, 36 C.F.R. Parts 60, 63). The
official inventory of districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects significant in American
history, architecture, archeology, and culture which is maintained by the Secretary of the
Interior under the authority of the Historic Sites Act of 1935 (16 U.S.C. 461-467 (1935)
                                                84                                           10/28/99

(amended)) and the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (16 U.S.C. 470 (1966)
(amended)).
    Nomination.        A formal application, submitted to the State Historical Resources
Commission, for listing an historical resource on the California Register of Historical
Resources.
                                                     -O-
    Object. Manifestations that are primarily artistic in nature, or are relatively small in scale
and simply constructed. The “object” may be a fixture (real property) or movable (personal
property). Although it may be movable by nature or design, an object must be associated with
a specific setting or environment. The “object” should be in a setting appropriate to its
significant historical use, role, or character; for example, a fountain or boundary marker.
    Officer. The State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) is appointed by the Governor
under the authority of Public Resources Code Section 5020.6. The SHPO serves as the Chief
Administrative Officer of the Office of Historic Preservation and Executive Secretary of the
State Historical Resources Commission. The SHPO administers state and federally mandated
historic preservation programs under the authority of the National Historic Preservation Act of
1966, Section 101 (b)(3), (16 U.S.C. 470 (1966) (amended)) and Cal. Pub. Res. Code Section
5024.
    Owner. Those individuals, partnerships, corporations, or public agencies holding fee
simple title to a resource. The term does not include individuals, partnerships, corporations, or
public agencies holding easements or less than fee simple interests, including leaseholds.
                                                     -P-
    Penal Code, Section 622.5. Provides misdemeanor penalties for every person, other than
the owner, who injures or destroys objects of historical or archeological interest located on
public or private lands.
    Point of Historical Interest. The California Point of Historical Interest Program (Cal. Pub.
Res. Code Section 5021) is a state historical resources registration program, established in
1965, which provides official recognition for historical resources that are significant at a county
or regional level, but do not qualify for designation as California Registered Historical
Landmarks.
    Preservation (treatment). The act or process of applying measures to sustain the existing
form, integrity, or historic fabric of an historical building or structure, or the form or vegetative
cover of an historic site. It may include stabilization work, as well as ongoing maintenance of
the historic fabric.
    Preservation Commission. A city or county board of appointed citizens with assigned
responsibilities for surveying, designating, and protecting historical resources. May also be
called an historic review board, design review board, landmarks commission, or cultural
heritage commission.
    Primary Number. The number used to identify and retrieve records regarding a specific
site in the California Historical Resources Information System. The Primary Number describes
the location of a resource in the same manner as a Site Trinomial Number.
    Protection (treatment). The act or process of applying measures to affect the physical
condition of an historical resource by guarding it from deterioration, loss, or attack by natural
causes, or to cover or shield it from threat of danger or harm. In the case of buildings or
structures, these measures are usually temporary; however, with regard to archeological
resources, protective measures may be temporary or permanent.
    Public Resources Code, Section 5097.5. Defines as a misdemeanor the unauthorized
disturbance or removal of archeological, historical, or paleontological resources located on
public lands.
                                                     -R-
                                               85                                             10/28/99

    Reconstruction (treatment). The act or process of reproducing through construction the
exact form and detail of a vanished building, structure, or object, or any part thereof, as it
appeared at a specified period of time.
    Recordation. Section 27288.2 of the Government Code and Section 5029 of the Public
Resources Code require the County Recorder to record a certified resolution of historical
resources designation containing the name of the current property owner, the historical
resources registration program, the designating entity, the specific historical resources
designation, and a legal description of the property.
    Regional Information Center.           An Information Center of the California Historical
Resources Information System, under contract to the Office of Historic Preservation, which
receives, manages, and provides information on historical and archeological resources. “An
Information Center” may also provide training or technical assistance on a fee-for-service
basis.
    Registration. A program by which an historic resource is documented, evaluated, and
determined eligible or nominated for listing as a type of historical resource. Such programs
may be local, state, or national.
    Rehabilitation (treatment). The act or process of returning a property to a state of utility
through repair or alteration which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while
preserving those portions or features of the property which are significant to its historical,
architectural, and cultural values.
    Research Design.          Reveals the logic that will be used to direct identification,
documentation, investigation, analysis, or treatment of an historical resource that identifies the
goals, methods and techniques, potential results, and the relationship of the potential results to
other proposed activities or treatments.
    Resource, Contributing. A resource which by location, design, setting materials,
workmanship, feeling, and association adds to the sense of historical authenticity, historical
development, or value of an historical resource.
    Resource, Non Contributing. An historical resource which does not add to the sense of
historical authenticity or evolution of an historic property or where the location, design, setting,
materials, workmanship, history, and/or association of the historical resource have been so
altered or deteriorated that the overall integrity of that resource has been irretrievably lost.
    Restoration (treatment). The act or process of reproducing the exact form and detail of a
vanished building, structure, or object, or a part thereof, as it appeared at a specific period of
time.
                                                    -S-
    Secretary of Interior Standards. Identified in the Secretary of the Interior Standards
and Guidelines for Historic Preservation Projects (36 C.F.R.67), with accompanying
interpretive guidelines, which are utilized by federal agencies in the preservation of historical
properties that are listed, or are eligible for listing, on the National Register. They are also
used by some State Historic Preservation Offices in evaluating projects proposed as historical
resources in accordance with federal regulations; or by local governments, organizations, and
individuals in making decisions about the identification, evaluation, registration, or treatment of
historic properties. The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation is aimed at
retaining and preserving those features and materials which are important in defining the
historic character of an historical resource. Technical advice about archeological and historic
preservation activities and methods is also included in the Secretary of the Interior’s
Standards and Guidelines for Archeology and Historic Preservation.
    Site. A location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a
building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself
possesses historical, cultural, or archeological value regardless of the value of any existing
building, structure, or object. A “site” need not be marked by physical remains if it is the
location of a prehistoric or historic event and if no buildings, structures, or objects marked it at
                                              86                                               10/28/99

that time. Examples include trails, designed landscapes, battlefields, habitation sites, Native
American ceremonial areas, petroglyphs, and pictographs.
     Site Record. A document which describes the characteristics and location of a site, and
which has been completed for entry in the California Archaeological Site Inventory.
     Site Trinomial Number. A site registration number assigned by the Office of Historic
Preservation to a specific archeological resource under which all documentation for that
resource will be recorded.
     Stabilization (treatment). The act or process of applying measures designed to establish
a weather resistant enclosure and the structural stability of an unsafe or deteriorated property,
or one which has the potential to deteriorate or to become unsafe, while maintaining the
essential form as it exists at present.
     State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO). See Officer.
     State Historic Resources Inventory. Compilation of all identified and evaluated historical
resources maintained by the State Office of Historic Preservation. It includes all those
historical resources evaluated in surveys that were conducted in accordance with criteria
established by the Office (see Appendix B) and were thereafter determined eligible for, or
listed in, the National Register of Historic Places or designated as California Registered
Historical Landmarks, California Points of Historical Interest, or the California Register of
Historical Resources.
     State Historical Building Code (SHBC). The State Historical Building Code is contained
in Part 8 of Title 24 (State Building Standards Code) and applies to all qualified historical
structures, districts, and sites designated under federal, state, or local authority. It provides
alternatives to the Uniform Building Code in cases consistent with building regulations for the
rehabilitation, preservation, restoration, or relocation of qualified historic structures designated
as historic buildings.
     State Historical Landmarks. The California Registered Historical Landmarks Program
(Cal. Pub. Res. Code Section 5021) is a state historical resources registration program which
was created in 1949 to recognize historical resources with regional and statewide significance
to the history of California.
     State Historical Resources Commission (SHRC). Commission appointed by the
Governor under Public Resources Code Section 5020.4 and 5020.5. The SHRC has broad
responsibilities for the statewide historic preservation program that include conducting a
statewide inventory of historical resources, establishing criteria for evaluating historical
resources, and conducting public hearings to develop and review a statewide historical
resources plan.
     Statement of Significance. An organizational format which groups information about
related historical resources based on theme, geographic units, and chronological period. The
information should describe why the resource is significant within a relevant historic context.
     Structure. A construction made for a functional purpose rather than creating human
shelter. Examples of structures include mines, bridges, and tunnels.
                                                 -T-
     Tax Certification. A provision of federal tax law which, under certain conditions, allows
money invested in capital rehabilitation to be deducted from income taxes owed. See those
provisions for certified National Register structures which are included in the Economic
Recovery Act of 1981 (Internal Revenue Code Sections 48, 168, 170, and 280B).
     Traditional Cultural Properties. A geographic area or historical resource that embodies
important cultural values. It may contain landscape characteristics that are the tangible
evidence of the activities and habits of the people who occupied, developed, and shaped the
land to serve their needs, or it may include several categories of properties. It may also
contain, or consist primarily of, natural features which are important in a religious or belief
system.
                                              87                                             10/28/99
                                              -U-
    UTM Coordinates. A set of metric coordinates (easting and northing) that indicate a
unique location according to the Universal Transverse Mercator grid appearing on maps of
the United States Geological Survey.
                                         88                                       10/28/99
                   Appendix B -
Online Resources for Historic Preservation in California
   (California OHP Technical Assistance Series #11)
STATE OF CALIFORNIA – THE RESOURCES AGENCY                                                      GRAY DAVIS, Governor
OFFICE OF HISTORIC PRESERVATION
DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION
P.O. BOX 942896
SACRAMENTO, CA 94296-0001
(916) 653-6624 Fax: (916) 653-9824
calshpo@ohp.parks.ca.gov
                                California Office of Historic Preservation
                                      Technical Assistance Series #11
                Online Resources for Historic Preservation In California
                                                   State Agencies
                                   California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Web
                                                www.ceres.ca.gov/ceqa/
           The CEQA Web is a cooperative effort among the Resources Agency, its CERES and
           LUPIN programs (see below) and the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research (see
           below). The site provides valuable information for planners, consultants, attorneys, and
           citizens with an interest in CEQA. Its offerings include CEQA Statute and Guidelines,
           an interactive process flow chart, a case law search, a directory of CEQA judges,
           answers to frequently asked questions, and more.
                         California Environmental Resources Evaluation System (CERES)
                                                   www.ceres.ca.gov
           CERES is an information system developed by the California Resources Agency to
           facilitate access to a variety of electronic data describing California's rich and diverse
           environments. The goal of CERES is to improve environmental analysis and planning
           by integrating natural and cultural resource information from multiple contributors and by
           making it available and useful to a wide variety of users. This site contains a wealth of
           environmental data, searchable by organization, geographical area, theme, and data
           type. It also contains information about environmental law and education.
                            California Historical Resources Information System (CHRIS)
                                         www.ohp.parks.ca.gov/chris/index.htm
           CHRIS is a statewide system for managing information on the full range of historical
           resources identified in California. CHRIS is a cooperative partnership between the
           citizens of California, historic preservation professionals, eleven Information Centers,
           the CHRIS Hub, and various agencies. Information Centers provide archeological and
           historical resources information to local governments and individuals with environmental
           review responsibilities. This site contains a listing of the Information Centers and
           contact information for each as well as CHRIS publications, including the Information
           Center Procedural Manual.
                             California Land Use Planning Information Network (LUPIN)
                                              www.ceres.ca.gov/planning/
           LUPIN, a program of the California Resources Agency, is an information service that
           supports and addresses land use and planning issues via the Internet. The site
           contains a listing of planning, zoning, and development laws, links to city and county
           zoning ordinances, and information on topics such as demographics.
                                                         1                                        10/22/01

                                    California Main Street
                   commerce.ca.gov/business/community/mainstreet/
In 1985, California joined a growing national movement to improve the quality of life in
America’s towns, cities and neighborhoods by restoring the economic health of Main
Streets--historic, traditionally designed central business districts. Since its birth,
California Main Street, a program of the California Trade and Commerce Agency, has
provided superior state-level leadership on revitalization techniques using the Main
Street Approach to revitalization. This site has a information on becoming a Main Street
community, training opportunities, and other resources.
                     California Office of Historic Preservation (OHP)
                                   www.ohp.parks.ca.gov
The OHP is the governmental agency primarily responsible for the statewide
administration of the historic preservation program in California. The OHP website
contains useful information about OHP programs, such as survey and inventory, local
government, registration programs, environmental review and compliance, incentives,
and grants and funding sources. It also provides information about the State Historical
Resources Commission and the California Historical Resources Information System
(see above).
     Division of the State Architect (DSA)/State Historical Building Safety Board
                                           (SHBSB)
                                       www.dsa.ca.gov
The DSA acts as California's policy leader for building design and construction and
provides design and construction oversight for K-12 schools and community colleges.
DSA also develops and maintains the accessibility standards and codes utilized in
public and private buildings throughout California. DSA incorporates the offices of the
independent SHBSB, caretaker of California's State Historical Building Code (SHBC).
The DSA site contains inspector information, project tracking lists, code change
updates, and more. The SHBC portion of the site also has reports on various aspects
of the code, such as fire protection, public safety, additions and expansions, and
seismic repair and upgrading.
  Governor’s Office of Planning & Research (OPR)/California State Clearinghouse
                                             (SCH)
                                      www.opr.ca.gov/
The OPR provides research staff to the Governor, conducts comprehensive statewide
planning, facilitates interagency coordination, provides local agency planning
assistance, and manages state environmental review processes. The SCH has three
primary functions: coordination of state agency review of environmental documents;
coordination of state and local review of federal grant applications; and technical
assistance on land use planning and CEQA matters. This site contains the SCH’s
CEQAnet database, information on SCH’s role in federal grant review processes, and
information on other OPR programs, such as the Innovation in Government and
Americorps programs.
                                     Federal Agencies
                                               2                                       10/22/01

        Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (ACHP)/Section 106 Review
                                       www.achp.gov/
The ACHP is an independent Federal agency that provides a forum for influencing
Federal activities, programs, and policies as they affect historic resources. The goal of
the National Historic Preservation Act, which established the ACHP in 1966, is to have
Federal agencies act as responsible stewards of our Nation's resources when their
actions affect historic properties. The ACHP is the only entity with the legal
responsibility to balance historic preservation concerns with Federal project
requirements. Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 requires
Federal agencies to take into account the effects of their undertakings on historic
properties and afford the ACHP a reasonable opportunity to comment. The historic
preservation review process mandated by Section 106 is outlined in regulations issued
by the ACHP. This site has news important to the ACHP and its constituents,
information on the Section 106 process, training and education sources, a listing of
publications, including Section 106 case law, and a listing of federal, state, and tribal
program contacts.
                           Heritage Preservation Services
                                     www2.cr.nps.gov/
Heritage Preservation Services, National Park Service, helps our nation's citizens and
communities identify, evaluate, protect, and preserve historic properties for future
generations of Americans. Located in Washington, D.C. within the National Center for
Cultural Resources, the Division provides a broad range of products and services,
financial assistance and incentives, educational guidance, and technical information in
support of this mission. Its diverse partners include State Historic Preservation Offices,
local governments, tribes, federal agencies, colleges, and non-profit organizations. This
site is a wealth of information, including all you need to know about the Secretary’s
Standards, the rehabilitation tax credit program, the Certified Local Government
program, and more (be sure to visit the HPS Classroom section). It also has many
useful publications, including the Preservation Briefs series.
      Historic American Building Survey/Historic American Engineering Record
                                        (HABS/HAER)
                                www.cr.nps.gov/habshaer/
HABS/HAER is an integral component of the federal government's commitment to
historic preservation. The program documents important architectural, engineering, and
industrial sites throughout the United States and its territories. A complete set of
HABS/HAER documentation, consisting of measured drawings, large-format
photographs, and written history, plays a key role in accomplishing the mission of
creating an archive of American architecture and engineering and in better
understanding what historic resources tell us about America's diverse ethnic and
cultural heritage. To ensure that such evidence is not lost to future generations, the
HABS/HAER Collections are archived at the Library of Congress, where they are made
available to the public. This site has information on highlighted projects, drawings and
photographs, different levels of documentation, and more, as well as a collections list for
previously documented buildings and structures.
                        National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA)
                            ceq.eh.doe.gov/nepa/nepanet.htm
NEPA is the nation’s broadest environmental law, put in place in 1970. It establishes
                                               3                                      10/22/01

environmental policy for the nation, provides an interdisciplinary framework for federal
agencies to prevent environmental damage, and contains “action-forcing” procedures to
ensure that federal agency decision-makers consider the effects their decisions will
have on the environment. This site contains NEPA procedures, statute, and related
executive orders, as well as information on the Council for Environmental Quality
(CEQ), points of contact, and links to federal agency sites.
                    National Park Service (NPS)/Cultural Resources
                                      www.cr.nps.gov/
The NPS preserves unimpaired the natural and cultural resources and values of the
national park system for the enjoyment, education, and inspiration of this and future
generations. The NPS cooperates with partners to extend the benefits of natural and
cultural resource conservation and outdoor recreation throughout this country and the
world. The NPS site has a Tools for Learning section, a History in the Parks section,
information on grants and assistance, and a host of other information sources.
                       National Register of Historic Places (NRHP)
                                    www.cr.nps.gov/nr/
The NRHP is the Nation's official list of cultural resources worthy of preservation.
Authorized under the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, NRHP is part of a
national program to coordinate and support public and private efforts to identify,
evaluate, and protect our historic and archeological resources. The NRHP is
administered by the National Park Service, which is part of the U.S. Department of the
Interior. This site contains the NRHP listing of designated properties (National Register
Information Service), travel itineraries, theme studies and information on the National
Historic Landmark program, and the invaluable National Register bulletins, as well as
other publications.
                    Advocacy and Professional Organizations
                          American Planning Association (APA)
                                     www.planning.org/
The APA and its professional institute, the American Institute of Certified Planners
(AICP), are organized to advance the art and science of planning and to foster the
activity of planning -- physical, economic, and social -- at the local, regional, state, and
national levels. The objective of the APA is to encourage planning that will contribute to
public well-being by developing communities and environments that meet the needs of
people and society more effectively. This site provides information on the AICP exam,
federal planning legislation, educational opportunities, and much more.
              California Chapter American Planning Association (CCAPA)
                                      www.calapa.org/
The CCAPA links planners statewide and nationwide through the American Planning
Association. Through this linkage, members obtain the latest information about
planning, unite to influence legislative issues, and further professional expertise through
conferences, meetings and workshops. The site has updates on the CCAPA annual
conference, information on taking the American Institute of Certified Planners
examination, planning legislation news, and a section for local news.
                                              4                                         10/22/01

                California Council for the Promotion of History (CCPH)
                                 www.csus.edu/org/ccph/
CCPH is a statewide nonprofit organization founded in 1977. CCPH members
represent almost every area of historical activity in California including historians
working for public agencies, historians working in the private sector, academic
historians, archivists, museum professionals, preservation specialists, teachers and
students. The role of CCPH is to foster, facilitate, and coordinate efforts that advance
the preservation, interpretation, and management of California's historical resources
and to enhance the application of history skills in the public and private sectors. The
site contains information about CCPH programs, including its annual conference, the
Register of Professional Historians, a mini-grants program, awards, and more.
                        California Preservation Foundation (CPF)
                             www.californiapreservation.org
CPF is a statewide, non-profit organization dedicated to the preservation and
enhancement of California's historic resources. CPF emerged in response to the need
for a statewide organization that could focus on issues common to all and provide the
cohesive and vital link between state, regional, and local preservation interests. CPF is
a statewide network of its members: individuals, businesses, organizations, and local
governments long committed to historic preservation. Through this network CPF serves
as a clearinghouse for preservation ideas, technical information, and advice, available
to all. The site contains information about CPF’s programs, such as their annual
conference and awards, and publications, whose topics range from building code
issues, to disaster management, to award-winning design solutions.
                National Alliance of Preservation Commissions (NAPC)
                         www.arches.uga.edu/~napc/index.htm
The NAPC builds strong local preservation programs through education, training, and
advocacy. The NAPC is a private, non-profit 501(c)(3) corporation, governed by a
Board of Directors whose members must have direct associations with preservation
commissions. This site contains answers to frequently asked questions, information on
the NAPC’s educational programs, and updates on their bi-annual forum.
          National Council of State Historic Preservation Officers (NCSHPO)
                                   www.sso.org/ncshpo/
The NCSHPO is the professional association of the State government officials who
carry out the national historic preservation program as delegatees of the Secretary of
the Interior pursuant to the National Historic Preservation Act (16 USC 470). The
NCSHPO acts as a communications vehicle among the State Historic Preservation
Officers and their staffs and represents the SHPOs with federal agencies and national
preservation organizations. The National Historic Preservation Act names the NCSHPO
as the point of contact for the State Historic Preservation Officers. The site has updates
on the Historic Preservation Fund, which funds the programs mandated by the National
Historic Preservation Act, a database of state preservation legislation, and a listing of
State Historic Preservation Officers.
                           National Preservation Institute (NPI)
                                       www.npi.org/
The NPI is a nonprofit organization offering specialized information, continuing
education, and professional training for the management, development, and
                                             5                                        10/22/01

preservation of historic, cultural, and environmental resources. Visit this site for an NPI
seminars list, a helpful materials listing, and information on NEPA (see above).
                    National Trust for Historic Preservation (NTHP)
                                        www.nthp.org
The NTHP provides leadership, education, and advocacy to save America's diverse
historic places and revitalize our communities. The NTHP site has a wealth of
information about the organization’s programs, including the well-known 11 Most
Endangered Places listing and the National Main Street Center, and publications, from
books to reports to pamphlets.
                        Society for California Archaeology (SCA)
                                      www.scanet.org/
SCA is a nonprofit scientific and educational organization dedicated to research,
understanding, interpretation, and conservation of California's heritage. Membership is
open to everyone with an interest in California archaeology. This site contains valuable
research links, legislative updates, educational opportunities, and information on SCA
programs, including California Archaeology Month.
                                              6                                       10/22/01

                                   Appendix C -
             Incentives for Historic Preservation in California
             (California OHP Technical Assistance Series #15)
NOTE: Preface and Table of Contents included here; the entire document is available for
 reference at Ferndale City Hall, 834 Main Street, Ferndale CA 95536 and on the City’s
                     website http://ci.ferndale.ca.us/index.html)

              15
                                             Technical Assistance Series
California Office of Historic Preservation                                  Incentives
                                                                                for
   Department of Parks & Recreation
                                                                             Historic
                                                                           Preservation
              1416 9th St,
               Rm 1442-7
          Sacramento CA 95814
                     PO Box 942896
                     Sacramento CA
                      94296-0001
                        phone:
                    (916) 653-6624
                          fax:
                    (916) 653-9824
          calshpo@parks.ca.gov
         www.ohp.parks.ca.gov
                                              INCENTIVES
                                                             FOR
                   HISTORIC PRESERVATION
                                        IN CALIFORNIA
          CALIFORNIA OFFICE OF HISTORIC PRESERVATION
                         TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE SERIES #15
This publication has been financed in part with Federal funds from the National Park Service, Department of the Interior, under the
National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, and administered by the California Office of Historic Preservation. The
contents and opinions do not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the Department of the Interior, nor does the mention of trade
names or commercial products constitute endorsement or recommendation by the Department of the Interior. Under Title VI of the
Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the U.S. Department of the Interior strictly prohibits
unlawful discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, or handicap in its federally- assisted programs. If you believe
you have been discriminated against in any program, activity, or facility as described above, or if you desire further information,
please write to Office for Equal Opportunity, U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service, Box 37127, Washington DC
20013-7127.
                                © 2004 by the California Department of Parks and Recreation
                                                   Office of Historic Preservation
                                                       Sacramento, California
                                                           All rights reserved
                                                             23 June 2004
                                                          revised 5 June 2009

                                         Preface
The programs listed in this document will assist anyone interested in the field of historic
preservation to locate funding and incentives available to qualified historic properties.
Some of the programs are incentive based while others rely on a designated funding
source, or on a commitment from an overseeing jurisdiction. Certain program funding
may be based on annual budgets at the federal, state, or local levels, while others are
ongoing programs involving credits or abatements. Programs may also be regulatory or
code driven.
This document includes the Worldwide Web addresses for each listed program.
Readers are advised to visit the web sites for contact information including address,
phone and fax numbers, in-depth background, and for up-to-date information on the
listed incentives and programs.
OHP wishes to thank the following individuals for contributing to the compilation of this
document. Staff members Jeanette Schulz, Bob Mackensen, Cheri Stanton, and Tim
Brandt served as coordinators for formulation and content. Marie Nelson formatted the
document for posting on the OHP web page. Additional OHP reviewers included
Stephen Mikesell, Hans Kreutzberg, Eugene Itogawa, and Lucinda Woodward. Outside
reviewers included Laura Westrup from the California State Parks Planning Division,
Gail Ostergren from the Getty Conservation Institute, and Christine Fedukowski from
the National Trust for Historic Preservation.
NOTE: Information provided is for general information only, and does not constitute
legal advice or opinion in any way. As these laws and regulations change over time and
may leave room for interpretation, you are urged to consult your attorney regarding
specific legal questions you may have. Every effort has been made to provide up-to-
date and correct information. If errors in text and/or content are found, please alert the
Office of Historic Preservation (OHP) as soon as possible.
For more information or additional copies contact:
California Department of Parks and Recreation
Office of Historic Preservation
ATTN: Tax Incentives Program
P.O. Box 942896
Sacramento, California 94296-0001
(916) 653-6624
(916) 653-9824 fax
E-mail: calshpo@parks.ca.gov
                               TABLE OF CONTENTS
PREFACE
1.      FEDERAL INCENTIVES
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (ACHP)
Community Development Block Grants (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development
Preservation Tax Incentives for Historic Buildings (National Park Service)
• 20% Rehabilitation Tax Credit
• 10% Rehabilitation Tax Credit
• Charitable Contributions (Easements)
• Investment Tax Credit for Low Income Housing (Affordable Housing)
TEA-21: Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act (ISTEA)
United States Small Business Administration (SBA)
2.      STATE INCENTIVES
California Heritage Fund (Proposition 40)
Certified Local Government Grants (CLG)
Earthquake Retrofit Programs (state and local)
Marks Historical Rehabilitation Act
Mills Act Property Tax Abatement Program
Seismic Bond Act
Williamson Act Program
3.      LOCAL INCENTIVES
Introduction: Local Incentives
Adaptive Reuse Ordinances
Business Improvement Districts
Planning and Zoning
Additional Local Incentives
4.      ALTERNATIVE INCENTIVES: Grants, Loans, Credits, and Deductions
Americans with Disability Act (ADA) and Tax Incentives
• Disabled Access Tax Credit (26 USC 44)
• Expenditures to Remove Architectural and Transportation Barriers to the
    Handicapped and Elderly, as amended (26 USC 190)

National Endowment for the Arts (NEA)
• Grants for Arts Projects
National Endowment for the Humanities Grants (NEH)
National Trust for Historic Preservation
• National Main Street Center
• National Trust Loan Funds
• Preservation Development Initiative
• Tax Credit Equity Investments
   - Banc of America Historic Tax Credit Fund
   - National Trust Small Deal Fund
• Additional NTHP Programs
National Trust for Historic Preservation Forum Funds
• Cynthia Woods Mitchell Fund
• Johanna Favrot Fund
• Preservation Services Fund
Partners for Sacred Places
Save America’s Treasures (SAT)
5.     CODES AND REGULATIONS
California Historical Building Code (CHBC)
APPENDICES
A. Guidance for Successful Tax Applications
B. 2007-2008 Certified Federal Tax Projects

	
             City of Ferndale
                     General Plan
  Noise & Air Quality Elements
           Public Draft
            April 2016
	
                                        	
                                        	
                           City	of	Ferndale	
	
                             General	Plan	
                 NOISE	&	AIR	QUALITY	ELEMENTS	
	
	
                   Public	Draft	April	2016	
	
	
                                City	Council:	
                             Don	Hindley,	Mayor	
                                Ken	Mierzwa	
                              Michael	Sweeney	
                                Daniel	Brown	
                                Doug	Brower	
                                        	
                       Planning Commission:
                     Jorgen	Von	Frausing-Borch,	Chair	
                               Michael	Warner	
                                Dean	Nielsen	
                                Paul	Gregson	
                                  Ellin	Beltz	
                                        	
                                 City	Staff:	
                          Jay	Parrish,	City	Manager	
                         Jennifer	Church,	City	Clerk	
                    Kristene	Tavares,	Deputy	City	Clerk	
                                        	
                                        	
                                Prepared	by:	
                                        	
                                        	
                                        	
	
City	of	Ferndale                       ii             General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
                                               City	of	Ferndale,	California	
                                                                           	
                                                              General	Plan		
                                             Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
                                                           Table	of	Contents	
Chapter	1	–	Introduction		..........................................................................................................................	1-1	
Chapter	2	–	Definitions		............................................................................................................................	2-1	
Chapter	3	–	Setting	and	Context		..............................................................................................................	3-1	
Chapter	4	–	Noise	Characteristics	and	Sources		........................................................................................	4-1	
Chapter	5	–	Air	Quality	Characteristics		....................................................................................................	5-1	
Chapter	6	–	Goals,	Policies	and	Implementation	Programs		.....................................................................	6-1	
Chapter	7	–	References		............................................................................................................................	7-1	
List of Figures
Figure	1	–	Perception	of	Sound	.................................................................................................................	3-2	
Figure	2	–	Community	Noise	Exposure	.....................................................................................................	4-5	
Figure	3	–	Noise	Exposure	Adjustment	Factors	.........................................................................................	4-6	
Figure	4	–	Noise	Contour	Map	..................................................................................................................	4-7	
Figure	5	–	Government	Operations	CO2	Emissions	by	Sector	and	Source	.................................................	5-9	
List of Photographs
Main	Street,	Ferndale	..................................................................................................................	Front	Cover	
Ferndale’s	Connick	Ranch		........................................................................................................................	3-4	
                  https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AConnick_Ranch_Ferndale_CA.jpg	
State	Route	211	Sign	................................................................................................................................	4-1	
	         	       https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:California_State_Route_211.jpg	
Morning	on	the	Lost	Coast	.......................................................................................................................	5-1	
                  https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AMorning_on_the_Lost_Coast.jpg	
Sitka	Spruce	on	the	Mattole	Road	............................................................................................................	5-3	
                  https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ASitkaSpruseOnWildcatRoad.jpg
	
All	photographs	used	with	permission:	Ellin	Beltz,	Ferndale,	California	
	                                      	
City	of	Ferndale                                                         iii                         General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	

                                  	
                                  	
                                  	
                                  	
                                  	
                                  	
                                  	
                                  	
                                  	
                 This	page	intentionally	left	blank
City	of	Ferndale                iv                  General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
1.0 Introduction	
Noise	
The	City	of	Ferndale	is	interested	in	reducing	the	effects	of	excessive	and	harmful	noise	and	is	
updating	 the	 General	 Plan	 Noise	 Element.	 Noise	 is	 a	 quality	 of	 life	 issue	 of	 significant	
community	interest.	It	is	one	of	seven	mandated	General	Plan	elements	per	the	State	Office	of	
Planning	 and	 Research	 (OPR)	 General	 Plan	 Guidelines	 (2015).	 The	 previous	 Ferndale	 Plan	
Noise	 Element	 was	 a	 part	 of	 the	 1975	 Public	 Safety	 and	 Scenic	 Highway	 Element.	 Updated	
Element	 goals,	 policies	 and	 implementation	 measures	 will	 help	 minimize	 the	 community’s	
exposure	 to	 current	 noise	 issues.	 	 Additionally	 these	 can	 shield	 the	 community	 from	 noise	
created	 by	 community	 activity	 and	 development.	 Identifying	 existing	 and	 projected	 noise	
sources	is	also	an	effective	way	to	guide	decisions	on	land	use	patterns.		
Land	 use	 decisions	 can	 result	 in	 noise	 increases	 both	 directly	 (e.g.,	 from	 zoning	 of	 additional	
community	noise	sources)	and	indirectly	(e.g.,	from	vehicle	trips	associated	with	future	uses).	
Transportation	 improvements	 (such	 as	 road	 widening	 and	 extensions)	 can	 bring	 sources	 of	
traffic	 noise	 closer	 to	 existing	 or	 planned	 receptors.	 Sensitive	 receptors	 such	 as	 schools	 and	
health	and	senior	care	facilities	are	more	vulnerable	to	noise	impacts.		
The	 OPR	 Guidelines	 require	 that	 the	 Noise	 Element	 provide	 a	 basis	 for	 comprehensive	 local	
programs	 that	 control	 and	 abate	 environmental	 noise	 to	 protect	 citizens	 from	 excessive	
exposure.	This	Element	is	required	to	identify	and	appraise	noise	in	the	community	and	follow	
guidelines	 adopted	 by	 the	 Office	 of	 Noise	 Control	 in	 the	 State	 Department	 of	 Health	 Services.	
Local	 governments	 must	 analyze	 and	 quantify	 noise	 levels	 and	 the	 extent	 of	 noise	 exposure	
through	 actual	 measurements	 or	 the	 use	 of	 noise	 modeling.	 The	 Noise	 component	 of	 the	
Element	 defines	 types	 of	 noise	 including	 mobile	 and	 stationary	 sources	 and	 uses	 projections,	
contour	mapping	and	analysis	to	ensure	that	City	noise	standards	are	met.	
Air	Quality	
Although	 an	 Air	 Quality	 Element	 is	 not	 required,	 in	 recognition	 of	 the	 significant	 value	 the	
community	places	on	clean	air	the	City	has	chosen	to	include	one.	It	is	among	the	most	common	
optional	 General	 Plan	 elements	 throughout	 California,	 with	 state	 level	 guidance	 found	 in	 the	
OPR	General	Plan	Conservation	Element	Guidelines.	Several	mandatory	elements	also	regulate	
emissions	to	achieve	air	quality	benefits,	including	the	Land	Use,	Circulation,	Conservation	and	
Open	Space	These	elements	will	be	updated	at	a	later	date	and	including	an	Air	Quality	Element	
now	will	facilitate	the	updating	of	these	elements.	
The	 Air	 Quality	 component	 of	 this	 Element	 is	 a	 focus	 for	 General	 Plan	 air	 quality	 policy,	
integrating	 related	 land	 use,	 transportation	 and	 circulation,	 transit,	 safety,	 and	 energy	 issues.	
The	 Air	 Quality	 component's	 policies	 and	 programs	 are	 intended	 to	 improve	 air	 quality	 and	
encourage	 cooperation	 with	 other	 jurisdictions	 involved	 in	 regional	 air	 quality	 improvement	
efforts.	
In	addition	to	general	air	quality	issues,	this	component	discusses	climate	change.	The	potential	
effects	of	climate	change	are	extensive,	have	been	well	publicized,	and	are	generally	accepted	
  City	of	Ferndale	                                   1-1	           General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
  DRAFT	April	2016	                                     	                                                     	

by	the	scientific	community.	Although	actions	taken	on	a	local	level	cannot	resolve	this	global	
issue,	 the	 Noise	 &	 Air	 Quality	 Element	 contains	 policies	 that	 address	 energy	 and	 resource	
conservation	and	compact	community	design.	These	policies	reduce	greenhouse	gas	emissions,	
counteract	global	warming,	and	help	reduce	potential	adverse	effects	of	global	warming.	
The	air	quality	data	and	analysis	includes	an	Emissions	Reduction	Plan	to	reduce	greenhouse	
gas	 emissions.	 Signed	 in	 to	 law	 in	 2006,	 Assembly	 Bill	 (AB)	 32	 calls	 for	 rollbacks	 that	 can	 be	
accomplished	 by	 reducing	 both	 stationary	 and	 mobile	 emission	 levels.	 AB	 32	 doesn’t	 require	
cities	 to	 complete	 Climate	 Action	 or	 Emissions	 Reduction	 Plans	 but	 the	 Attorney	 General’s	
Office	 has	 confirmed	 that	 such	 plans	 constitute	 acceptable	 mitigation	 for	 cities	 conducting	
General	 Plan	 Updates.	 When	 prepared	 in	 conjunction	 with	 a	 General	 Plan	 Update	 and	
incorporated	 into	 each	 Element,	 Climate	 Action	 or	 Emission	 Reduction	 Plans	 can	 expedite	
California	Environmental	Quality	Act	(CEQA)	review.	
Public	 involvement	 is	 an	 integral	 part	 of	 the	 General	 Plan	 update	 process.	 Prior	 to	 the	
preparation	 of	 this	 Element,	 both	 the	 Planning	 Commission	 and	 City	 Council	 held	 study	
sessions	 and	 public	 hearings.	 General	 Plan	 consultation	 is	 an	 important	 part	 of	 element	
preparation	and	the	City	contacted	Native	American	governments	soliciting	input	on	the	Noise	
&	Air	Quality	Element.	
During	 Element	 preparation,	 the	 City	 collaborated	 with	 agencies,	 districts,	 and	 organizations	
including	 the	 North	 Coast	 Unified	 Air	 Quality	 Management	 District	 (NCUAQMD),	 California	
Department	of	Transportation	(Caltrans)	and	the	Redwood	Coast	Energy	Authority	(RCEA).	The	
Element	was	reviewed	for	consistency	with	relevant	plans	such	as	the	NCUAQMD’s	Particulate	
Matter	Attainment	Plan	and	Humboldt	County	Noise	Element	and	Air	Quality	Element	updates.	
The	 RCEA	 and	 NCUAQMD	 may	 have	 funding	 opportunities	 for	 projects	 identified	 in	 this	
element.	 The	 element	 makes	 extensive	 use	 of	 web	 links	 and	 Internet	 source	 references	 to	
maximize	the	utility	of	the	element	while	keeping	it	as	concise	as	possible.	
It	is	the	overall	goal	of	the	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Element	to	protect	the	health	and	welfare	of	the	
community	by	promoting	development	that	is	compatible	with	noise	and	air	quality	standards,	
and	which	reflects	the	City’s	commitment	to	sustainable	practices.	This	Element’s	noise	and	air	
quality	goals	and	policies	address	the	provisions	for	maintaining	acceptable	community	noise	
levels	and	continued	improvement	to	air	quality	in	Ferndale	and	the	surrounding	air	basin.	
	
	                               	
City	of	Ferndale	                                  1-2	           General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	April	2016	                                    	                                                     	

Relationship	to	other	General	Plan	Elements	
All	 General	 Plan	 element	 goals	 and	 policies	 must	 be	 internally	 consistent	 and	 are	
interdependent	 and	 related	 to	 each	 other.	 No	 single	 element	 of	 the	 plan	 should	 be	 used	 in	
isolation	without	consideration	of	all	other	component	elements	as	an	integrated	General	Plan.	
The	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Element	directly	correlates	to	the	Land	Use,	Circulation,	and	Housing	
Elements,	and	was	reviewed	for	consistency	with	all	Ferndale	General	Plan	Elements.			
Land	 Use	 Element	 -	 The	Land	Use	Element	includes	policies	that	are	intended	to	promote	
efficient	land	use	patterns,	preserve	open	space,	and	provide	adequate	services.	These	policies	
support	sustainability.	When	updated,	the	Land	Use	Element	will	show	acceptable	land	uses	in	
relation	to	existing	and	projected	noise	contours.			
Circulation	 Element	 -	 The	 updated	 Circulation	 Element	 may	 include	 polices	 to	 reduce	
congestion	 and	 encourage	 bicycle	 and	 pedestrian	 travel.	 These	 measures	 help	 ensure	 that	
greenhouse	gas	emissions	from	vehicle	sources	are	reduced	or	minimized.	Noise	exposure	data	
will	also	influence	the	location	and	design	of	transportation	facilities.	
Open	 Space	 and	 Conservation	 Element	 -	 The	updated	Open	Space	and	Conservation	
Element	 may	 include	 policies	 that	 support	 open	 space	 acquisition,	 emphasizing	 an	
interconnected	 open	 space	 system	 including	 bicyclist	 and	 pedestrian	 connections	 between	
residential	development	and	schools,	employment,	and	commercial	areas.		
Public	 Facilities	 Element	 -	 The	 updated	 Public	 Facilities	 Element	 may	 include	 policies	
that	address	energy-efficiency	and	renewable	energy,	water	conservation,	maximizing	the	use	
of	recycled	water,	solid	waste	source	reduction	and	recycling.	
Safety	 Element	 -	 The	 safety	 element	 includes	 policies	 intended	 to	 minimize	 the	 potential	
for	loss	of	life	and	property	due	to	flooding,	which	has	been	identified	as	a	potential	impact	of	
climate	change.		
Housing	 Element	 -	 The	Housing	Element	includes	policies	to	promote	energy	conservation	
educational	programs	and	sustainable	building	techniques	such	as	construction	waste	recycling	
and	energy	efficient	retrofits,	as	well	as	to	explore	ways	to	incorporate	energy	saving	features	
and	 materials,	 and	 energy	 efficient	 systems	 and	 designs	 into	 residential	 development	 and	
retrofits.	 These	 policies	 support	 sustainable	 development.	 Noise	 exposure	 information	
provided	 in	 the	 Noise	 component	 must	 be	 considered	 when	 planning	 the	 location	 of	 new	
housing.	
Historic	&	Cultural	Resources	Element-	The	Historic	&	Cultural	Resources	Element	includes	
policies	to	maintain	and	enhance	the	historic	character	and	nature	of	the	city	including	those	
structures	 on	 the	 National	 Register	 of	 Historic	 Places	 as	 well	 as	 contributing	 buildings	 and	
neighborhoods.	
	                             	
City	of	Ferndale	                                1-3	           General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	April	2016	                                  	                                                     	
                                   	
                                   	
                                   	
                                   	
                                   	
                                   	
                                   	
                  This	page	intentionally	left	blank
   	
   	
City	of	Ferndale	             1-4	                General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	April	2016	               	                                                          	
2.0	 Definitions	
This	section	provides	definitions	of	terms	used	throughout	the	Element.	
ADT:	Average	daily	trips	(vehicles).	
AADT:	Annual	average	daily	trips	(vehicles)		
Ambient	Noise:	The	composite	of	noise	from	all	sources	near	and	far.	In	this	context,	the	
ambient	 noise	 level	 constitutes	 the	 normal	 or	 existing	 level	 of	 environmental	 noise	 at	 a	
given	location.		
Attenuation:	 A	 decrease	 in	 sound	 level.	 The	 most	 common	 cause	 of	 attenuation	 is	
increased	distance	between	a	source	and	receiver	(typically,	sound	decreases	by	3	to	6	dB	
per	doubling	of	distance).	Barriers	(e.g.,	walls,	hills,	and	dense	vegetation)	located	between	
a	source	and	receiver	can	also	cause	attenuation.	
A-Weighted	Level:	See	dBA.	
Best	Management	Practices	(BMP):	Methods	or	techniques	found	to	be	the	most	effective	
and	practical	means	in	achieving	an	objective	(such	as	preventing	or	minimizing	pollution)	
while	making	the	optimum	use	of	resources.	
CAPCOA:	 California	 Air	 Pollution	 Control	 Officers	 Association;	 represents	 all	 35	 local	 air	
quality	 agencies	 in	 the	 state	 including	 the	 North	 Coast	 Unified	 Air	 Quality	 Management	
District.		
CARB:	 California	 Air	 Resources	 Board,	 a	 department	 within	 the	 California	 Environmental	
Protection	Agency.	
CNEL:	Community	Noise	Equivalent	Level.	The	average	equivalent	A-weighted	sound	level	
during	a	24-hour	period,	obtained	after	addition	of	five	decibels	to	evening	(7	to	10	p.m.)	
sound	levels,	and	addition	of	10	decibels	to	night	(10	p.m.	to	7	a.m.)	sound	levels.		
dBA:	A-weighted	sound	level.	The	sound	pressure	level	in	decibels	as	measured	on	a	sound	
level	meter	using	the	A-weighting	filter	network.	The	A-weighting	filter	de-emphasizes	the	
very	 low	 and	 very	 high	 frequency	 components	 of	 sound	 in	 a	 manner	 similar	 to	 the	
frequency	response	of	the	human	ear	and	correlates	well	with	subjective	reactions	to	noise.	
Decibel	(dB):	A	unit	of	measurement	describing	the	amplitude	of	sound,	equal	to	20	times	
the	 logarithm	 to	 the	 base	 10	 of	 the	 ratio	 of	 the	 pressure	 of	 the	 sound	 measured	 to	 the	
reference	pressure,	which	is	20	micropascals	(20	micronewtons	per	square	meter).	
Greenhouse	 Gas:	 Any	 of	 various	 gaseous	 compounds	 (such	 as	 carbon	 dioxide	 and	
methane)	that	absorb	infrared	radiation,	trap	heat	in	the	atmosphere	and	contribute	to	the	
greenhouse	effect.	
	
City	of	Ferndale	                                   2-1	           General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	April	2016	                                     	                                                     	
Intrusive	 Noise:	 Any	 noise	 that	 intrudes	 over	 and	 above	 the	 existing	 ambient	 noise	 at	 a	
given	location.	The	relative	intrusiveness	of	a	sound	depends	upon	its	amplitude,	duration,	
frequency,	time	of	occurrence,	and	tonal	or	informational	content	as	well	as	the	prevailing	
noise	level.	
Ldn:	Day-Night	Average	Level.	The	average	equivalent	A-weighted	sound	level	during	a	24-
hour	 day,	 obtained	 after	 the	 addition	 of	 10	 decibels	 to	 sound	 levels	 in	 the	 night	 after	 10	
p.m.	 and	 before	 7	 a.m.	 (Note:	 CNEL	 and	 Ldn	 represent	 daily	 levels	 of	 noise	 exposure	
averaged	 on	 an	 annual	 or	 daily	 basis,	 while	 Leq	 represents	 the	 equivalent	 energy	 noise	
exposure	for	a	shorter	time	period,	typically	one	hour.)	
Leq:	 Equivalent	 energy	 level.	 The	 sound	 level	 corresponding	 to	 a	 steady-state	 sound	
containing	 the	 same	 total	 energy	 as	 a	 time-varying	 signal	 measured	 over	 a	 given	 sample	
period.	Leq	is	typically	computed	over	1-,	8-,	and	24-hour	sample	periods.	
Noise:	Unwanted	sound.	
Noise	 Contours:	 Lines	 drawn	 on	 a	 map	 around	 a	 noise	 source	 indicating	 equal	 levels	 of	
noise	exposure.	CNEL	and	Ldn	are	the	metrics	utilized	herein	to	describe	annoyance	due	to	
noise	and	to	establish	land	use	planning	criteria	for	noise.		
Noise	 Contour	 Bands:	 	 The	 area	 between	 Noise	 Contours	 measured	 in	 Ldn	 illustrating	
how	quickly	sound	diminishes	as	it	travels	away	from	the	source.			
Noise	Impacted	Areas:	Land	areas	that	are	located	on	the	Noise	Contour	Map	within	the	
Noise	Contour	Bands	of	60	Ldn	or	greater.	
Noise	Measurement:	The	measurement	of	noise	at	a	given	location.	It	is	usually	desirable	
to	indicate	both	the	intensity	of	the	noise	at	the	given	location,	and	the	distance	between	
the	 noise	 source	 and	 the	 location	 at	 which	 the	 measurement	 is	 made.	 For	 example,	 one	
would	report	that	a	diesel	truck	generates	88	dBA	of	noise,	as	measured	at	a	distance	of	50	
feet.	
City	of	Ferndale	                                 2-2	             General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	April	2016	                                   	                                                       	
3.0	 Setting	and	Context	
The	 City	 of	 Ferndale	 is	 located	 on	 the	 Eel	 River	 Valley’s	 alluvial	 plain,	 roughly	 4½	 miles	
from	the	Pacific	Ocean.	This	marine	influenced	environment	has	prevailing	northerly	ocean	
winds,	 carrying	 cool,	 moist	 air	 across	 the	 alluvial	 plain	 in	 summer.	 In	 the	 winter,	 the	
prevailing	winds	are	from	the	south.	
Considered	 the	 northern	 gateway	 to	 California’s	 Lost	 Coast,	 the	 City	 is	 surrounded	 by	
forested	mountains	to	the	south	and	flat	agricultural	lands	to	the	west,	north	and	east.	State	
Highway	211	connects	Ferndale	and	U.S.	101.		It	passes	directly	through	the	middle	of	town	
(Main	Street)	providing	a	connection	to	Petrolia	and	the	Lost	Coast	via	the	Mattole	Road.		
General	Noise	Characteristics	and	Regulation	
Sound	is	mechanical	energy	transmitted	by	pressure	waves	in	a	compressible	medium	such	
as	 air.	 Sound	 is	 characterized	 by	 various	 parameters	 that	 include	 the	 oscillation	 rate	 of	
sound	 waves,	 the	 speed	 of	 propagation,	 and	 the	 pressure	 level	 or	 energy	 content.	 Sound	
pressure	level	has	become	the	most	common	descriptor	used	to	characterize	the	loudness	
of	an	ambient	sound	level.	The	unit	of	sound	pressure	expressed	as	a	ratio	to	the	faintest	
sound	 detectable	 by	 a	 human	 ear	 is	 called	 a	 decibel	 (dB).	 The	 U.S.	 Environmental	
Protection	Agency	(EPA)	has	established	70	dB	as	the	point	at	which	noise	begins	to	harm	
hearing	(EPA	1974).	
The	 dB	 scale	 is	 used	 to	 quantify	 sound	 intensity.	 Because	 sound	
pressure	can	vary	enormously	within	the	range	of	human	hearing,	
noise	 measurements	 are	 weighted	 more	 heavily	 within	 those	
frequencies	of	maximum	human	sensitivity	in	a	process	called	“A-
weighting,”	referred	to	as	dBA.	In	general,	a	difference	of	more	than	
3	 dBA	 is	 a	 perceptible	 change	 in	 environmental	 noise;	 people	
perceive	 an	 increase	 of	 10	 dBA	 as	 a	 doubling	 of	 loudness	 (EPA	
1974).	 Figure	 1	 compares	 some	 common	 sounds	 and	 how	 the	
average	human	perceives	them.	
Because	 sound	 levels	 can	 vary	 markedly	 over	 time,	 several	 methods	 for	 describing	 the	
average	 character	 of	 sound	 have	 been	 devised.	 A	 commonly	 used	 noise	 metric	 is	 the	
Community	Noise	Equivalent	Level	(CNEL).	The	CNEL	penalizes	noise	levels	during	periods	
of	 greater	 noise	 sensitivity	 to	 create	 an	 artificially	 weighted	 24-hour	 exposure.	 It	 is	
calculated	by	adding	a	5-decibel	penalty	to	sound	levels	in	the	evening	(7:00	p.m.	to	10:00	
p.m.),	 and	 a	 10-decibel	 penalty	 to	 sound	 levels	 in	 the	 night	 (10:00	 p.m.	 to	 7:00	 a.m.)	 to	
compensate	 for	 the	 increased	 sensitivity	 to	 noise	 during	 the	 quieter	 late	 evening	 and	
nighttime	periods.	Thus,	the	CNEL	noise	metric	provides	a	24-hour	average	of	A-weighted	
noise	 levels	 at	 a	 particular	 location,	 with	 an	 evening	 and	 a	 nighttime	 adjustment,	 which	
reflects	 increased	 sensitivity	 to	 noise	 during	 these	 times	 of	 the	 day.	 The	 Day	 Night	 Level	
(Ldn)	similarly	averages	sound	levels	over	24	hours,	with	10dB	added	to	nighttime	sound	
levels.	Ldn	and	CNEL	values	rarely	differ	by	more	than	1	dB.	As	a	matter	of	practice,	Ldn	
and	 CNEL	 values	 are	 considered	 to	 be	 equivalent	 and	 are	 treated	 as	 such	 in	 this	
assessment.	
City	of	Ferndale	                                   3-1	           General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	April	2016	                                     	                                                     	

                                 Figure	1:		Perception	of	Sounds	
                  					                                                            	
                        Dept.	of	Labor	OSHA	Appendix	I:A-3.	Sound	Propagation	
	                             	
City	of	Ferndale	                               3-2	             General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	April	2016	                                 	                                                       	
Noise	is	commonly	defined	as	unwanted	sound.	In	general,	noise	is	not	a	significant	issue	in	
Ferndale.	 The	 primary	 noise	 source	 affecting	 sensitive	 receptors	 (homes,	 schools)	 in	 the	
City	is	traffic	on	State	Route	211.	Some	commercial	and	agricultural	uses	are	also	identified	
as	 noise	 contributors,	 although	 such	 sources	 have	 not	 generally	 been	 identified	 as	
significant	 noise	 problems.	 Potential	 noise	 sources	 affecting	 development	 in	 the	 City	 are	
described	in	more	detail	in	Chapter	4.0	Noise	Characteristics	and	Sources.		
According	to	OPR’s	General	Plan	Guidelines,	the	fundamental	goals	of	a	noise	element	are:	
     §    To	provide	sufficient	information	concerning	the	community	noise	environment	so	
          that	 noise	 may	 be	 effectively	 considered	 in	 the	 land	 use	 planning	 process.	 In	 so	
          doing,	 the	 necessary	 groundwork	 will	 have	 been	 developed	 so	 that	 a	 community	
          noise	ordinance	may	be	utilized	to	resolve	noise	complaints.	
     §    To	 develop	 strategies	 for	 abating	 excessive	 noise	 exposure	 through	 cost-effective	
          mitigating	 measures	 in	 combination	 with	 zoning,	 as	 appropriate,	 to	 avoid	
          incompatible	land	uses.	
     §    To	 protect	 those	 existing	 regions	 of	 the	 planning	 area	 whose	 noise	 environments	
          are	deemed	acceptable	and	also	those	locations	throughout	the	community	deemed	
          “noise	sensitive.”	
     §    To	 utilize	 the	 definition	 of	 the	 community	 noise	 environment	 in	 the	 form	 of	
          Community	Noise	Equivalent	Level	(CNEL)	or	Day	Night	Average	Level	(Ldn)	noise	
          contours	as	provided	in	the	noise	element	for	local	compliance	with	the	State	Noise	
          Insulation	Standards.	These	standards	require	specified	levels	of	outdoor	to	indoor	
          noise	 reduction	 for	 new	 multifamily	 residential	 constructions	 in	 areas	 where	 the	
          outdoor	noise	exposure	exceeds	CNEL	(or	Ldn)	60	decibels	(dB)	(OPR	2003).	
Government	 Code	 Section	 65302(f)	 requires	 that	 noise	 elements	 identify	 and	 appraise	
noise	 problems	 in	 the	 community.	 The	 noise	 element	 must	 recognize	 the	 guidelines	
established	by	the	State	Department	of	Health	Services	Office	of	Noise	Control	and	analyze	
and	quantify,	to	the	extent	practicable,	as	determined	by	the	legislative	body,	current	and	
projected	noise	levels	for	each	of	the	following:	
     §    Highways	and	freeways.	
     §    Primary	arterials	and	major	local	streets.	
     §    Passenger	and	freight	on-line	railroad	operations	and	ground	rapid	transit	systems.	
     §    Commercial,	 general	 aviation,	 heliport,	 helistop,	 and	 military	 airport	 operations,	
          aircraft	 overflights,	 jet	 engine	 test	 stands,	 and	 all	 other	 ground	 facilities	 and	
          maintenance	functions	related	to	airport	operation.	
     § Local	industrial	plants,	including,	but	not	limited	to,	railroad	classification	yards.	
     § Other	ground	stationary	sources	identified	by	local	agencies	as	contributing	to	the	
          community	noise	environment.		
Noise	contours	must	be	shown	for	each	of	these	sources	and	stated	in	terms	of	community	
noise	 equivalent	 level	 (CNEL)	 or	 day-night	 average	 level	 (Ldn)	 (OPR	 2003).	 Chapter	 4.0	
Noise	Characteristics	and	Sources	presents	the	noise	contour	map	and	guidelines	for	noise-
compatible	land	use.	Chapter	6	(Goals,	Policies	and	Implementation)	presents	mitigation	to	
reduce	noise	impacts	to	the	community.						
City	of	Ferndale	                                   3-3	           General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	April	2016	                                     	                                                     	

General	Air	Quality	Characteristics	and	Regulations	
Ferndale	 is	 located	 within	 the	 North	 Coast	 Unified	 Air	 Quality	 Management	 District	
(NCUAQMD),	 which	 consists	 of	 Del	 Norte,	 Humboldt,	 and	 Trinity	 Counties.	 The	 California	
and	Federal	Clean	Air	Acts	establish	air	quality	standards	for	several	pollutants,	including	
particulate	matter,	carbon	monoxide,	ozone,	nitrogen	dioxide,	sulfur	dioxide,	and	lead,	and	
require	jurisdictions	for	areas	that	violate	these	standards	to	prepare	and	implement	plans	
to	 achieve	 the	 standards.	 The	 NCUAQMD	 meets	 all	 federal	 air	 quality	 standards,	 but	
exceeds	the	maximum	limits	for	state	standards	relating	to	particulate	matter	smaller	than	
or	 equal	 to	 10	 microns	 in	 diameter	 (PM10).	 Significant	 sources	 of	 PM10	 include	 motor	
vehicle	 exhaust,	 road	 dust,	 construction	 and	 demolition	 activities,	 and	 wood-burning	
stoves	and	fireplaces.			
According	to	the	Environmental	Protection	Agency	(EPA),	the	federal	agency	regulating	air	
quality,	particulate	pollution	consists	of	microscopic	solids	or	liquid	droplets	small	enough	
to	 pass	 through	 the	 nose	 and	 throat	 and	 penetrate	 deep	 into	 the	 lungs,	 causing	 serious	
health	 problems.	 Scientists	 have	 linked	 particulate	 matter	 to	 a	 variety	 of	 health	 issues	
including	 asthma,	 decreased	 lung	 function,	 irregular	 heartbeat	 and	 increased	 respiratory	
symptoms	(EPA	2013).	Particulate	matter	has	a	greater	effect	on	people	with	heart	or	lung	
diseases,	children	and	older	adults	(EPA	2013).	                 Marsh	areas	such	as	those	in	Ferndale’s	
                                                                 Connick	Ranch	clean	the	air	and	water.			
The	 California	 Clean	 Air	 Act	 of	 1988	 places	
primary	 responsibility	 for	 improving	 Humboldt	
County’s	 air	 quality	 on	 the	 NCUAQMD.	 In	 1995,	
the	 NCUAQMD	 prepared	 a	 Particulate	 Matter	
(PM10)	 Attainment	 Plan	 draft	 report	 to	 identify	
major	 sources	 of	 PM10	 in	 the	 District	 and	
strategies	 to	 reduce	 particulate	 pollution	 and	
achieve	the	state	standard	for	PM10.	These	include	
strategies	 to	 reduce	 emissions	 from	 both	
stationary	and	mobile	sources.	
The	California	Environmental	Quality	Act	(CEQA)	requires	cities	to	identify	the	potentially	
significant	 effects	 on	 the	 environments	 of	 projects	 over	 which	 the	 city	 has	 discretionary	
authority.	 A	 city	 approving	 a	 project	 is	 also	 required	 to	 mitigate	 significant	 effects	
whenever	 feasible.	 To	 determine	 whether	 a	 project	 would	 have	 a	 potentially	 significant	
effect	 on	 air	 quality,	 the	 project’s	 potential	 effects	 are	 compared	 to	 the	 local	 air	 district's	
thresholds	of	significance.	The	NCUAQMD	has	not	formally	adopted	significance	thresholds;	
the	District	instead	uses	the	Best	Available	Control	Technology	(BACT)	emission	rates	for	
stationary	 sources	 and	 recommends	 the	 use	 of	 the	 latest	 version	 of	 the	 California	 Air	
Pollution	Control	Officer’s	Association	(CAPCOA)'s	"Health	Risk	Assessments	for	Proposed	
Land	Use	Project"	for	new	development	(NCUAQMD	2013).	
Global	Climate	Change	
Global	 climate	 change	 is	 defined	 as	 the	 long-term	 change	 in	 Earth’s	 climate,	 which	 has	
multiple	effects.		One	of	these	is	global	warming,	a	progressive	gradual	rise	of	the	Earth's	
average	 surface	 temperature	 thought	 to	 be	 caused	 in	 part	 by	 increased	 concentrations	 of	
City	of	Ferndale	                                    3-4	             General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	April	2016	                                      	                                                       	

  greenhouse	 gases	 (GHGs)	 in	 the	 atmosphere.	 The	 change	 in	 the	 average	 weather	 of	 the	
  earth	 can	 be	 measured	 by	 wind	 patterns,	 storms,	 precipitation,	 and	 temperature.	 It	 is	
  exacerbated	 by	 GHGs,	 which	 trap	 heat	 in	 the	 atmosphere	 (thus	 the	 “greenhouse”	 effect).	
  GHGs	 include	 carbon	 dioxide	 (CO2),	 methane	 (CH4),	 nitrous	 oxide	 (N20),	
  hydroflourocarbons	 (HFCs),	 perflourocarbons	 (PFCs),	 and	 sulfur	 hexafluoride	 (SF6),	 and	
  are	emitted	by	both	natural	processes	and	human	activities.	
  The	projected	effects	of	climate	change	cover	a	broad	spectrum	of	impact	areas:	
       Human	health:	
       § Exposure	to	air	pollution	
       § Exposure	to	infectious	diseases	due	to	changing	ecosystems	and	climate	
       § Weather-related	mortality	(flooding)		
            	
       Water	Resources:	
       § Changing	rainfall	and	snow	pack	issues	
       § Hydrology	change	in	rivers	and	Delta	
       § Increasing	sea	level:	
       § Changing	habitat	and	species	distribution	
            	
  Chapter	5.0	Air	Quality	Characteristics	includes	a	description	of	local	and	regional	air	
  quality	conditions,	a	discussion	of	the	area’s	current	air	quality	designation,	a	summary	of	
  applicable	federal	and	state	standards	and	laws,	a	summary	of	air	pollution	sources	in	the	
  Planning	Area,	and	an	emissions	inventory.
	
	                             	
  City	of	Ferndale	                               3-5	         General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
  DRAFT	April	2016	                                 	                                                   	

	
	
	
                    This	page	intentionally	left	blank
   	
   	
   	              	
City	of	Ferndale	                 	   	           General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	June	2015	                  	                                                          	
4.0	 Noise	Characteristics	and	Sources	
Noise	Sources	
The	main	noise	source	in	Ferndale	is	from	vehicular	traffic	travelling	State	Route	(SR)	211.	
This	 two-lane	 roadway	 with	 shoulders	 connects	 Ferndale	 to	 US	 Highway	 101	 at	
Fernbridge,	and	becomes	Main	Street	within	City	limits.	For	traffic	entering	Ferndale,	the	
55	mph	speed	limit	is	lowered	to	35	mph	just	outside	of	easterly	City	limits,	and	again	to	25	
mph	approximately	a	quarter	mile	later	at	the	high	school.		Highway	speeds	are	established	
by	Caltrans	using	the	California	Manual	for	Setting	Speed	Limits	(2014).	
Classified	 as	 a	 Rural	 Major	 Collector,	 SR	 211	 primarily	 provides	
transportation	 to	 and	 from	 the	 City	 of	 Ferndale,	 although	
Petrolia,	 Capetown,	 and	 Honeydew	 residents	 and	 visitors	 also	
use	 the	 route	 to	 travel	 from	 the	 Mattole	 Road	 to	 Highway	 101.	
According	 to	 the	 most	 recent	 Route	 Concept	 Report,	 Caltrans	
does	 not	 plan	 to	 increase	 the	 capacity	 of	 the	 route	 (Caltrans	
2014).			
Many	 residences	 are	 within	 two	 blocks	 of	 SR	 211	 and,	 in	 a	
generally	 quiet	 community,	 are	 disproportionally	 affected	 by	
road	noise	from	traffic.	
Within	 the	 City	 Limits,	 Rural	 Major	 Collectors	 include	 Arlington	
Ave,	 5th	 Street,	 Ocean	 Ave,	 Wildcat	 Ave,	 Bluff	 Street,	 and	 Grant	
Ave.	 There	 are	 no	 roads	 classified	 as	 Arterials	 in	 Ferndale.	
Market	Street,	Herbert	Street,	Shaw	Ave	and	Rose	Ave	are	classified	as	Minor	Collectors;	all	
other	roads	within	the	City	are	classified	as	Local	Roads.	See	Figures	2	and	3.	
Traffic	noise	volume	depends	primarily	on	traffic	speed,	volume	and	vehicle	type.	The	main	
motor	 vehicle	 noise	 source	 is	 tire	 noise,	 which	 increases	 with	 speed.	 Trucks	 and	 older	
automobiles	also	produce	engine	and	exhaust	noise,	and	trucks	generate	wind	noise.		The	
California	 State	 Vehicle	 Code	 states	 that	 all	 vehicles	 must	 be	 equipped	 with	 an	 adequate	
muffler	 to	 prevent	 excessive	 exhaust	 system	 noise.	 It	 also	 prohibits	 the	 operation	 of	 a	
passenger	vehicle	(other	than	a	motorcycle),	or	a	truck	with	a	Gross	Vehicle	Weight	Rating	
(GVWR)	of	less	than	6,000	pounds,	with	an	exhaust	noise	level	greater	than	95	decibels.	A	
noise	limit	of	92	decibels	applies	to	any	motorcycle	manufactured	before	1970,	and	a	noise	
limit	of	80-88	decibels	applies	to	motorcycles	manufactured	after	1970,	depending	on	the	
year	of	manufacture.	
Within	the	city,	noise	abatement,	related	to	truck	noise	specifically,	is	enforced	by	the	City	
of	 Ferndale	 Traffic	 Ordinance	 04-01,	 which	 states	 that	 motor	 truck	 travel	 for	 vehicles	
exceeding	a	maximum	gross	weight	limit	of	three	tons,	are	restricted	to	the	following	truck	
route:	 beginning	 on	 Ocean	 Avenue	 where	 the	 Wildcat	 Road	 intersects	 Ocean	 Avenue;	
thence	easterly	to	where	Ocean	Avenue	intersects	Main	Street;	thence	along	Main	Street	to	
the	easterly	boundary	line	of	the	City	of	Ferndale.	This	limits	truck	related	noise	exclusively	
to	the	aforementioned	route	through	town.	
City	of	Ferndale	                                  4-1	           General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	April	2016	                                    	                                                     	
In	 actuality,	 there	 are	 at	 least	 three	 different	 ambience	 conditions	 in	 Ferndale.	 The	 first	
ambience	 level	 is	 during	 peak	 morning	 and	 late	 afternoon	 traffic.	 The	 second	 ambience	
level	 is	 during	 the	 remaining	 daylight	 hours	 of	 the	 day.	 Field	 measurements	 of	 ambience	
were	taken,	and	it	was	found	that	the	ambient	level	on	Main	Street	is	about	52	dB(A),	which	
is	 at	 least	 20	 dB(A)	 lower	 than	 during	 the	 peak	 traffic	 flow.	 At	 5th	 and	 Shaw	 Streets	 the	
reading	was	45	dB(A)	-	about	15	dB(A)	lower	than	the	peak	traffic	period	ambience	level.	
In	 outlying	 areas,	 the	 peak	 traffic	 and	 normal	 daytime	 levels	 differ	 very	 little.	 Developing	
contours	of	the	usual	daytime	ambience	would	be	difficult	because	the	lowest	and	highest	
readings	were	45	and	52	decibels	respectively;	very	quiet	for	a	community	during	the	day.	
The	 third	 ambience	 level	 is	 during	 the	 night	 when	 ambience	 levels	 are	 approximately	 10	
dB(A)	lower	than	the	usual	daytime	levels.	The	very	low	level	of	background	noise	in	the	
community	 increases	 the	 contrast	 with	 loud	 single	 event	 noises	 and	 single	 event	 noise	 is	
consequently	more	noticeable	and	objectionable.		
Stationary	 sources	 of	 noise	 within	 City	 limits	 are	 limited.	 The	 Humboldt	 County	
Fairgrounds	 generates	 noise	 during	 events,	 but	 is	 not	 a	 constant	 source	 of	 noise.	 The	
nearest	 airport	 is	 Rohnerville	 Airport,	 a	 one-runway	 airport	 located	 about	 6.5	 miles	
southeast	 of	 Ferndale;	 airport	 sounds	 are	 not	 audible	 within	 the	 City.	 	 Other	 minor	 or	
infrequent	stationary	sources	of	noise	include	high	school	sporting	events,	farm	equipment	
repair,	the	Noon	and	emergency	siren	and	the	Kinetic	Sculpture	Race	and	parades.		
Single	 Event	 Noise	 occasionally	 occurs	 within	 the	 city	 of	 Ferndale.	 Diesel	 delivery	 trucks	
generate	the	loudest	single	event	noises	in	the	planning	area.	At	50	feet,	a	truck	generates	a	
noise	level	of	88	decibels	and	at	100	feet	the	level	is	82	decibels.	Single	event	sounds	in	the	
75	to	85	decibel	range	are	distracting	to	most	people	and	sounds	over	85	decibels	are	often	
disturbing	and	can	cause	hearing	loss	if	exposure	is	frequent.	For	persons	inside	a	building,	
these	 noise	 levels	 would	 be	 perceived	 at	 about	 20	 decibels	 less	 with	 the	 windows	 closed	
and	10	decibels	less	with	them	open.	Single	event	impacts	from	other	sources	that	generate	
noises	 of	 above	 75	 decibels,	 such	 as	 chain	 saws,	 lawn	 mowers	 and	 barking	 dogs,	 are	 not	
mapped	because	they	occur	at	random	or	in	scattered	locations.	Field	measurements	of	a	
chain	saw	that	registered	108	dB	(A)	at	the	operator	and	a	tractor	that	registered	at	93	dB	
(A)	 at	 the	 driver	 suggest	 that	 Ferndale	 experiences	 the	 usual	 occurrences	 of	 loud	 single	
event	noises.	In	recent	years	there	has	been	considerable	reduction	of	truck	noise	on	Main	
Street	 as	 a	 result	 of	 reduced	 logging	 activity	 and	 as	 a	 result	 of	 State	 and	 Federal	
requirements	for	quieter	trucks.	
According	 to	 conversations	 with	 Chief	 of	 Police	 Bret	 Smith,	 noise	 complaints	 are	
uncommon	in	Ferndale	and	are	not	tracked	separately	from	other	service	calls.		
Sensitive	Receptors	
Sensitive	 receptors	 are	 land	 uses	 or	 users	 that	 are	 interrupted	 (rather	 than	 simply	
impacted)	by	relatively	low	levels	of	noise.	Such	receptors	include	hospitals,	convalescent	
homes,	schools,	churches,	and	sensitive	wildlife	habitat.			
Ferndale’s	 sensitive	 receptors	 include	 Ferndale	 Elementary	 and	 High	 Schools,	 Ferndale	
Community	Church,	St.	Mary’s	Episcopal	Church,	Assumption	Catholic	Church,	Our	Savior’s	
Lutheran	Church,	St.	Mark’s	Lutheran	Church,	and	Living	Waters	Foursquare	Church.	There	
City	of	Ferndale	                                    4-2	            General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	April	2016	                                      	                                                      	

are	 no	 hospitals,	 convalescent	 homes,	 or	 sensitive	 wildlife	 habitats	 within	 the	 City.		
However,	 Russ	 Park	 includes	 105	 acres	 of	 closed	 canopy	 forest	 deeded	 to	 the	 City,	 “as	 a	
refuge	and	breeding	place	for	birds”	(Z.	Patrick	Russ	(Mrs.)	deed).	
Noise	Standards	
The	 EPA	 has	 concluded	 that	 maintaining	 environmental	 noise	 below	 a	 24-hour	 exposure	
level	 of	 70	 decibels	 will	 prevent	 any	 measurable	 hearing	 loss	 over	 a	 lifetime.	 Likewise,	
levels	of	55	decibels	outdoors	and	45	decibels	indoors	are	identified	as	preventing	activity	
interference	 and	 annoyance.	 These	 levels	 of	 noise	 permit	 spoken	 conversation	 and	 other	
activities	 such	 as	 sleeping,	 working	 and	 recreation,	 which	 are	 part	 of	 the	 daily	 human	
condition.	
Figure	 4	 presents	 the	 California	 Department	 of	 Health,	 Office	 of	 Noise	 Control	 noise	
compatibility	 guidelines	 for	 various	 land	 uses.	 The	 table	 illustrates	 the	 ranges	 of	
community	 noise	 exposure	 in	 terms	 of	 what	 is	 “normally	 acceptable,”	 “conditionally	
acceptable,”	“normally	unacceptable,”	and	“clearly	unacceptable.”	These	guidelines	may	be	
used	 to	 assess	 whether	 or	 not	 noise	 poses	 a	 conflict	 with	 land	 development.	 Figure	 5	
provides	 adjustment	 factors	 to	 correct	 for	 seasonal	 variations	 in	 noise	 source	 levels,	
existing	 outdoor	 ambient	 noise	 levels,	 previous	 exposure	 to	 the	 source,	 community	
attitudes,	 and	 tonal	 characteristics	 of	 the	 source.	 Adjusting	 the	 noise	 exposure	 values	
provides	an	accurate	assessment	of	locally	acceptable	noise	exposure.	
In	 2006,	 the	 City	 of	 Ferndale	 adopted	 Nuisance	 Ordinance	 06-04,	 with	 Section	 7.04	
designated	specifically	for	Noise.	It	outlines	restrictions	for	noise,	both	vehicular	and	non-
vehicular,	 within	 the	 city	 limits.	 A	 noise-based	 curfew	 is	 set	 for	 the	 hours	 of	 10:00	 p.m.	
through	7:00	a.m.,	and	a	construction-related	noise-based	curfew	is	set	for	the	hours	of	7	
a.m.	 and	 7	 p.m.	 on	 weekdays,	 or	 between	 8	 a.m.	 and	 7	 p.m.	 on	 Saturday	 and	 Sunday	
(Ferndale	Nuisance	Ordinance	06-04	§7.04).	
	
Analysis	of	Local	Noise	Environment	
Estimated	existing	noise	contours	from	SR	211	are	shown	on	Figure	6.	It	should	be	noted	
that	the	contours	presented	are	outdoor	noise	levels	and	only	account	for	attenuation	due	
to	 distance,	 not	 from	 sound	 wall	 structures	 or	 other	 noise	 barriers.	 The	 contours	 are	
intended	 to	 show	 generally	 where	 higher	 noise	 levels	 expressed	 in	 Annual	 Average	 Daily	
Traffic	(AADT)	may	occur.		
	
Future	Conditions	
Community	 noise	 levels	 can	 increase	 with	 development.	 With	 a	 static	 rate	 of	 growth	
experienced	over	the	past	13	years,	Ferndale’s	development	trends	have	remained	equally	
static.	According	to	the	2012	General	Plan	Housing	Element,	three	new	subdivisions	were	
approved	 between	 2004	 and	 2009.	 There	 are	 13	 new	 buildable	 parcels.	 These	 are	 all	
located	in	single-family	zones.	There	is	limited	land	available	in	Ferndale	because	the	City	
has	maintained	its	one	square	mile	of	land	within	the	city	limits.	At	this	time,	the	City	does	
not	plan	to	annex	additional	land.	Noise	levels	within	the	City	are	not	expected	to	increase	
significantly	due	to	development.	
City	of	Ferndale	                                  4-3	           General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	April	2016	                                    	                                                     	

Attenuation	
Existing	and	potentially	incompatible	noise	levels	in	problem	areas	can	be	reduced	through	
land	use	planning,	subdivision	review,	building	code	enforcement,	and	other	administrative	
means.	 Chapter	 6	 Goals,	 Policies	 and	 Implementation	 Programs	 contains	 attenuation	
measures	to	reduce	noise	impacts	to	the	Ferndale	community.		
	                            	
City	of	Ferndale	                            4-4	          General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	April	2016	                              	                                                    	
                                        Figure	2:	Community	Noise	Exposure	
                                                        Ldn	or	CNEL,	dB	
                                                                                                                    Maximum	
                                                                                                                     Interior	
       Land	Use	Category	                    50	       55	          60	         65	        70	     75	        80	
                                                                                                                        Noise	
                                                                                                                      Levels*	
    Residential	–	Low	Density	             	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	
  Single	Family,	Duplex,	Mobile	           	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	      45	
                                           	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	
               Home	                       	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	
                                           	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	
    Residential	–	Multi-Family	            	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	      45	
                                           	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	
                                           	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	
                                           	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	
       Transient	Lodging	–	                	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	      45	
            Motel/Hotel	                   	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	
                                           	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	
                                           	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	
  Schools,	Libraries,	Churches,	           	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	      45	
    Hospitals,	Nursing	Homes	              	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	
                                           	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	
                                           	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	
    Auditorium,	Concert	Hall,	             	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	      35	
          Amphitheaters	                   	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	
                                           	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	
                                           	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	
      Sports	Arena,	Outdoor	               	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	       -	
         Spectator	Sports	                 	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	
                                           	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	
                                           	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	
   Playgrounds,	Neighborhood	              	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	       -	
                Parks	                     	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	
                                           	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	
                                           	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	
  Golf	Courses,	Riding	Stables,	           	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	       -	
  Water	Recreation,	Cemeteries	            	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	
                                           	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	
                                           	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	
    Office	Buildings,	Business,	           	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	      50	
  Commercial	and	Professional	             	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	
                                           	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	
                                           	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	    	   	     	
    Industrial,	Manufacturing,	          	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	     	  	     	        50	
       Utilities,	Agriculture	           	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	     	  	     	
                                         	     	   	     	      	     	     	     	    	     	   	     	  	     	
	      NORMALLY	 ACCEPTABLE	 –	 Specified	 land	 use	 is	 satisfactory,	 based	 upon	 the	 assumption	 that	 any	 buildings	
       involved	are	of	normal	conventional	construction,	without	any	special	noise	insulation	requirements.	
       CONDITIONALLY	 ACCEPTABLE	 –	 New	 construction/development	 should	 be	 undertaken	 only	 after	 a	 detailed	
	      analysis	 of	 noise	 reduction	 requirements	 is	 made	 and	 noise	 insulation	 features	 are	 included	 in	 the	 design.	
       Conventional	construction	but	with	closed	windows	and	fresh	air	supply	system	will	normally	suffice.	
       NORMALLY	 UNACCEPTABLE	 –	 New	 construction	 or	 development	 should	 be	 discouraged.	 If	 new	 construction	 or	
	      development	 does	 proceed,	 a	 detailed	 analysis	 of	 the	 noise	 reduction	 requirement	 must	 be	 made	 and	 need	 noise	
       insulation	features	included	in	the	design	
	      CLEARLY	UNACCEPTABLE	–	New	construction	or	development	should	generally	not	be	undertaken.	
        *Due	to	exterior	sources.		Source:	Office	of	Planning	and	Research.	2003.	State	of	California	General	Plan	Guidelines	
City	of	Ferndale	                                                 4-5	                General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	April	2016	                                                   	                                                              	

                                                       	
                                                       	
                                                       	
                         Figure	3:		Noise	Exposure	Adjustment	Factors	
                                                                                                    Amount	of	
                                                                                                  Correction	to	
     Type	of	
                                                Description	                                       be	Added	to	
   Correction	
                                                                                                Measured	CNEL	
                                                                                                       in	dB	
    Seasonal	                   Summer	(or	year-round	operation).	                                         0	
   Correction	               Winter	only	(or	windows	always	closed).	                                     -5	
                  Quiet	suburban	or	rural	community	(remote	from	large	cities	
                                                                                                         +10	
                             and	from	industrial	activity	and	trucking).	
                       Quiet	suburban	or	rural	community	(not	located	near	
 Correction	for	                                                                                          +5	
                                           industrial	activity).	
    Outdoor	
                   Urban	residential	community	(not	immediately	adjacent	to	
Residual	Noise	                                                                                            0	
                           heavily	travelled	roads	and	industrial	areas).	
      Level	
                    Urban	residential	community	near	relatively	busy	roads	of	
                                                                                                          -5	
                                              industrial	areas.	
                              Very	noisy	urban	residential	community.	                                   -10	
                           No	prior	experience	with	the	intruding	noise.	                                 +5	
                       Community	has	had	some	previous	exposure	to	noise	
                   intruding	but	little	effort	is	being	made	to	control	the	noise.	
                   This	correction	may	also	be	applied	in	a	situation	where	the	
                                                                                                           0	
                  community	has	not	been	exposed	to	the	noise	previously,	but	
 Correction	for	
                  the	people	are	aware	that	bona	fide	efforts	are	being	made	to	
    Previous	
                                             control	the	noise.	
  Exposure	and	
                   Community	has	had	considerable	previous	exposure	to	the	
   Community	
                     intruding	noise	and	the	noisemaker’s	relations	with	the	                             -5	
    Attitudes	
                                          community	are	good.	
                      Community	aware	that	operation-causing	noise	is	very	
                  necessary	and	it	will	not	continue	indefinitely.	This	correction	
                                                                                                         -10	
                  can	be	applied	for	an	operation	of	limited	duration	and	under	
                                      emergency	circumstances.	
  Pure	Tone	or	                 No	pure	tone	or	impulsive	character.	                                      0	
     Impulse	                Pure	tone	or	impulsive	character	present.	                                   +5	
                                                        	
                           Source:	Office	of	Planning	and	Research.	2003.	State	of	California	General	Plan	Guidelines	
	
	
	
City	of	Ferndale	                                     4-6	             General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	April	2016	                                       	                                                            	

                                                          Figure	4:	Ferndale’s	Noise	Contour	Map	
                                                                                                                                                    211
                                                                                   101
                                                    211
                       Area of Detail
                                            VAN NESS AVE
                                                                                                                                   TENNYSON
                                                                    0        0.5   1 Miles
        ARLINGTON AVE
                                                                                                                  HOWARD ST
                                                                                               MAIN ST
                                5TH ST
                                                                   FE R
                                                                       N
                                                                            AV
                                                                               E
                                          A ST
                                                                                                     HERBERT ST
                                         PIXLEY
                                                                                                                                          City of Ferndale
                                                                                                                                                 AADT
                                                                    IN
                                                                        G                                                                        AADT - Truck
                                                                   D
                                                                R
                                                               B
                                                                E                                                                                65 dBA Ldn
                                                                                                                                                 60 dBA Ldn
       Data Sources - Roads: Humboldt County;                                       0           250               500 Feet                                Prepared by:
       AADT: CalTrans; Imagery: Esri; Noise Data;
       Illingworth & Rodkin, Inc.
                                                                                                                                                                         	
AADT	=	Annual	Average	Daily	Traffic	
  City	of	Ferndale	                                                                          4-7	                            General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
  DRAFT	April	2016	                                                                            	                                                                      	

                                   	
                                   	
                                   	
                                   	
                  This	page	intentionally	left	blank
City	of	Ferndale	               	    	          General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	June	2015	                	                                                          	
5.0	      Air	Quality	Characteristics	
This	section	includes	a	description	of	local	and	regional	air	quality	conditions,	a	discussion	of	
the	area’s	current	air	quality	designation,	a	summary	of	applicable	federal	and	state	standards	
and	laws,	a	summary	of	air	pollution	sources	in	the	Planning	Area,	and	an	emissions	inventory	
and	reduction	plan.		
Overall	Air	Quality	
The	Humboldt	County	General	Plan	Update	Background	Natural	Resources	and	Hazards	Report		
(2002)	Chapter	9	Air	Quality	describes	the	overall	countywide	climate,	regulatory	setting,	and	
air	quality	conditions	and	trends.	The	report	also	examines	climate	and	atmospheric	conditions	
impacts	on	the	air	pollutants	movement	and	dispersal.		
                                                   Ferndale’s	 climate	 and	 wind	 patterns	 are	 typical	 of	 the	
                                                   low-lying	 coastal	 areas	 of	 Humboldt	 County.	 In	 general,	
                                                   the	Background	Report	characterizes	the	coastal	climate	
                                                   as	 having	 cool	 summers	 with	 frequent	 fog	 and	 mild	
                                                   winters	 with	 lots	 of	 rain.	 Proximity	 to	 the	 ocean	
                                                   moderates	coastal	temperatures	while	inland	areas	tend	
                                                   to	experience	the	extremes	of	hot,	dry	summers	and	mild,	
                                                   wet	winters.	
                                                   Winds	 control	 the	 rate	 and	 dispersion	 of	 local	 pollutant	
        Morning	mist	on	the	Lost	Coast												 emissions.	 Horizontal	 air	 movement	 spreads	 pollutants	
          south	of	Centerville	Beach	              over	 a	 wider	 area.	 Coastal	 Humboldt	 County	 winds	
                                                   exhibit	a	seasonal	pattern.	In	the	summer,	strong	north	to	
northwesterly	 winds	 are	 common.	 During	 the	 winter,	 winds	 are	 from	 southerly	 quadrants.	
Offshore	and	onshore	flows	are	also	common	along	the	coast	and	are	associated	with	pressure	
systems	 in	 the	 area.	 Onshore	 flows	 frequently	 bring	 foggy	 cool	 weather	 to	 the	 coast,	 while	
offshore	flows	often	blow	fog	away	from	the	coast	and	bring	sunny	warm	days.		
Vertical	air	movement	spreads	pollutants	through	a	thicker	layer	of	air.	Upward	dispersion	of	
pollutants	is	hindered	when	the	atmosphere	is	stable;	that	is,	when	warm	air	overlies	cooler	air	
below.	This	situation	is	known	as	an	inversion.	Inversions	affect	the	dispersion	of	pollutants	by	
altering	 the	 vertical	 depth	 of	 the	 atmosphere	 through	 which	 pollutants	 can	 be	 mixed.	 The	
County	 General	 Plan	 Update	 Background	 Report	 discusses	 inversions	 and	 their	 effects	 on	
pollutant	dispersal	in	greater	detail.	
Unlike	 more	 urban	 areas,	 Humboldt	 County’s	 air	 quality	 concerns	 tend	 to	 focus	 on	 industrial	
emission	 sources.	 The	 California	 Air	 Resources	 Board	 (CARB)	 operates	 a	 regional	 network	 of	
air	 pollution	 monitoring	 stations	 that	 provide	 information	 on	 ambient	 concentrations	 of	
criteria	air	pollutants	and	toxic	air	contaminants.	NCUAQMD	measures	PM10	at	sites	in	Crescent	
City,	Eureka,	and	Weaverville.	Data	for	Humboldt	County	is	collected	at	an	air	quality	station	in	
Eureka	that	also	monitors	for	PM10	and	PM2.5.	Monitoring	station	data	indicates	that	Eureka’s	
air	quality	is	improving,	and	that	PM	levels	have	been	reduced	almost	to	attainment	levels.		
Ferndale’s	 air	 quality	 is	 similar	 to	 that	 of	 the	 rest	 of	 rural	 Humboldt	 County.	 The	 nearest	 air	
quality	 monitoring	 station	 to	 Ferndale	 is	 located	 on	 Humboldt	 Hill.	 The	 station	 monitors	 CO,	
NO2,	SO2,	PM10,	PM2.5,	and	ozone.	According	to	the	EPA,	since	2009	lead	has	been	measured	and	
City	of	Ferndale	                                          	   	       General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	June	2015	                                           	                                                      	

reported	 in	 Total	 Suspended	 Particulates	 and	 PM10	 locally	 (EPA	 2013).	 The	 County	 General	
Plan	Update	background	report	on	air	quality	contains	an	in-depth	look	at	existing	levels	and	
regulation	of	these	pollutants,	as	well	as	toxic	air	contaminants,	within	the	county.	
Air	Basin	Requirements	
The	 North	 Coast	 Air	 Basin	 must	 is	 targeted	 to	 meet	 standards	 outlined	 in	 the	 NCUAQMD	 Air	
Quality	 Control	 Rules	 covering	 visible	 emissions,	 particulate	 matter,	 fugitive	 dust	 emissions,	
sulfur	oxide	and	sulfides,	and	geothermal	emissions.	Emissions	are	also	subject	to	General	Plan	
policies	 and	 programs	 if	 the	 project	 requires	 discretionary	 City	 approval.	 Environmental	
review	of	such	projects	requires	coordination	between	NCUAQMD	and	the	City	to	ensure	that	
the	project	will	be	carried	out	in	a	manner	consistent	with	state	air	quality	laws	and	reduce	any	
project	 impacts	 to	 below	 levels	 of	 significance.	 NCUAQMD	 also	 requires	 coordination	 on	
projects	 involving	 demolition	 of	 commercial	 structures	 containing	 asbestos	 and	 for	 surface	
mining	and	grading	in	areas	containing	naturally	occurring	asbestos.		
Climate	Change	Legislation	
Executive	Order	S-3-05	(2005)	
Executive	Order	S-3-05	(EO-S-3-05)	states	that	California	is	vulnerable	to	the	effects	of	climate	
change,	 including	 reduced	 snowpack	 in	 the	 Sierra	 Nevada	 Mountains,	 exacerbation	 of	
California's	 existing	 air	 quality	 problems,	 and	 sea	 level	 rise.	 To	 address	 these	 concerns,	 the	
executive	 order	 established	 statewide	 targets	 to	 reduce	 greenhouse	 gas	 emissions	 to	 2000	
levels	by	2010,	to	1990	levels	by	2020,	and	to	80%	below	1990	levels	by	2050.	
AB	32	(2006)	
California	Assembly	Bill	32	(AB	32),	the	Global	Warming	Solutions	Act,	required	the	state	Air	
Resources	 Board	 (ARB)	 to	 adopt	 regulations	 by	 January	 1,	 2008	 for	 the	 reporting	 and	
verification	 of	 statewide	 greenhouse	 gas	 emissions	 and	 to	 monitor	 and	 enforce	 compliance	
with	 that	 program.	 The	 bill	 requires	 the	 adoption	 of	 rules	 and	 regulations	 to	 achieve	 the	
maximum	technologically	feasible	and	cost-effective	greenhouse	gas	emissions	reductions,	and	
adoption	of	a	"Scoping	Plan"	that	provides	a	detailed	pathway	to	achieve	by	2020	of	statewide	
greenhouse	gas	emissions	limit	equivalent	to	1990	emissions.	
AB	811	(2007)	
AB	 811	 authorizes	 all	 local	 governments	 in	 California,	 if	 they	 so	 choose,	 to	 establish	 special	
districts	 that	 can	 be	 used	 to	 finance	 energy	 efficiency,	 solar,	 or	 other	 renewable	 energy	
improvements	to	homes	and	businesses	in	their	jurisdiction.	As	a	result	of	opposition	by	Fannie	
Mae	and	Freddie	Mac,	federal	regulators	have	effectively	put	most	of	the	local	programs	dealing	
with	residential	properties	on	hold.	It	may	take	additional	federal	legislation	to	get	residential	
programs	 fully	 back	 on	 track,	 although	 programs	 designed	 for	 commercial	 properties	 face	 no	
similar	 roadblocks.	 A	 handful	 of	 programs	 in	 California	 are	 continuing	 but	 at	 the	 time	 of	
publication,	uncertainty	remains.	
	
	
	
City	of	Ferndale	                                  	   	       General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	June	2015	                                   	                                                      	
SB	97	(2007)	
Senate	Bill	(SB)	97	acknowledges	that	climate	change	is	a	prominent	environmental	issue	that	
requires	 analysis	 under	 the	 California	 Environmental	 Quality	 Act	 (CEQA).	 Pursuant	 to	 SB	 97,	
the	 State	 CEQA	 Guidelines	 were	 updated	 in	 2010	 to	 include	 provisions	 for	 mitigating	
greenhouse	gas	emissions	and/or	the	effects	of	greenhouse	gas	emissions.	The	amended	CEQA	
Guidelines	(Section	15183.5)	allow	jurisdictions	to	analyze	and	mitigate	the	significant	effects	
of	 greenhouse	 gases	 at	 a	 programmatic	 level	 by	adopting	 a	 Climate	 Action	 Plan	 (CAP)	 for	 the	
reduction	 of	 greenhouse	 gas	 emissions.	 Later,	 as	 individual	 projects	 are	 proposed,	 project	
specific	environmental	documents	may	tier	from	and/or	incorporate	by	reference	that	existing	
programmatic	 review	 in	 their	 cumulative	 impacts	 analysis.	 This	 CAP	 has	 been	 developed	
specifically	for	this	purpose.		
	
SB	375	(2008)	
Senate	 Bill	 375	 aligns	 regional	 transportation	 planning	 efforts,	 regional	 greenhouse	 gas	
reduction	targets,	and	land	use	and	housing	allocations	to	reduce	vehicle	emissions.	This	effort	
was	 not	 applicable	 to	 Humboldt	 County.	 The	 State	 assigned	 passenger	 vehicle	 per	 capita	
greenhouse	 gas	 reduction	 targets	 to	 each	 Metropolitan	 Planning	 Organization·	 (MPO).	 For	
example,	 within	 the	 Sacramento	 Area	 Council	 of	 Governments	 (SA	 COG)	 region,	 these	 targets	
are	a	7%	reduction	by	2020	and	a	16%	reduction	by	2030	compared	to	2005	baseline	levels	of	
23.0	lbs	of	C02	per	capita	per	weekday.		
                                                                        	
	
California	Environmental	Quality	Act	(CEQA)	
CEQA	requires	public	agencies	to	evaluate	whether	a	project	
that	 requires	 discretionary	 approval	 may	 have	 significant	
environmental	effects	and,	if	so,	to	impose	feasible	mitigation	
measures.	In	general,	when	it	determines	in	the	first	instance	
that	 a	 project	 may	 have	 a	 significant	 effect	 on	 the	
environment,	 the	 public	 agency	 must	 prepare	 an	
environmental	 impact	 report	 (EIR).	 While	 air	 quality	
modeling	software	(URBEMIS	2007)	provides	a	methodology	
for	estimating	a	project's	carbon	dioxide	emissions,	there	are	
no	 established	 thresholds	 or	 standards	 for	 determining	
whether	a	project's	greenhouse	gas	emissions	are	significant.		
Attenuation	                                                            Sitka	Spruce	trees	on	the	Mattole	
Area-wide	 and	 mobile	 source	 emissions	 may	 be	 reduced	            Road	absorb	CO2,	a	greenhouse	gas.	
through	 policies	 that	 target	 specific	 sources.	 Transportation	
policies	 may	 be	 designed	 to	 reduce	 area-wide	 PM10	 levels	 by	 reducing	 both	 the	 number	 of	
vehicle	miles	traveled	and	the	number	of	vehicle	trips.	Grading	and	road	maintenance	policies	
may	reduce	particulates	in	dust.	Incentives	for	energy	efficient	building	construction	may	help	
reduce	 emissions	 related	 to	 residential	 and	 commercial	 energy	 consumption,	 including	
woodstove	 emissions.	 Maintaining	 efficient	 and	 timely	 procedures	 for	 project	 referral	 to	 the	
NCUAQMD	for	review	and	consultation	will	help	reduce	emissions	caused	by	demolition.	
City	of	Ferndale	                                  	   	     General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	June	2015	                                   	                                                     	

Chapter	 6	 Goals,	 Policies	 and	 Implementation	 Programs	 contains	 attenuation	 measures	 to	
improve	air	quality	and	reduce	greenhouse	gas	emissions	in	the	City.		
Greenhouse	Gas	Emissions	
The	 Redwood	 Coast	 Energy	 Authority	 (RCEA)	 is	 a	 Joint	 Powers	 Authority	 whose	 members	
include	the	County	of	Humboldt,	the	Cities	of	Arcata,	Blue	Lake,	Eureka,	Ferndale,	Fortuna,	Rio	
Dell	 and	 Trinidad,	 and	 the	 Humboldt	 Bay	 Municipal	 Water	 District.	 RCEA's	 purpose	 is	 to	
develop	 and	 implement	 sustainable	 energy	 initiatives	 that	 reduce	 energy	 demand,	 increase	
energy	efficiency,	and	advance	the	use	of	clean,	efficient	and	renewable	resources	available	in	
the	region	(RCEA	2013).			
RCEA	 produced	 the	 Humboldt	 County	 Comprehensive	 Energy	 Action	 Plan,	 consisting	 of	
implementation	measures	specific	to	the	functions	of	RCEA	as	the	regional	energy	authority	for	
the	County,	including	working	with	local	jurisdictions	to	complete	greenhouse	gas	inventories,	
set	greenhouse	gas	reduction	targets,	and	developing	climate	action	plans	(RCEA	2013).	
Local	 government	 operations,	 including	 facilities,	 vehicle	 fleets,	 street	 lights,	 traffic	 signals,	
water	 systems,	 wastewater	 plants,	 and	 solid	 waste	 generation	 release	 greenhouse	 gases	 into	
the	atmosphere.	
Following	California	mandates	to	address	climate	change	and	tackle	greenhouse	gas	emissions,	
the	 Redwood	 Coast	 Energy	 Authority	 also	 helps	 local	 government	 agencies	 calculate	
greenhouse	gas	emissions,	create	climate	action	plans,	and	carry	plans	into	action.	
In	 2005	 and	 2010,	 RCEA,	 in	 conjunction	 with	 International	 Council	 for	 Local	 Environmental	
Initiatives’	(ICLEI)	Institute	for	Local	Governments,	completed	a	Greenhouse	Gas	Inventory	for	
Ferndale.	RCEA produced these documents for the City’s benefit	as	a	planning	resource. The cost
was entirely covered by RCEA through its PG&E partnership program.	This	document	is	a	primary	
resource	 used	 in	 this	 Air	 Quality	 Element.	 The	 inventory	 measures	 greenhouse	 gas	 emissions	
resulting	 specifically	 from	 Ferndale’s	 government	 operations,	 and	 addresses	 where	 and	 what	
quantity	of	emissions	are	generated	through	various	government	activities.		
The	 intent	 of	 the	 analysis	 enables	 Ferndale	 to	 tailor	 effective	 greenhouse	 gas	 emission	
reduction	 strategies.	 Potential	 strategies	 identified	 by	 RCEA	 include	 increasing	 energy	
efficiency	 in	 facilities	 and	 vehicle	 fleets,	 renewable	 energy	 sources,	 reducing	 waste,	 and	
supporting	alternative	modes	of	transportation	for	employees.	In	performing	these	actions,	the	
City	would	benefit	from	lower	energy	bills,	improved	air	quality,	and	more	efficient	government	
operations.	 The	 City	 would	 also	 be	 mitigating	 local	 and	 global	 climate	 change	 impacts	 while	
saving	taxpayer	money	through	more	efficient	government	operations	(RCEA	2012).	
The	 following	 Emissions	 Reduction	 Plan	 is	 based	 largely	 on	 the	 Ferndale	 2005	 Government	
Operations	 Greenhouse	 Gas	 Emissions	 Inventory.	 	 The	 2010	 inventory	 was	 not	 released	 by	
RCEA	until	August	10,	2015,	after	the	Air	Quality	Element	was	prepared.	
Emissions	Inventories	and	Reduction	Target	
The	six	internationally	recognized	greenhouse	gases	(Carbon	Dioxide,	Methane,	Nitrous	Oxide,	
Hydro	fluorocarbons,	Perfluorocarbons,	and	Sulfur	Hexafluoride)	are	combined	in	a	unit	called	
carbon	dioxide	equivalent	(CO2e).	Since	equal	quantities	of	each	greenhouse	gas	have	more	or	
less	influence	on	the	greenhouse	effect,	converting	all	emissions	to	a	standard	metric	allows	for	
City	of	Ferndale	                                   	   	     General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	June	2015	                                    	                                                    	

apples-to-apples	 comparisons	 amongst	 quantities	 of	 all	 six	 emissions	 types	 (RCEA	 2012).	
Greenhouse	gas	emissions	are	reported	in	this	inventory	as	metric	tons	of	CO2e	(MTCO2e).	
In	 2005,	 Ferndale’s	 annual	 government	 operations	 greenhouse	 gas	 emissions	 totaled	 320	
metric	tons	of	CO2e.	The	majority	of	greenhouse	gases	emitted	by	government	operations	come	
from	 the	 Wastewater	 Treatment	 Facility,	 followed	 by	 vehicles,	 buildings	 and	 facilities,	 and	
employee	 commute,	 and	 water	 and	 wastewater	 transport.	 Public	 lighting	 and	 solid	 waste	
contribute	a	small	portion	of	CO2e	by	sector	(Figure	5).	The	biggest	source	of	CO2e	emissions	is	
the	wastewater	treatment	process,	followed	by	electricity,	gasoline,	propane,	diesel,	and	finally	
solid	 waste	 processing	 (Figure	 5).	 	 Although	 the	 EPA	 cites	 cattle	 and	 cow	 manure	 in	 holding	
ponds	 as	 a	 source	 of	 methane,	 there	 are	 too	 few	 dairy	 cows	 within	 the	 City	 limits	 to	 be	 a	
contributing	factor.	
The	 City	 of	 Ferndale	 2005	 Government	 Operations	 Greenhouse	 Gas	 Emission	 Inventory	
prepared	 by	 RCEA	 contains	 a	 more	 detailed	 breakdown	 of	 emissions,	 a	 discussion	 of	 the	
methodology,	 and	 an	 in-depth	 analysis	 of	 emissions	 by	 sector	 and	 source.	 This	 inventory	
provides	 an	 emissions	 baseline	 that	 can	 be	 used	 to	 set	 emissions	 reduction	 targets	 for	
Ferndale’s	municipal	operations.		
A	 greenhouse	 gas	 emissions	 reduction	 target	 is	 established	 to	 reduce	 emissions	 to	 a	 certain	
percentage	below	base	year	levels	by	a	chosen	planning	horizon	year	(e.g.,	a	reduction	to	1990	
levels	by	2020	or	80	percent	below	1990	levels	by	2050).		The	reduction	target	provides	both	
an	objective	toward	which	to	strive	and	a	baseline	against	which	to	measure	progress.	It	allows	
the	 City	 to	 quantify	 its	 commitment	 to	 reducing	 its	 contribution	 to	 global	 greenhouse	 gases	
while	becoming	more	efficient.	An	emissions	reduction	target	should	strike	a	balance	between	
scientific	necessity,	ambition,	and	what	is	realistically	achievable	(RCEA	2012).		
The	 International	 Council	 for	 Local	 Environmental	 Initiatives	 (ICLEI)	 is	 a	 worldwide	 non-
governmental	 organization.	 ICLEI	 developed	 software	 to	 quantify	 greenhouse	 gas	 emission	
reduction	efforts,	providing	tools	to	inventory,	categorize,	and	quantify	past,	present	and	future	
conditions.	Humboldt	County	has	used	ICLEI	software	to	develop	a	greenhouse	gas	emissions	
baseline	for	1990	and	to	assess	the	current	level	of	greenhouse	gas	emissions	for	compliance	
with	AB	32.		
ICLEI	 recommends	 that	 Ferndale	 establish	 short	 term	 and	 long-range	 emissions	 reduction	
targets.	A	long-term	target	will	allow	the	City	sufficient	time	to	implement	emissions	reduction	
measures.	 Short-term	 interim	 targets	 for	 every	 two-	 to	 three-year	 period	 will	 facilitate	
additional	 support	 and	 accountability	 and	 ensure	 continued	 momentum.	 ICLEI	 recommends	
that	interim	targets	be	guided	by	the	long-range	goal	of	reducing	emissions	by	80	percent	to	95	
percent	 from	 the	 2005	 baseline	 level	 by	 the	 year	 2050,	 noting	 that	 this	 won’t	 be	 possible	
without	the	assistance	of	state	and	federal	policy	changes	that	create	new	incentives	and	new	
sources	of	funding	for	emissions	reduction	projects	and	programs	(RCEA	2012).		
An	 integral	 component	 of	 the	 State	 of	 California’s	 climate	 protection	 approach	 has	 been	 the	
creation	of	three	core	emissions	reduction	targets	at	the	community	level.	While	these	targets	
are	 specific	 to	 the	 community-scale,	 they	 can	 be	 used	 to	 inform	 emissions	 targets	 for	
government	 operations	 as	 well.	 On	 June	 1,	 2005,	 California	 Governor	 Schwarzenegger	 signed	
Executive	Order	S-3-05	establishing	climate	change	emission	reductions	targets	for	California.		
City	of	Ferndale	                                  	   	       General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	June	2015	                                   	                                                      	

These	targets	are	an	example	of	near,	mid	and	long-term	targets:	
     § Reduce	emissions	to	2000	levels	by	2010	
     § Reduce	emissions	to	1990	levels	by	2020	
     § Reduce	emissions	to	80	percent	below	1990	levels	by	2050	
     § 	
The	AB	32	Scoping	Plan	also	provides	guidance	on	establishing	targets	for	local	governments;	
specifically	 the	 Plan	 suggests	 creating	 an	 emissions	 reduction	 objective	 of	 15	 percent	 below	
then	 existing	 levels	 by	 2020.	 This	 target	 has	 guided	 many	 local	 government’s	 emission	
reduction	targets	for	municipal	operations—most	local	governments	in	California	with	adopted	
targets	have	targets	of	15	to	25	percent	reductions	under	2005	levels	by	2020	(RCEA	2012).	
Using	 this	 guidance	 and	 ICLEI’s	 recommendations,	 Ferndale	 has	 set	 the	 following	 targets	 for	
greenhouse	gas	emissions	due	to	government	operations:	
     §    Reduce	emissions	to	10%	below	2005	levels	by	2020	
     §    Reduce	emissions	to	80%	below	2005	levels	by	2050	
	
Emission	Reduction	Measures	and	Implementation	Timeline	
Ferndale’s	 greenhouse	 gas	 inventory	 identifies	 major	 sources	 of	 emissions	 from	 government	
operations.	 Sectors	 and	 sources	 responsible	 for	 the	 highest	 emissions	 should	 be	 targeted	 for	
emissions	 reductions	 activities	 in	 order	 to	 make	 significant	 progress	 toward	 the	 short-term	
emission	reduction	target.	Utilities	currently	generate	the	major	portion	of	their	electricity	by	
burning	 fossil	 fuels.	 Therefore	 reducing	 electricity	 consumption	 will	 reduce	 emissions	 and	 it	
may	be	possible	for	the	City	to	meet	its	2020	target	by	implementing	a	few	major	actions	on	the	
City’s	 electricity	 consumers.	 RCEA	 notes	 that,	 although	 Ferndale’s	 Wastewater	 Treatment	
Facility	 is	 a	 major	 emissions	 source,	 the	 vast	 majority	 of	 CO2e	 emissions	 are	 from	 methane	
emissions;	 emissions	 reduction	 options	 for	 the	 facility	 are	 likely	 extremely	 expensive.	 Long-
range	(2050)	targets	will	require	major	reductions	in	all	sectors.	
Given	the	results	of	the	inventory,	ICLEI	recommends	that	Ferndale	focus	on	the	following	tasks	
in	order	to	significantly	reduce	emissions	from	its	government	operations:		
     §    Comprehensive	 municipal	 retrofit	 of	 City	 Hall,	 Community	 Center	 and	 Public	 Works	
          facilities	targeting	reduction	in	both	electricity	and	propane		
     § Modify	 the	 procurement	 policy	 to	 specify	 high	 fuel	 efficiency	 when	 purchasing	 public	
          works	vehicles		
     § Increase	office	recycling,	e.g.	paper,	cardboard,	cans,	toner	cartridges		
     § Encourage	PG&E	to	switch	their	outdoor	lights	energy	efficient	lighting.	
          	
Ferndale	 is	 already	 planning	 to	 reduce	 energy	 consumption.	 In	 2013,	 the	 City	 prepared	 an	
Energy	Assurance	Plan	(EAP)	in	conjunction	with	the	California	Energy	Commission	sponsored	
California	 Local	 Energy	 Assurance	 Planning	 project.	 The	 aim	 of	 the	 EAP	 is	 to	 help	 Ferndale	
become	 more	 resilient	 to	 energy	 supply	 interruptions	 during	 an	 emergency,	 ensuring	 that	
critical	facilities	within	the	community	continue	to	function.		
The	energy	profile	in	the	EAP	provides	a	basic	understanding	of	the	sources	of	energy	supplies	
and	 how	 they	 are	 consumed	 in	 the	 Ferndale	 community	 as	 well	 as	 for	 specific	 city-owned	
City	of	Ferndale	                                   	   	      General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	June	2015	                                    	                                                     	

facilities.	This	information	guided	policies	and	actions	the	city	can	take	to	protect	its	key	assets	
from	 extended	 energy	 disruptions,	 as	 well	 as	 several	 energy-reducing	 actions,	 that	 were	
incorporated	 in	 the	 Humboldt	 Operational	 Area	 Multi-Agency	 Multi-Hazard	 Mitigation	 Plan	
2013	Update	(HMP),	which	was	in	turn	incorporated	into	the	General	Plan	2013	Safety	Element	
Update.	These	actions	included	the	following:	
     Initiative	#F5—Investigate	the	viability	of	renewable	and	distributed	generation	technologies	that	can	be	city-
     owned	 and	 serve	 a	 dual	 purpose	 of	 primary	 and	 stand-by	 power/energy.	 Work	 with	 the	 California	 Energy	
     Commission	and	other	sources	to	identify	advanced	technologies,	systems,	and	financing	options.	
     Initiative	 #F6—	 Investigate	 low-no	 cost	 energy	 efficiency	 and	 conservation	 measures	 and	 innovative	
     technologies	for	key	assets	and	other	city-owned/operated	assets	in	order	to	decrease	their	energy	footprint,	
     thus	 reducing	 energy	 bills	 and	 the	 scale	 of	 needed	 back-up	 power.	 Also	 look	 into	 higher	 cost,	 advanced	
     technologies	such	as	micro-grids.	
Using	these	initiatives	as	well	as	strategies	recommended	by	ICLEI,	Ferndale	has	outlined	the	
following	overall	emissions	reductions	strategy.	
Emissions	Reduction	Measures	and	Timeline	
    M e a s u r e 	1 	 Establish	data	collection	systems	for	GHG	data	as	part	of	normal	City	operations.	
                         T im e lin e :	 Establish	by	2015;	ongoing		
    M e a s u r e 	2 		 Investigate	 the	 viability	 of	 renewable	 and	 distributed	 generation	 technologies	
                        that	 can	 be	 city-owned	 and	 serve	 a	 dual	 purpose	 of	 primary	 and	 stand-by	
                        power/energy.	Work	with	the	California	Energy	Commission	and	other	sources	
                        to	ID	advanced	technologies,	systems,	and	financing	options.	
                         T im e lin e :	 Initiate	discussions	with	RCEA	in	2016	
    M e a s u r e 	3 		 Investigate	 low-no	 cost	 energy	 efficiency	 and	 conservation	 measures	 and	
                        innovative	 technologies	 for	 city-owned/operated	 assets	 in	 order	 to	 decrease	
                        their	energy	footprint	thus	reducing	energy	bills	and	the	scale	of	needed	back-
                        up	power.	Also	consider	looking	into	higher	cost,	advanced	technologies	such	as	
                        micro-grids.	
                         T im e lin e :	 Initiate	by	2017	
    M e a s u r e 	4 		 Comprehensive	 municipal	 retrofit	 of	 existing	 buildings	 including	 City	 Hall	 and	
                        the	Community	Center	targeting	reduction	in	both	electricity	and	propane	
                         T im e lin e :	 Research	grant	opportunities	in	2016;	ongoing	
    M e a s u r e 	5 		 Change	procurement	policy	to	specify	high	fuel	efficiency	for	vehicles	purchased	
                        for	public	works	and	other	departments.	
                         T im e lin e :	 Prepare	by	2017	
    M e a s u r e 	6 		 Increase	office	recycling,	e.g.	paper,	cardboard,	cans,	toner	cartridges	
                         T im e lin e :	 Ongoing	
    M e a s u r e 	7 		 Encourage	PG&E	to	switch	their	outdoor	lights	other	energy	efficient	lighting.	
                         T im e lin e :	 Initiate	by	2018	
    M e a s u r e 	8 		 Develop	renewable	energy	options	for	the	City’s	Wastewater	Treatment	Plant	
                         T im e lin e :	 Establish	by	2018	
	
City	of	Ferndale	                                             	    	       General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	June	2015	                                              	                                                           	

	
	
Greenhouse	Gas	Reduction	Monitoring	and	Verification	
As	emissions	reduction	measures	are	implemented,	regular	emissions	monitoring	is	required	to	
ensure	 that	 the	 City	 is	 on	 track	 to	 meet	 its	 objectives.	 ICLEI	 recommends	 that	 Ferndale	 re-
inventory	its	emissions	every	three	to	five	years	and	has	created	various	tools	to	assist	the	City	
towards	this	goal.	RCEA	plans	to	conduct	a	greenhouse	gas	inventory	based	on	2012	data,	and	
may	assist	the	City	with	future	inventories	(RCEA	2012).		
During	the	RCEA	inventory	process,	Ferndale	staff	identified	the	following	gaps	in	data:	
     §    Direct	tracking	of	refrigerants	recharged	into	HVAC	and	refrigeration	equipment	
     §    Direct	tracking	of	fire	suppressants	recharged	into	fire	suppression	equipment	
     §    Clear	labeling	of	vehicle	make	and	model	in	gas	logs	
     §    Odometer	readings	of	individual	vehicles	
     §    Fuel	consumption	by	mobile	equipment	make	and	model	
     §    Refrigerants	recharged	into	vehicles	in	the	vehicle	fleet	
     §    Tracking	of	propane	consumption	by	facility	and	by	volume	
     §    Tracking	and	inventorying	of	contracted	services	
          	
ICLEI	 advises	 that	 Ferndale	 establish	 data	 collection	 systems	 for	 this	 data	 as	 part	 of	 normal	
operations.	In	this	way,	when	staff	are	ready	to	re-inventory	for	a	future	year,	they	will	have	the	
proper	data	to	make	a	more	accurate	emissions	estimate.	This	has	been	incorporated	into	the	
emissions	reduction	strategy.		
Measures	from	the	emissions	reduction	strategy,	along	with	attenuation	for	general	air	quality	
issues,	have	been	incorporated	into	Chapter	6.	Goals,	Policies	and	Objectives	as	actions	the	City	
will	take	to	improve	air	quality	and	to	limit	future	impacts	of	climate	change.			
	
	
	
	                                	
City	of	Ferndale	                                     	   	      General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	June	2015	                                      	                                                     	

                  Figure	5:		Summary	of	Government	Operations	CO2e	Emissions	
                         2005 Government Operations CO2e Emissions by Sector
                                                            Series1,	      Series1,	
                                       Series1,	
                                                         Solid	Waste,	    Buildings	
                                      Employee	
                                                           2.41,	1%	         and	
                                     Commute,	
                               Series1,	                                  Facilities,	
                                     35.59,	11%	
                             Water	and	                                  37.51,	12%	
                            Wastewater	                                                   Series1,	
                             Transport,	                                                  Vehicle	
                             24.12,	8%	                                                 Fleet,	48.73,	
                                                                                            15%	
                                                                                           Series1,	
                                                                                            Public	
                                                                                           Lighting,	
                                                                                          10.38,	3%	
                                       Series1,	
                                    Wastewater	
                                     Treatment	
                                        Plant,	
                                    160.83,	50%	
                        2005 Government Operations CO2e Emissions by Source
                                                                                  Series1,	
                                                                                Electricity,	
                                                                               69.77,	22%	
                             Series1,	
                           Wastewater	
                             Process	
                           Emissions,	
                          137.77,	43%	
                                                                                           Series1,	
                                                                                        Diesel,	15.16,	
                                                                                             5%	
                                        Series1,	
                                      Solid	Waste	                                     Series1,	
                                        Process	                                       Gasoline,	
                                                       Series1,	                    69.19,	21%	
                                       Emissions,	    Propane,	
                                        2.41,	1%	     25.27,	8%	
                                                              	
               Source:	2005	City	Of	Ferndale	Government	Operations	Greenhouse	Gas	Emissions	Inventory,	page	7.	
City	of	Ferndale	                                          	    	        General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	June	2015	                                           	                                                        	
                                   	
                                   	
                                   	
                                   	
                                   	
                  This	page	intentionally	left	blank
City	of	Ferndale	               	    	          General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	June	2015	                	                                                          	
6.0	      Goals,	Policies	and	Implementation	Programs	
The	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Element	includes	goals	and	policy	to	moderate	noise	and	improve	air	
quality,	 supported	 by	 community	 measures	 targeting	 noise	 level	 reductions	 and	 harmful	
emissions.			
Goals	are	broad	statements	of	community	values	or	aspirations.	They	define	the	ends	toward	
which	the	City	will	address	its	efforts.	
Policies	are	more	precise	expressions	of	the	community’s	position	on	particular	issues,	or	how	
particular	 goals	 can	 be	 reached.	 Polices	 may	 include	 guidelines,	 standards,	 measurable	
objectives,	maps,	diagrams,	or	a	combination	of	these	components.	
Programs	 are	 specific	 actions	 that	 the	 City	 will	 undertake	 to	 implement	 policy	 in	 order	 to	
realize	community	goals.	This	includes	ongoing	City	sponsored	programs	that	are	time-specific	
and	measurable.	
	
NOISE:	GOALS,	POLICIES	AND	IMPLEMENTATION		
Goals	 	          	
     1.1	    Prevent	excessive	point	source	and	ambient	noise	levels	throughout	the	community.	
     1.2	    Realize	 overall	 noise	 reduction	 through	 land	 use,	 design	 review,	 construction,	
             transportation,	and	monitoring	methods.	
    1.3	     Promote	 noise	 mitigation	 techniques	 in	 noise	 receptor	 and	 noise	 generator	 through	
             design.	
Policies	
    1.1	      Stationary	and	Mobile	Sources.	The	City	will	apply	appropriate	average	and	short-
              term	noise	level	standards	during	the	permit	review	process	and	during	subsequent	
              monitoring	 to	 minimize	 stationary	 noise	 sources	 and	 noise	 emanating	 from	
              temporary	activities.	
     1.2	     Noise	 Compatibility	 Standards.	 The	 City	 shall	 ensure	 compatibility	 with	 adjacent	
              and	noise-sensitive	land	uses	by	adopting	noise	standards	by	land	use	type.		
     1.3	     New	Construction.	Amend	the	Noise	Ordinance	for	residential	uses,	to	limit	exterior	
              noise	levels	to	60	dBA	Ldn	and	interior	noise	levels	of	45	dBA	Ldn.			
     1.4	     Noise	Attenuation.	If	all	other	practical	design-related	mitigation	measures	do	not	
              attenuate	 noise	 to	 established	 standards,	 the	 City	 will	 consider	 the	 use	 of	 noise	
              barriers.		
     1.5	    Noise	 Reduction	 Design.	 The	 City	 shall	 incorporate	 buffers,	 screening,	 routing	
             coordination,	 and	 other	 traffic	 control	 measures	 at	 time	 of	 street	 upgrades	 and	
             extensions.		The	City	will	encourage	the	use	of	berms	and	increased	building	setbacks	
City	of	Ferndale	                                  6-	1	 	     General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	April	2016	                                   	                                                     	

             in	 the	 design	 of	 noise-sensitive	 land	 uses	 that	 are	 adjacent	 to	 collector	 roads	 and	
             commercial	or	industrial	areas.	
Implementation	Programs	
     1.a	 Ferndale	Nuisance	Ordinance	06-04	Section	7.04.	The	City	shall	protect	individuals	
            from	 existing	 or	 future	 excessive	 noise	 levels	 that	 can	 interfere	 with	 sleep,	
            communication,	 relaxation,	 health	 or	 the	 legally	 permitted	 use	 of	 property	 by	
            regulating	 noise	 sources	 through	 the	 implementation	 of	 Nuisance	 Ordinance	 06-04,	
            Section	7.04.		
     1.b	 Land	 Use/Noise	 Compatibility	 Matrix.	 The	 City	 shall	 develop	 Noise	 Standards	 to	
            ensure	 that	 adjoining	 land	 uses	 are	 compatible.	 Development	 may	 occur	 if	 design	 or	
            mitigation	measures	will	reduce	indoor	noise	to	“Maximum	Interior	Noise	Levels”	and	
            outdoor	noise	levels	to	the	maximum	“Normally	Acceptable”	values.	 	
     1.c	 Noise	 Compatibility	 Implementation.	 The	 City	 will	 only	 permit	 new	 land	 uses	 that	
            meet	 noise	 compatibility	 standards	 as	 measured	 from	 either	 existing	 adjacent	 land	
            uses	or	nearby	noise-sensitive	receptors.	
     1.d	 Noise	 Source	 Isolation.	 The	 City	 shall	 require	 adequate	 shielding	 or	 distance	 for	
            permitted	uses	that	generate	high	noise	levels	and	ground-borne	vibration	to	protect	
            sensitive	receptors,	such	as:	
              • single	and	multi-family	residential	homes,	
              • schools	and	other	learning	institutions,	
              • libraries,	places	of	worship	or	public	assembly,	and	
              • similar	uses	as	may	be	determined	by	the	City.				
     	
     1.e	    California	Residential	Code.	The	City	should	apply	the	Building	Code	as	adopted	for	
             California	 (CCR,	 Title	 24,	 Appendix	 Chapter	 12)	 for	 determining	 building	 separation	
             requirements.		
     1.f	    Highways	Noise	Contours.	The	City	will	request	Caltrans	trip-count	data	for	SR	211	
             and	 make	 recommendations	 and	 work	 with	 the	 City	 to	 reduce	 noise	 as	 it	 relates	 to	
             noise	contours.		
     1.g	    Environmental	 Review	 Process.	 The	 City	 shall	 utilize	 the	 environmental	 review	
             process	required	by	the	California	Environmental	Quality	Act	(CEQA)	to	generate	an	
             analysis	and	determine	appropriate	mitigation	measures	per	City	and	state	standards	
             for	noise	sensitive	locations	where	noise	contours	do	not	exist.	
     1.h	    Noise	Study	Requirements.	The	City	should	utilize	the	U.S.	Department	of	Housing	
             and	 Urban	 Development	 Noise	 Guidebook,	 or	 its	 equivalent,	 to	 guide	 analysis	 and	
             mitigation	recommendations	for	proposed	projects.	When	a	discretionary	project	has	
             the	 potential	 to	 generate	 noise	 levels	 in	 excess	 of	 General	 Plan	 standards,	 a	 noise	
             study	together	with	acceptable	mitigation	plans	to	assure	compliance	with	the	noise	
             level	 standards	 will	 be	 required.	 The	 noise	 study	 should	 measure	 Community	 Noise	
             Equivalent	 Level	 (CNEL)	 and	 Maximum	 Noise	 Level	 (Lmax)	 levels	 at	 property	 lines	
             and,	if	feasible,	nearby	sensitive	receptor	locations.	Noise	studies	shall	be	prepared	by	
City	of	Ferndale	                                    6-	2	 	      General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	April	2016	                                     	                                                      	

             qualified	 individuals	 using	 calibrated	 equipment	 under	 currently	 accepted	
             professional	standards	and	include	an	analysis	of	the	characteristics	of	the	project	in	
             relation	to	noise	levels,	all	feasible	mitigations,	and	projected	noise	impacts.		
	
AIR	QUALITY	GOALS,	POLICIES	AND	IMPLEMENTATION	PROGRAMS	
Goals	 	           	      	       	
     2.1	    Improve	Ferndale	and	surrounding	air	basin	air	quality.	
     2.2	    Improve	 Ferndale	 and	 surrounding	 air	 basin	 air	 quality	 by	 reducing	 particulate	
             emissions	 through	 to	 achieve	 and	 then	 maintain	 attainment	 of	 California	 Ambient	 Air	
             Quality	Standards	for	particulate	matter.	
     2.3	 Reduce	Criteria	Pollutants.	
     2.4	 Achieve	Overall	Emissions	Reduction	by	mitigating	impacts	to	air	quality	from,	Land	Use,	
            Energy	 Conservation,	 Transportation,	 Hazardous	 Materials,	 Temporary	 Measures	
            Pertaining	to	Construction,	and	Monitoring.	
Policies	          	      	       		
     2.1	 Reduce	Localized	Concentrated	Air	Pollution.	The	City	shall	not	permit	the	creation	
            of	"hot	spots"	or	localized	places	of	concentrated	emissions.	
     2.2	 Buffering	 Land	 Uses.	 The	 City	 shall	 reduce	 the	 exposure	 of	existing	 land	 uses	 to	 air	
            pollution	from	new	sources	of	emissions	by	requiring	the	use	of	buffers.	
     2.3	 Energy	 Conservation	 Incentives.	 The	 City	 should	 consider	 local,	 state	 and	 federal	
            incentive	 programs	 to	 minimize	 energy	 usage	 in	 Ferndale,	 including	 programs	 to	
            reduce	PM10	emissions	and	increase	solar-electric	capacity	in	residential,	commercial	
            and	industrial	sectors.	
     2.4	 Vehicle	Trip	Length	and	Frequency	Reduction	The	City	shall	encourage	mixed-use	
            projects	and	compact	development	concepts,	and	encourage	active	modes	of	travel	as	
            one	way	to	reduce	the	length	and	frequency	of	vehicle	trips.	
     2.5	 Alternative	 Fuel	 Vehicle	 Accommodations.	 The	 City	 shall	 encourage	 and	 may	
            provide	 incentives	 for	 commercial	 and	 residential	 design	 that	 supports	 the	
            maintenance	of	electric,	natural	gas,	bio-diesel	and	hydrogen	powered	vehicles.	
     2.6	 Interagency	Coordination.	 The	City	will	coordinate	with	the	North	Coast	Unified	Air	
            Quality	 Management	 District	 (NCUAQMD)	 early	 in	 the	 permit	 review	 process	 to	
            identify	expected	regulatory	outcomes	and	minimize	delays	for	projects	involving:	
                  a.			 CEQA;	
                  b.		  Building	demolition	projects	that	may	involve	removal	of	material	containing	
                        asbestos	 and	 subject	 to	 National	 Emission	 Standards	 for	 Hazardous	 Air	
                        Pollutants	(NESHAP);	and	
City	of	Ferndale	                                   6-	3	 	     General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	April	2016	                                    	                                                     	
                  c.			 Grading	 and	 mining	 operations	 subject	 to	 State	 Airborne	 Toxic	 Control	
                        Measures	(ATCM)	for	naturally	occurring	asbestos.		
            The	 City	 should	 rely	 on	 the	 air	 quality	 standards,	 permitting	 processes	 and	
            enforcement	 capacity	 of	 the	 NCUAQMD	 to	 define	 thresholds	 of	 significance	 and	 set	
            adequate	mitigations	under	CEQA	to	the	maximum	extent	allowable.	
     2.7	 Mitigate	 Impacts	 from	 New	 Construction.	 The	 City	 shall	 mitigate	 impacts	 to	 air	
            quality	 from	 new	 construction	 by	 implementing	 measures	 for	 dust	 control,	 energy	
            efficient	building	standards,	preservation	of	on-site	trees,	etc.	
     2.8	 Develop	 a	 Monitoring	 Program	 for	 Air	 Quality.	 The	 City	 should	 develop	 a	
            monitoring	 program	 for	 Air	 Quality	 in	 conjunction	 with	 NCUAQMD	 standards,	 and	
            enlist	RCEA	for	assistance	in	the	monitoring	process.				
     Implementation	Programs	
     2.a	 North	 Coast	 Air	 Quality	 Management	 Permitting	 Coordination.	 The	 City	 shall	
            adopt,	 utilize	 and	 maintain	 efficient	 and	 timely	 procedures	 when	 referring	 project	
            applications	 to	 the	 North	 Coast	 Air	 Quality	 Management	 District	 for	 review	 and	
            consultation.	
     2.b	 Land	Use	Buffers.	When	conducting	an	environmental	review	of	discretionary	permit	
            applications	 for	 commercial	 and	 industrial	 projects,	 the	 City	 will	 require	 the	 use	 of	
            appropriate	 buffers	 between	 new	 sources	 of	 emissions	 and	 adjacent	 land	 uses	 that	
            minimize	exposure	to	air	pollution.		
     2.c	 Fireplace	 and	 Woodstove	 PM10	 Emissions.	 The	 City	 should	 promote	 incentives	 to	
            minimize	 PM10	 emissions	 from	 fireplaces	 and	 woodstoves,	 such	 as	 the	 NCUAQMD’s	
            Wood	 Stove	 Incentive	 Replacement	 Program	 and	 other	 State	 or	 federal	 incentive	
            programs.	
     2.d	 Alternative	 Fuel	 Vehicle	 Accommodations.	 The	 City	 will	 encourage	 and	 provide	
            incentives	for	public,	commercial	and	residential	design	that	supports	the	charging	of	
            electric	vehicles,	or	refueling	of	alternative	fuel	vehicles	(ethanol,	biodiesel,	hydrogen,	
            etc.).	
     2.e	 Reduce	Air	Quality	Impacts	from	Surface	Mining.	The	City	shall	develop	procedures	
            to	 reduce	 air	 quality	 impacts	 from	 airborne	 pollutants	 and	 refer	 all	 discretionary	
            review	actions	for	rock	quarries	and	other	surface	mining	activities	to	the	North	Coast	
            Air	Quality	Management	District	for	review	and	recommendations.	
     2.f	 Construction	 and	 Grading	 Dust	 Control.	 The	 City	 shall	 require	 Best	 Management	
            Practices	(BMP)	for	dust	control	at	construction	and	grading	sites	in	compliance	with	
            NCUAQMD	fugitive	dust	emission	standards.	
     2.g	 Air	 Quality	 Impacts	 from	 New	 Development.	 For	 new	 commercial	 and	 industrial	
            projects	that	are	subject	to	CEQA,	the	City	shall	require	feasible	mitigation	measures	to	
            reduce	emissions	of	air	pollutants	and	to	achieve	the	standards	of	the	NCUAQMD.	
City	of	Ferndale	                                   6-	4	 	     General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	April	2016	                                    	                                                     	

     2.h	 Energy	Efficient	Building	Design.	The	City	should	encourage	and	provide	incentives	
            for	 construction	 of	 buildings	 with	 Leadership	 in	 Energy	 and	 Environmental	 Design	
            (LEED)	 Standards	 and	 energy	 saving	 measures	 beyond	 Title	 24	 requirements	 for	
            residential	and	commercial	projects.	
     2.i	 Preservation	 and	 Replacement	 of	 On-site	 Trees.	 The	 City	 should	 consider	 a	 site	
            review	standard	that	preserves	large	trees	where	possible	and	require	mitigation	for	
            carbon	storage	losses	attributable	to	significant	removal	of	trees.	
     2.j	   Air	Quality	Monitoring	Program.	The	City	should	work	with	Redwood	Coast	Energy	
            Authority	 (RCEA)	 and	 NCUAQMD	 to	 develop	 a	 monitoring	 program	 for	 citywide	 Air	
            Quality.	
     	    	
GREENHOUSE	GAS	EMISSIONS	GOALS,	POLICIES	AND	IMPLEMENTATION	PROGRAMS	
     Goals	
     3.1	     Reduce	Greenhouse	Gases	according	to	the	following	targets:	
                  o Reduce	emissions	to	10%	below	2005	levels	by	2020	
                  o Reduce	emissions	to	80%	below	2005	levels	by	2050	
     3.2	     Implement	 successful	 mitigation	 of	 greenhouse	 gas	 emissions	 to	 levels	 of	 non-
              significance	 as	 established	 by	 the	 Global	 Warming	 Solutions	 Act	 and	 subsequent	
              implementing	legislation	and	regulations.	
     Policies	
     3.1	     Greenhouse	 Gas	 Emission	 Reductions.	 The	 City	 will	 work	 to	 reduce	 its	
              governmental	operations	greenhouse	gas	emissions,	consistent	with	the	state	Global	
              Warming	Solutions	Act,	implementing	legislation	and	regulations.	
     3.2	     Review	 of	 Projects	 for	 Greenhouse	 Gas	 Emission	 Reductions.	 The	 City	 should	
              evaluate	 the	 GHG	 emissions	 of	 new	 residential,	 commercial	 and	 industrial	 projects,	
              and	require	feasible	emissions	reduction	measures.	
     Implementation	Programs	
     3.a	     City	 Government	 Greenhouse	 Gas	 Emission	 Reductions.	 The	 City	 should	 seek	
              grant	 funding	 to	 prepare	 a	 Climate	 Action	 Plan	 for	 its	 governmental	 operations	
              consistent	with	the	Countywide	Climate	Action	Plan	that	seeks	emission	reductions	
              in	the	following	areas:	
     	        	 A.	Energy	Efficiency	and	Conservation	
     	        	 B.	Green	Building	
     	        	   C.	Waste	Reduction	and	Recycling	
     	        	   D.	Climate-Friendly	Purchasing	
     	        	   E.	Renewable	Energy	and	Low-Carbon	Fuels	
     	        	   F.	Efficient	Transportation	
City	of	Ferndale	                                   6-	5	 	    General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	April	2016	                                    	                                                    	
     	       	    G.	Offsetting	Carbon	Emissions	
     	       	    H.	Promoting	Community	and	Individual	Action	
     3.b	    Establish	 data	 collection	 systems	 for	 GHG	 data	 as	 part	 of	 normal	 City	
             operations.	The	City	should	re-inventory	its	emissions	every	three	to	five	years	per	
             ICLEI	recommendations,	and	coordinate	with	RCEA	for	the	inventory	process.	
     3.c	    Greenhouse	Gas	Emissions	Standards.	The	City	shall	update	the	General	Plan	and	
             Land	Use	Ordinances	as	appropriate	to	reflect	the	Climate	Action	Plan	and	Emissions	
             Reduction	 Plan,	 and	 new	 state	 laws	 and	 regulations	 for	 greenhouse	 gas	 emissions	
             when	they	become	available.	
     3.d	    Review	 of	 Greenhouse	 Gas	 Emissions	 Impacts	 of	 New	 Development.	 The	 City	
             will	 consider	 modifying	 the	 Zoning	 and	 Subdivision	 Ordinances	 to	 require	 an	
             assessment	 for	 GHG	 emissions	 of	 large	 scale	 residential,	 commercial	 and	 industrial	
             projects,	and	require	feasible	mitigation.	
     3.e	    Investigate	the	viability	of	renewable	and	distributed	generation	technologies.	
             The	City	should	consider	renewable	and	distributed	generation	technologies	that	can	
             be	city-owned	and	serve	a	dual	purpose	of	primary	and	stand-by	power/energy.	The	
             City	 should	 work	 with	 the	 California	 Energy	 Commission	 and	 other	 sources	 to	
             identify	advanced	technologies,	systems	and	financing	options.	
     3.f	    Investigate	low-cost	and	no-cost	energy	efficiency	and	conservation	measures.	
             The	 City	 should	 consider	 innovative	 technologies	 for	 key	 assets	 and	 other	 city-
             owned/operated	 assets	 in	 order	 to	 decrease	 their	 energy	 footprint,	 thus	 reducing	
             energy	 bills	 and	 the	 scale	 of	 needed	 back-up	 power.	 The	 City	 should	 also	 research	
             the	feasibility	of	higher	cost,	advanced	technologies	such	as	micro-grids.	
     3.g	    Reduce	 Electricity	 and	 Propane	 Use.	 The	 City	 should	 consider	 including	 a	
             comprehensive	 municipal	 retrofit	 of	 existing	 buildings	 targeting	 reduction	 in	 both	
             electricity	and	propane	in	the	Capital	Improvement	Plan.		
     3.h	    Obtain	High	Fuel	Efficiency	Vehicles.	The	City	shall	modify	its	procurement	policy	
             to	specify	high	fuel	efficiency	for	each	vehicle	class	for	City	Government	vehicles.	
     3.i	    Increase	 office	 recycling.	 The	 City	 should	 work	 with	 Eel	 River	 Disposal	 to	
             implement	 programs	 for	 the	 business	 community	 and	 City	 Hall	 that	 increase	 the	
             recycling	of	paper,	cardboard,	cans,	toner	cartridges,	etc.	
     3.j	    Energy	 Reduction	 Efforts.	 The	 City	 will	 switch	 from	 incandescent	 bulbs	 to	 more	
             energy	efficient	lighting	in	City-owned	and	operated	infrastructure.	
     3.k	    Collaborate	 with	 PG&E	 in	 Energy	 Reduction	 Efforts.	 The	 City	 should	 work	 with	
             and	encourage	PG&E	to	switch	outdoor	steet	lights	from	incandescent	bulbs	to	more	
             energy	efficient	lighting.	
	                                	
City	of	Ferndale	                                    6-	6	 	    General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	April	2016	                                     	                                                    	
7.0	 References	
	
California	Department	of	Transportation	(Caltrans).	1999.		Route	211	Concept	Report.	Approved	
January	1999.	Available:	http://www.dot.ca.gov/dist1/d1transplan/r211.pdf	Retrieved	30	October	2013	
California	Department	of	Transportation	(Caltrans).	2012.	California	Road	System	Map	1D33.	Approved	
09/26/2012.		http://www.dot.ca.gov/hq/tsip/hseb/crs_map/01d33.pdf		Retrieved	7	November	2103	
California	Department	of	Transportation	(Caltrans).	2013.	California	Road	System	Map	1D43.	Approved	
04/23/2013.		http://www.dot.ca.gov/hq/tsip/hseb/crs_map/01d43.pdf				Retrieved	7	November	2103.	
City	of	Ferndale	Greenhouse	Gas	Emissions	Report		(2005)	
http://www.redwoodenergy.org/index.php/planning/climate-action-planning	
Governor’s	Office	of	Planning	and	Research	(OPR).	2003.		State	of	California	General	Plan	Guidelines.		
https://www.google.com/?gws_rd=ssl#q=opr+general+plan+guidelines+2003	Retrieved	1	November	2013.	
Humboldt	County.	2002.	General	Plan	Update	Background	Reports.	Available	from:	
http://co.humboldt.ca.us/gpu/documentsbackground.aspx	Retrieved	13	December	2013.		
Humboldt	County.	2012.	General	Plan	Planning	Commission	Approved	Draft	Chapter	15	Air	Quality	
Element.		http://co.humboldt.ca.us/gpu/documentsplan.aspx	Retrieved	6	December	2013.	
Humboldt	County.	2012.	General	Plan	Draft	Noise	Element.				Available	from:		
http://www.humboldtgov.org/677/Preliminary-Planning-Commission-Draft	
North	Coast	Unified	Air	Quality	Management	District.	1998.	Regulation	1	Air	Quality	Control	Rules,	
readopted	25	September	1998,	Rule	104:	http://www.ncuaqmd.org/index.php?page=rules.regulations	
North	Coast	Unified	Air	Quality	Management	District	(NCUAQMD).	2013.	Air	Quality	Planning	and	CEQA.	
Available	from:	http://www.ncuaqmd.org/index.php?page=aqplanning.ceqa		Retrieved:	1	November	2013	
Redwood	Coast	Energy	Authority	(RCEA)	2012.		Humboldt	County	Comprehensive	Action	Plan	for	
Energy	Adopted	September	2012.	Retrieved	15	October	2013.		Available	from:	
http://www.redwoodenergy.org/images/Files/CAPE/CAPE-Final-9-2012.pdf			
Redwood	Coast	Energy	Authority	(RCEA).	2013.	Programs>>County	General	Plan	–	CAPE.												
Available	from:	http://www.redwoodenergy.org/index.php/planning/cape		Retrieved	6	December	2013.		
U.S.	Environmental	Protection	Agency	(EPA).	1974.	Information	on	Levels	of	Environmental	Noise	
Requisite	to	Protect	Public	Health	and	Welfare	with	an	Adequate	Margin	of	Safety.																											
Available	from:	http://www.epa.gov/aboutepa/epa-identifies-noise-levels-affecting-health-and-welfare																				
Retrieved	6	November	2013	
U.S.	Environmental	Protection	Agency	(EPA).	2013.	AirData>>Interactive	Map.	Available	from:	
http://www.epa.gov/airdata/ad_maps.html.	
U.S.	Environmental	Protection	Agency	(EPA).	2013.	Health/Particulate	Matter/Air	&	Radiation/US	EPA.	
Available	from:	http://www.epa.gov/pm/health.html	Retrieved	30	October	2013	
Z.	Patrick	Russ	(Mrs.)	deed	reference	to	October	31,	1920,	deed	of	Russ	Park	dedication.	Available	from:	
http://ci.ferndale.ca.us/facilities.html	Retrieved	18	January	2016	
City	of	Ferndale	                                     7-1	 	      General	Plan	Noise	&	Air	Quality	Elements	
DRAFT	April	2016	                                       	                                                    	

                	
                	
       City	of	Ferndale	
Noise	and	Air	Quality	Elements	
                	
                	
                	
                                	
City of Ferndale
Housing Element
    Update
     Adopted
  September 2014
        City of Ferndale
HOUSING ELEMENT UPDATE
Adopted by Resolution No. 2014-19
         September 4, 2014
              City Council:
            Stuart Titus, Mayor
                Dan Brown
               John Maxwell
               Ken Mierzwa
             Michael Sweeney
      Planning Commission:
    Jorgen Von Frausing-Borch, Chair
               Doug Brower
               Dean Nielsen
                Lino Mogni
             Michael Warner
          Former Commissioner:
             Uffe Christiansen
                City Staff:
        Jay Parrish, City Manager
       Elizabeth Conner, City Clerk
               Prepared by:
This document printed on 100% post-consumer recycled pape
                                                    Table of Contents
                                                                                                                                                          Page
Chapter One: Introduction
    Purpose of the Element ...................................................................................................................... 1-1
    Public Participation............................................................................................................................. 1-1
    Consistency with the General Plan..................................................................................................... 1-2
Chapter Two: Housing Needs
    Population .......................................................................................................................................... 2-1
    Employment ....................................................................................................................................... 2-3
    Household Characteristics
           Household Growth and Tenure Trends .................................................................................... 2-6
           Special Housing Needs .............................................................................................................. 2-7
           Overcrowded Households ...................................................................................................... 2-12
           Households Overpaying .......................................................................................................... 2-12
           Extremely Low Income Households ....................................................................................... 2-13
    Housing Stock Characteristics
           Housing Units by Type ............................................................................................................ 2-13
           Construction Trends ............................................................................................................... 2-16
           Housing Stock Conditions ....................................................................................................... 2-16
Chapter Three: Resources and Constraints
    Jurisdictional Share of the Regional Housing Need ........................................................................... 3-1
    Land Inventory
           Identification of Available Land and Sites by Zoning District and
             Realistic Capacity ................................................................................................................... 3-5
           Zoning that Facilitates Development by Income Group ......................................................... 3-10
           Environmental Constraints ..................................................................................................... 3-13
           Availability of Infrastructure ................................................................................................... 3-13
           Zoning that Facilitates Transitional Housing, Emergency Shelters and Housing for Farmworkers
             ............................................................................................................................................. 3-14
    Analysis of Governmental Constraints
           Land Available for Residential Development.......................................................................... 3-16
           Land Use Controls ................................................................................................................... 3-16
           Codes and Enforcement ......................................................................................................... 3-20
           On/Off-site Improvement Standards...................................................................................... 3-21
           Fees and Exactions.................................................................................................................. 3-21
           Processing and Permit Procedures ......................................................................................... 3-23
           Timelines................................................................................................................................. 3-27
           Constraints on Persons with Disabilities ................................................................................ 3-28
    Analysis of Non-Governmental Constraints ..................................................................................... 3-30
    Units At-Risk of Converting to Market Rate Uses ............................................................................ 3-31
    Energy Conservation......................................................................................................................... 3-31
City of Ferndale Housing Element                                             i                                                        Table of Contents
                                                                                                                         Adopted September 2014
Chapter Four: Review and Revision of Prior Housing Programs
    Review and Revise .............................................................................................................................. 4-1
    Housing Needs Summary ................................................................................................................. 4-11
Chapter Five: Housing Program
    Goals and Policies ............................................................................................................................... 5-1
    Implementation Programs ................................................................................................................. 5-4
    Quantified Objectives ......................................................................................................................... 5-8
List of Tables
    1      Population Growth Trends (1970 – 2013) – City of Ferndale ................................................... 2-1
    2      Ethnic Makeup (2000) – Ferndale and Humboldt County ........................................................ 2-2
    3      Sex and Age of Population (2000) – Ferndale, Humboldt County & California ........................ 2-2
    4      Male to Female Ratios (2000) – Ferndale................................................................................. 2-3
    5      Employment by Industry (2000-2011) – Ferndale .................................................................... 2-4
    6      Household Income (2000) – Ferndale, Humboldt County, & California ................................... 2-5
    7      Unemployment Levels (2009) – Humboldt County .................................................................. 2-6
    8      Household Growth Trends (2000-2010) – Ferndale ................................................................. 2-7
    9      Households by Tenure (1980 – 2010) – Ferndale ..................................................................... 2-7
    10     Householders by Tenure by Age (2007-2011) – Ferndale ........................................................ 2-7
    11     Persons with Physical Disability by Employment Status (2010) – Ferndale ............................. 2-9
    12     Persons with Disabilities by Disability Type (2000) – Ferndale ................................................ 2-9
    13     Household Size by Tenure (2007-2011) – Ferndale................................................................ 2-10
    14     Female Headed Households (2011) – Ferndale...................................................................... 2-11
    15     Overcrowded Households (2011) – Ferndale ......................................................................... 2-12
    16     Households by Income Category Paying in Excess of 30% of Income Toward Housing Cost
           (Overpayment by Income Category) (2011) – Ferndale ......................................................... 2-13
    17     Extremely Low Income Households (2000) - Ferndale ........................................................... 2-13
    18     Housing Units by Type (1990 – 2013) – Ferndale ................................................................... 2-14
    19     Estimated Vacancy Rates (2009-2010) – Humboldt County................................................... 2-14
    20     Owners / Renters by Cities (2000) – Humboldt County ......................................................... 2-15
    21     Estimate Median Home Sales ................................................................................................. 2-15
    22     Housing Permits issued (1998-2013) – Ferndale .................................................................... 2-16
    23     Types of Housing 2009 2010 to 2013 – Ferndale ................................................................... 2-16
    24     Age of Housing – Ferndale ...................................................................................................... 2-17
    25     Housing Conditions (2014) – Ferndale ................................................................................... 2-17
    26     Regional Housing Needs Allocation (2009-2014) – Ferndale ................................................... 3-1
    27     Progress toward Meeting Regional Housing Need Allocation (2009 to 2014) ......................... 3-2
    28     Ferndale Housing Rental Distribution....................................................................................... 3-3
    29     Vacant Land Summary by Zone – Ferndale .............................................................................. 3-4
    30     Vacant Land Inventory by Income Category – Ferndale........................................................... 3-8
    31     Vacant Land Inventory by Parcel Number – Ferndale .............................................................. 3-5
    32     Zoning District Descriptions .................................................................................................... 3-17
    33     Housing Types Permitted by Zoning District – Ferndale ........................................................ 3-19
City of Ferndale Housing Element                                       ii                                                       Table of Contents
                                                                                                                   Adopted September 2014

    34     Development Standards – Ferndale ....................................................................................... 3-20
    35     Planning and Development Fees – Ferndale .......................................................................... 3-22
    36     Typical Fees for New Residential Development (2012) .......................................................... 3-22
    37     Timelines for Permit Procedures – Ferndale .......................................................................... 3-28
    38     4th Cycle Quantified Objectives............................................................................................... 4-10
    39     Summary of Conclusions ........................................................................................................ 4-11
    40     Quantified Objectives ............................................................................................................... 5-8
Attachments*
    Attachment A - City of Ferndale Land Use / Zoning Map
    Attachment B – Addendum and Initial Study/Negative Declaration for the Housing Element Update
*Attachments bound separately
City of Ferndale Housing Element                                 iii                                                      Table of Contents
                                                                                                             Adopted September 2014

Chapter One: Introduction
Purpose of the Element
Recognizing the importance of providing adequate housing in all communities, the State of California
has mandated a Housing Element, one of seven required, within every General Plan. The rules regarding
Housing Elements are stated in California Government Code §65580-65589. The statewide goal is given
as “decent housing and a suitable living environment for every California family.”
The primary purpose of the Housing Element is to:
    • Preserve and improve housing and neighborhoods,
    • Provide adequate housing sites,
    • Assist in the provision of affordable housing,
    • Remove governmental constraints to housing investment, and
    • Promote fair and equal housing opportunities.
Further, State Housing Element law requires “An assessment of housing needs and an inventory of
resources and constraints relevant to the meeting of these needs.” The law requires:
    • An analysis of population and employment trends,
    • An analysis of the City’s fair share of the regional housing needs,
    • An analysis of household characteristics,
    • An inventory of suitable land for residential development, and
    • An analysis of the governmental and non-governmental constraints on the improvement,
         maintenance and development of housing.
The City of Ferndale last prepared a Housing Element in 2012 with prior updates in 1989 and 1992. The
most recent City adopted and HCD certified Housing Element for the City of Ferndale is from 2012.
The updated Housing Element presented here includes some information from earlier documents,
relying heavily on Ferndale’s 2012 update, but incorporates updated state guidance and available census
data.
Public Participation
Public participation will be encouraged throughout the development and implementation of the
Housing Element update. Public participation in the development of the Housing Element will occur in
several ways. The primary method of assuring that a good cross representation of views is heard will be
through a study session held by the Planning Commission, which will also be a noticed meeting open to
the public. This study session will be posted on the City’s website, in several places throughout the City
and advertised in the Ferndale Enterprise. Additionally, the Planning Commission will review Housing
Element chapters at a series of regularly scheduled meetings open to the public. The advice and
City of Ferndale Housing Element                    1-1                                       Introduction
                                                                                 Adopted September 2014

guidance offered during the formulation of this element will be considered in developing programs that
comprehensively addresses the needs and intentions of the community with regard to its housing.
To promote public participation and comment on the Housing Element, a news release summarizing key
matters and inviting the public to review the Draft and attend the Planning Commission public hearing
will be provided to the local newspaper and posted on the City’s website. The Planning Commission will
forward their comments and recommendations to the City Council, who will hold an additional hearing
prior to adoption. Both the Planning Commission and City Council hearings will be advertised in the local
newspaper, as well as on the City’s Online News Page, inviting the public to review the Draft Housing
Element and attend the hearings. Copies of the Housing Element will be available at several locations to
facilitate public review and comment, including Ferndale City Hall, 834 Main Street and the Ferndale
Library, 807 Main Street. Electronic versions and hard copies will be provided for the public
convenience. The draft was also distributed to the Redwood Community Action Agency and the
Ferndale Senior Housing Coalition. The Coalition consists of representatives from the Area 1 Agency on
Aging, the Lytel Foundation, the Senior Resource Agency, and the City Planning Department, as well as
the property manager for the newly renovated Ferndale Housing, a local developer, and the City
Manager.
Consistency with the General Plan
Ferndale’s General Plan serves as a policy document prepared to guide City growth and development.
The City's General Plan provides a framework for guiding the area toward orderly growth. The goals of
the General Plan addresses a variety of issues, including: health, public safety, land use, circulation,
provision of services and facilities, environmental protection, and open space preservation. The Housing
Element is one of the seven elements mandated by State law which comprise the City's General Plan.
The other six mandated Plan elements are Land Use, Conservation, Circulation, Noise, Safety, and Open
Space.
All General Plan elements, goals and policies must be internally consistent. Housing Element goals,
objectives, and policies have been reviewed for consistency with goals, policies, and implementation
measures of the other General Plan elements. The City of Ferndale has undertaken a multi-year, multi-
element General Plan Update in May 2012, and is in the process of updating the Safety Element and
Noise & Air Quality Element, with expected adoption in 2014.
The Housing Element bases the City’s ability to meet the need for new housing units on the availability
of parcels that are planned and zoned for residential development and served by utilities such as sewer
and water systems. The Land Use Element provides suitable sites for housing at densities that can
support a variety of housing types. The Land Use Element takes into account the development
constraints and opportunities of the community, including hazards, resources and open space. The
identification of these components of the natural environment guide appropriate locations for housing
and are reflected in the holding capacity projections used in the Housing Element. Community goals are
supportive of the Housing Element objectives in that they encourage sustainable growth, infill
development compatible with existing development, improved public infrastructure and systems, and
diversity of housing opportunities for all income groups, while preserving Ferndale’s small town
character.
City of Ferndale Housing Element                    1-2                                      Introduction
                                                                                Adopted September 2014

The Housing Element addresses all State requirements, including relevant legislation enacted
subsequent to adoption of the previous element. It contains information on housing constraints and
actions to deal with constraints. The Housing Element includes information on the number of units
required to meet Ferndale’s housing needs and its share of the regional need. Sites with development
potential in accordance with the City’s housing needs are evaluated. The revised Housing Element, along
with the adopted elements of the General Plan will act as a guide for municipal decisions which affect
the quality and quantity of housing; and maintain Ferndale’s present quality of life by balancing the
availability of housing with other environmental considerations.
The Housing Element update must be submitted to the California Department of Housing and
Community Development (HCD) for review. HCD will determine if the update is in compliance with State
Housing Element law and may require applicable revisions. Once determined acceptable, HCD will
certify the document.
City of Ferndale Housing Element                  1-3                                       Introduction
                                                                               Adopted September 2014

Chapter Two: Housing Needs
Population
Introduction
Ferndale is located approximately fifteen miles south of Eureka and five miles west of U.S. Route 101 in
the rural dairy area of the Eel River Valley of Humboldt County. Pursuant to SB 244, no disadvantaged
unincorporated communities exist within the City’s sphere of influence. This small community has
traditionally had an agricultural-based economy that has expanded to also include a very successful
tourist economy. Specifically, the main industries in Ferndale are dairy farming, cattle ranching, tourism,
lumber and wood products, and professional, government and retail services. Ferndale is known for its
Victorian architecture and Main Street businesses.
Population Growth Trends
The City of Ferndale has both grown and lost population annually. Ferndale’s population grew by 25.8%
between 1950 and 2000, with much of that growth occurring during the late 1960’s. Between 2000 and
2013, Ferndale’s population was reduced by an average of 1.1% annually. Ferndale’s 2013 population is
estimated at 1,366 (Table 1).
Table 1: Population Growth Trends (1970 - 2013) – City of Ferndale
          Year                   Population                Numerical Change                  Percent
                                                                                             Change
          1970                       1,352
          1980                       1,367                           15                         1.1
          1990                       1,331                          -36                        -2.6
          2000                       1,382                           51                         3.8
          2004                       1,460                           78                         5.6
          2006                       1,444                          -16                        -1.1
          2009                       1,441                           -3                        -0.2
         2013*                       1,366                          -75                        -5.2
Source: Census Bureau (2000 Census, SF3: P1) and (1990 Census, STF3: P001), DOF (Report E-4)
* Source: HCD 5th Housing Element Data Package – Humboldt County
Ferndale’s boundaries, limited to one square mile, coupled with the City’s remote location six miles from
the Highway 101 corridor, contributes to Ferndale’s slow growth rate. Ferndale’s average annual
population change between 2010 and 2013 was minus 0.1%, which is comparable to that of Humboldt
County as a whole, which averaged 0.1%.
Ethnic Composition
Ferndale’s population is predominately white (93.3%) according to the 2000 U.S. Census (Table 2). In
recent history, Swiss Italians owned many of the dairies surrounding Ferndale, and hired Portuguese
City of Ferndale Housing Element                       2-1                                    Housing Needs
                                                                                    Adopted September 2014

workers. Eventually, the Portuguese purchased the dairies, and hired Hispanic workers. Currently, the
Hispanic population is increasing. A diverse array of other races and ethnicities reside in Ferndale,
although in very low numbers. Humboldt County is also predominantly white, although numbers of most
other races or ethnic groups are somewhat higher.
Table 2: Ethnic Makeup (2000) – Ferndale and Humboldt County
    Ethnicity                                             Ferndale                  Humboldt County
                                                  Population      Percent      Population        Percent
Total Population                                    1,382           100.0         126,518          100.0
One Race                                            1,328            96.1         120,962          95.6
    White                                           1,290            93.3         107,179          84.7
    Black or African American                          4              0.3          1,111            0.9
    American Indian and Alaska Native                  7              0.5          7,241            5.7
    Asian                                              8              0.6          2,091            1.7
    Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander                1              0.1           241             0.2
Two or more races                                     54              3.9          5,556            4.4
Hispanic or Latino (of any race)                      59              4.3          8,210            6.5
Source: 2000 Census
Sex and Age
Ferndale attracts retirees, both of local origin and from larger metropolitan areas. A review of the data
indicates that for all age groups below 44 years, Ferndale percentages are below state figures. Over age
45, the trend reverses in that Ferndale consistently has a higher percentage of these residents than the
state as a whole. This is generally true of comparison between Ferndale and Humboldt County as well,
although the trend is not as strong. Although Ferndale has an older population in comparison to the
state or county, the majority of Ferndale’s population (53.9%) is under 45 years of age, and 16.6% are
over 65 (Table 3).
Table 3: Sex and Age of Population (2000) – Ferndale, Humboldt County & California
    Sex & Age                      Ferndale              Humboldt County                California
                            Number      Percent      Number        Percent      Number           Percent
    Male                        641         46.4         62,532        49.4      16,874,892          49.8
    Female                      741         53.6         63,986        50.6      16,996,756          50.2
    Under 5 years                79           5.7         7,125          5.6       2,486,981          7.3
    5 to 9 years                 81           5.9         7,899          6.2       2,725,880          8.0
    10 to 14 years               93           6.7         8,817          7.0       2,570,822          7.6
    15 to 19 years               84           6.1        10,025          7.9       2,450,888          7.2
    20 to 24 years               73           5.3        11,209          8.9       2,381,288          7.0
    25 to 34 years              142         10.3         16,016        12.7        5,229,062         15.4
    35 to 44 years              192         13.9         18,679        14.8        5,485,341         16.2
    45 to 54 years              223         16.1         19,861        15.7        4,331,635         12.8
    55 to 59 years              103           7.5         6,313          5.0       1,467,252          4.3
    60 to 64 years               82           5.9         4,798          3.8       1,146,841          3.4
City of Ferndale Housing Element                      2-2                                  Housing Needs
                                                                                Adopted September 2014

     Sex & Age                    Ferndale              Humboldt County                 California
                           Number      Percent      Number      Percent         Number           Percent
     65 to 74 years             123          8.9         8,020         6.3        1,887,823            5.6
     75 to 84 years              86          6.2         5,754         4.5        1,282,178            3.8
     85 years or older           21          1.5         2,002         1.6          425,657            1.3
     Under 20                              24.4                       26.7                           30.1
     20-44 years                           29.5                       36.4                           38.6
     45-64 years                           29.5                       24.5                           20.5
     65 and older                          16.6                       12.4                           10.7
Source: 2000 Census
According to 2000 Census figures, females outnumber males in almost all age categories with an overall
of 53.6% females to 46.4% males. This follows the trend in Humboldt County, with 50.6% female, 49.4%
males, and California, with 50.2% females to 49.8% males (Table 4).
Table 4: Male to Female Ratios (2000) – Ferndale
                                          Number                           Percent                 Males
                                 Both                            Both                             per 100
     SEX and Age                sexes      Male       Female    sexes       Male     Female      females
     Total population            1,382        641         741    100.0     100.0       100.0         86.5
     50 to 54 years                111         51          60       8.0       8.0        8.1         85.0
     55 to 59 years                103         48          55       7.5       7.5        7.4         87.3
     60 to 64 years                 82         43          39       5.9       6.7        5.3        110.3
     65 to 69 years                 64         29          35       4.6       4.5        4.7         82.9
     70 to 74 years                 59         21          38       4.3       3.3        5.1         55.3
     75 to 79 years                 50         20          30       3.6       3.1        4.0         66.7
     80 to 84 years                 36         14          22       2.6       2.2        3.0         63.6
     85 to 89 years                 14           2         12       1.0       0.3        1.6         16.7
     90 years and over               7           0          7       0.5       0.0        0.9           0.0
Source: 2000 Census
Employment
Employment by Industry
The economy of Ferndale has become more diversified in recent years. Many residents work in a variety
of jobs in Eureka or other regional business centers. In Humboldt County, government is now the largest
employer. The health service industry is a major employer, as is retail trade. The logging industry
continues to play an important but declining role, with the number of logging-related jobs declining
substantially in recent years.
City of Ferndale Housing Element                     2-3                                  Housing Needs
                                                                                Adopted September 2014

Table 5: Employment by Industry (2000-2011) – City of Ferndale
                          Industry Type                                 20001              2007-20112
                                                                  Number Percent       Number Percent
Agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting, and mining:              39        5.9        52        7.0
Construction                                                         37        5.6        55        7.4
Manufacturing                                                        58        8.8        32        4.3
Wholesale trade                                                      16        2.4        28        3.8
Retail trade                                                         87       13.2        68        9.1
Transportation and warehousing, and utilities:                       33        5.0        33        4.4
Information                                                          24        3.6        12        1.6
Finance, insurance, real estate and rental and leasing:              27        4.1        73        9.8
Professional, scientific, management, admin.                         49        7.4        61        8.2
Educational, health and social services:                            137       20.8       133       17.9
Arts, entertainment, recreation, and hospitality                     61        9.3       109       14.7
(accommodation)
Other services, except public administration                         39        5.9        32        4.3
Public administration                                                52        7.9        56        7.5
TOTAL                                                               659      100.0       744        100
Source: 1Census Bureau (2000 Census, SF3: P49)
         2
          HCD 5th Housing Element Data Package – Humboldt County
Ferndale is a tourist center, with businesses on Main Street and several bed and breakfasts serving those
drawn by historic architecture or by a variety of regional attractions. Ferndale also serves the needs of
the surrounding dairy community. Technology dependent activities including consulting, design, and
computer support are a growing segment of the local economy. Arts, entertainment, recreation and
hospitality (accommodation) services have expanded over the last decade, as have finance, insurance
and real estate services.
Income
A review of 2000 Census data on household income shows that relative to Humboldt County or the State
of California, fewer Ferndale residents fall within the two lowest income categories. A total of 11.2% of
Ferndale households reported less than $15,000 of income, compared with 23.7% of Humboldt County
households, and 14.0% of all California households (Table 6). For the $50,000 to $75,000 income range
Ferndale and statewide percentages are similar, at 20.3 and 19.1%, respectively. Only 15.9% of county
households reported the same level of income. In the four highest brackets, the disparity widens. In
Ferndale, 15.7% of households reported 1999 income greater than $75,000, compared with 12.6% in
Humboldt County, and 28.8% statewide. The higher state allocation presumably reflects the
concentration of professional and top management jobs in major urban centers, as well as the higher
cost of living there.
City of Ferndale Housing Element                      2-4                                  Housing Needs
                                                                                Adopted September 2014

Table 6: Household Income (2000) – Ferndale, Humboldt County, & California
  1999 Household Income                   Ferndale           Humboldt County            California
                                    Number      Percent     Number       Percent     Number       Percent
  Households                             630         100       51,235        100    11,512,020        100
  Less than $10,000                       37         5.9        7,059       13.8       967,089        8.4
  $10,000-14,999                          46         5.3        5,057        9.9       648,780        5.6
  $15,000-24,999                         102        16.2        8,803       17.2     1,318,246       11.5
  $25,000-34,999                         100        15.9        7,300       14.2     1,315,085       11.4
  $35,000-49,999                         118        18.7        8,411       16.4     1,745,961       15.2
  $50,000-74,999                         128        20.3        8,138       15.9     2,202,873       19.1
  $75,000-99,999                          53         8.4        3,485        6.8     1,326,569       11.5
  $100,000-149,999                        24         3.8        1,911        3.7     1,192,618       10.4
  $150,000-199,999                        13         2.1          471        0.9       385,248        3.3
  Greater than $200,000                    9         1.4          600        1.2       409,551        3.6
  Median Household Income            $37,955                  $31,226                 $47,493
  Median Family Income               $49,706                  $39,370                 $53,025
Source: 2000 Census
A City of Ferndale Community Income Survey was conducted by Redwood Community Action Agency
during 2008 and 2009. Notice about the survey was published in the local newspaper and it was
distributed with a letter from the City Manager. Although the survey was mailed out with stamped,
addresses return envelopes, response was poor. Since response was so limited, the data collected was
not representative of Ferndale household incomes.
Employment/Unemployment
California Employment Development Department (EDD) data indicates there were 600 City of Ferndale
residents in the labor force in July 2009 (Table 7). The reported City unemployment rate in July 2009 was
2.6%; this figure is slightly higher than the previous planning period of 2.3%. When compared to the
overall County unemployment of 11.3% and all county jurisdictions, Ferndale has the lowest
unemployment rate.
The City of Ferndale has relatively few major employers, as most businesses on Main Street are owner
operated. The Elementary and High Schools employ approximately 65 permanent and 30 seasonal
employees; Del Biaggio Construction employs 35 full time people; Valley Grocery has four full time, nine
part time; City Government seven full time, five part time; Nilsen Feed seven full time, six part time;
Valley Lumber nine full time; and the two banks employ four full time and six part time. Of course, some
of these employees come from outside the city limits of Ferndale.
City of Ferndale Housing Element                       2-5                                 Housing Needs
                                                                                 Adopted September 2014

Table 7: Unemployment Levels (2009) – Humboldt County
Area Name               Labor Force         Employment                      Unemployment
                                                                      Number                   Rate
Arcata                      9,100               8,100                  1,000                  11.0%
Blue Lake                    600                 600                      0                    0.0%
Eureka                     11,700               10,300                 1,400                  12.0%
Ferndale                     600                 600                      0                    0.0%
Fortuna                     4,600               4,200                   400                    8.7%
Rio Dell                    1,400               1,200                   200                   14.3%
Trinidad                     200                 200                      0                    0.0%
Humboldt County            59,900               53,200                 6,700                  11.2%
Source: CA Employment Development Department 2009
Household Characteristics
Household Growth and Tenure Trends
The US Census Bureau identified 663 households in Ferndale in 2000, with approximately 2.3 persons
per household: 564 of the units were single family units, 90 were multiple family units, and 9 were
mobile homes. 52 of the units were vacant, for a 7.84% vacancy rate. In 2010, DOF estimated 717
housing units in Ferndale, with approximately 2.2 persons per household: 608 single family units, 109
multiple family units, and zero mobile home units. 106 of the total units were vacant, for a 14.78%
vacancy rate (HCD 5th Housing Element Data Package – Humboldt County). Over the ten year period,
the vacancy rate increased by 88.5% (see Table 8).
According to the 2010 Census, the percentage of owner-occupied homes was 63.5%; rentals comprised
36.5% of total dwellings units (Table 9). The proportion of renters to owners has remained fairly
constant since the 1980’s. During the 1990’s, twenty-one minor subdivisions with at least 2 parcels each
were approved, along with one major subdivision of 22 lots. During the 1990’s, 40 single family
residences were built, five secondary dwelling units, four duplexes (8 dwellings) and nine apartments.
Ferndale added 29 single family units, six secondary dwelling units and two apartments from 2000 to
2012. Two planning periods ago there were two large (for Ferndale) subdivisions in the planning stages.
One subdivision created 33 single-family parcels, the other created eight additional single-family parcels.
Both of these subdivisions allow secondary-dwelling unit development, should the owners desire. As the
above information shows, most new construction involves single-family dwellings, with few apartments,
secondary dwelling units and duplexes being constructed. Between 2004 and the end of 2009 the City
approved 3 residential subdivisions including one eight lot, one three lot and one two lot subdivision.
Full development of these subdivisions is not expected to take place within this planning period.
City of Ferndale Housing Element                     2-6                                   Housing Needs
                                                                                Adopted September 2014

Table 8: Household Growth Trends (–2000-2010) - City of Ferndale
                 E-8 City/County/State Population and Housing Estimates, 2000     and 2010
                                               HOUSING UNITS
           Total               Multipl      Mobile      Household Vacant           Vacancy     Persons Per
  Year              Single
           Units                  e         Homes            s           Units       Rate       Household
2000       663      564       90         9              611            52         7.84%        2.262
2010       717      608       109        0              611            106        14.78%       2.244
Change     8.1% 7.8%          21.1%      -100.0%        0.0%           103.8%     88.5%        -0.8%
Source: HCD 5th Housing Element Data Package – Humboldt County
Table 9: Households by Tenure (1980 – 2010) - City of Ferndale
                    1980                   1990                 2000                      2010
            Number Percent Number Percent Number Percent                         Number          Percent
Owner         353         65.2%        352      62.2%     385        63.0%         388            63.5%
Renter        188         34.8%        214      37.8%     226        37.0%         223            36.5%
TOTAL         541        100.0%        566     100.0%     611       100.0%         611            100%
Source: HCD 5th Housing Element Data Package – Humboldt County, Census Bureau (2000 Census, SF 3: H7), (1990
         Census, STF 3: H008) and 1980 Census
Special Housing Needs
In addition to overall housing needs, cities and counties must plan for the special housing needs of
certain groups. Government Code (§65584(a)(6)) requires that several populations with special needs be
addressed: homeless people, seniors, people with disabilities, large families, female-headed households,
and farmworker households. This Housing Element takes into account any local factors that create an
extraordinary need for housing, and quantifies those needs as best as possible.
Seniors
In 1980, there were 11,103 persons aged 65 and over living in Humboldt County. This was 10.2% of the
total population. By 1990, 12% of the total population was estimated by the Census to be 65 years or
older (14,631 persons). The 2000 Census indicates that the senior population had risen to 13% of the
total population in Humboldt County.
According to the 2000 Census, Ferndale had 185 senior households, which was 29.9% of the total
households (Table 10). Between 2007-2011, Ferndale had an estimated 193 senior households. Of these,
only 13 were renters, which indicates a strong ownership trend amongst seniors.
Table 10: Householders by Tenure by Age (2007-2011) - City of Ferndale
Householder Age                               Owners                Renters                  Total
15-24 years                                       0                     0                       0
25-34 years                                      23                    34                       57
35-64 years                                     249                    111                    360
65-74 years                                     123                     9                     132
City of Ferndale Housing Element                      2-7                                  Housing Needs
                                                                                 Adopted September 2014

Householder Age                                Owners                    Renters              Total
75 plus years                                     57                         4                 61
TOTAL                                             452                      158                 610
Source: HCD 5th Housing Element Data Package – Humboldt County )
Local Senior Programs
The Humboldt County Sheriff’s Department SWAP program provides free firewood to seniors. The
Bertha Russ Lytel Foundation was formed to help seniors stay in their homes as long as possible. They
have assisted the Ferndale Senior Resource Agency by providing a minivan for rides to medical
appointments, Eureka, Fortuna and Arcata, as well as the Arcata Airport. The van is wheelchair
accessible. Again with the help of the Lytel Foundation, the Ferndale Senior Resource Agency is also
providing home delivery of hot meals. This foundation, along with the Ferndale Community Chest and
local churches offer assistance with monthly bills, help with maintenance costs associated with home-
ownership, help out when seniors and others are faced with unforeseen needs. Another group, Total
Socialization, offers senior meals on the first and third Thursday of the month.
A Coalition for Senior Housing formed in late 2013 to address to local seniors’ housing needs, with the
ultimate goal of planning, securing funding for, and implementing a senior housing development within
Ferndale. The Coalition consists of representatives from the Area 1 Agency on Aging, the Lytel
Foundation, the Senior Resource Agency, and the City Planning Department, as well as the property
manager for the newly renovated Ferndale Housing, a local developer, and the City Manager. The group
has monthly meetings to discuss needs, obstacles, and progress, and has been looking at properties and
development designs to assist in defining the scope of the development.
Persons with Disabilities
In order to understand the special needs of a community, it helps to look at the number of people in a
community who live with a disability, and the types of facilities that are available to them. Six of the
major disabilities are listed below:
       • Developmental disabilities are conditions that originate before an individual becomes 18 years
           old, continue, or can be expected to continue, indefinitely, and constitute a substantial
           disability for that individual. This includes Mental Retardation, Cerebral Palsy, Epilepsy, and
           Autism.
       • Sensory disabilities are conditions that affect the sensory organs, such as blindness, deafness,
           or a severe vision or hearing impairment.
       • Physical disabilities are conditions that substantially limit one or more basic physical activities,
           such as walking, climbing stairs, reaching, lifting, or carrying.
       • Mental disabilities are conditions that affect thinking processes, such as learning,
           remembering, or concentrating.
       • Self-care disabilities are conditions in which basic everyday routines are not met, such as
           bathing and dressing oneself, or getting around inside the home without assistance.
       • Going outside the home disabilities are conditions in which people are confined to their home
           and cannot leave it without assistance.
       • Employment disability is an inability to work at a job or business.
City of Ferndale Housing Element                       2-8                                 Housing Needs
                                                                                 Adopted September 2014

Table 11: Persons with Physical Disability by Employment Status (2010) - City of Ferndale
                                                                         Number               Percent
Age 5-64, Employed Persons with a Disability                                  27                22.9%
Age 5-64, Not Employed Persons with a Disability                              43                36.4%
Persons Age 65 Plus with a Disability                                         47                39.8%
Total Persons with a Disability                                             118                100.0%
% of Total Population over Age 5(Civilian Non-institutional)                           0.0%
Source: HCD 5th Housing Element Data Package – Humboldt County
Table 12: Persons with Disabilities by Disability Type (2000) - City of Ferndale
                                                              Number                       Percent
Total Disabilities Tallied                                       383                       100.0%
Total Disabilities for Ages 5-64                                 224                        58.5%
   Sensory Disability                                            14                         3.7%
   Physical disability                                           71                         18.5%
   Mental disability                                             47                         12.3%
   Self-care disability                                          17                         4.4%
   Go-outside-home disability                                    25                         6.5%
   Employment disability                                         50                         13.1%
Total Disabilities for Ages 65 and Over                          159                        41.5%
   Sensory Disability                                            26                         6.8%
   Physical disability                                           47                         12.3%
   Mental disability                                             20                         5.2%
   Self-care disability                                          27                         7.0%
   Go-outside-home disability                                    39                         10.2%
Source: Census Bureau (2000 Census SF 3: P41)
As of 2000, the total number of people living in Humboldt County with reported disabilities was 25,116,
a number which represents 20.4% of the total population. Statewide, 19.4% of the state’s total
population reported some kind of disability in 2000.
According to the 2000 Census, 194 persons in Ferndale had a disability, representing 14.9% of the
population. Most people with disabilities were either employed (3.4%) or over the age of 65 (6.4%). Only
5.1% of the Ferndale population had a disability and was prevented from working.
According to the Department of Developmental Services, Ferndale has 21 individuals determined to be
developmentally disabled, eligible for regional center services and currently receiving services. 18 of
these individuals are living at home with a parent or guardian. Only one is living independently, and two
are living in a licensed 24-hour non-medical residential care facility (HCD 5th Housing Element Data
Package – Humboldt County).
People with disabilities, including the developmentally disabled, have special needs in that many earn
very low incomes, have higher health costs, and may be dependent on supportive services. These special
City of Ferndale Housing Element                     2-9                                    Housing Needs
                                                                                 Adopted September 2014

 needs may include accessible and affordable housing near public transportation, services, and
 community facilities
 Although there has recently been discussion about bringing bus service into Ferndale, it has been found
 to be economically infeasible. However, the Ferndale Senior Resource Agency has recently initiated a
 senior bus service, with service provided to seniors 62 years and over, as well as disabled persons.
 Ferndale can help meet the housing need for people with disabilities by facilitating independent living
 through in-home modifications, providing suitable housing opportunities, allowing for supportive
 services, and implementing existing state and federal law. For people with physical or mobility
 limitations, the California Administrative Code Title 24 sets forth access and adaptability requirements
 that apply to public buildings, employee housing, manufactured housing, and privately funded and
 newly constructed apartment houses. Although home modifications can improve the ability of people to
 live in independent housing, many individuals may require more extensive care, such as a group living
 environment that provides supervision. Severely affected individuals may require an institutional
 environment that provides medical attention and physical therapy.
 Large Families
 Large households are defined as households with more than five persons. In some circumstances,
 where the housing market does not meet large household housing needs, overcrowding can be a
 significant result of the lack of adequate housing. Overcrowding is not a significant housing need in
 Ferndale. A total of 5.2% of households in Ferndale have five or more people (Table 13).
 Table 13: Household Size by Tenure (2007-2011) - City of Ferndale
                   1 persons              2-4 persons              5+ Persons                 Total
                   #         %           #           %           #           %             #          %
   Owner         109        60.6%       315        91.0%         28        87.5%          452      81.0%
   Renter        71         39.4%       31          9.0%         4         12.5%          106      19.0%
   TOTAL         180        29.5%       346        56.7%         32         5.2%          558     100.0%
Source: HCD 5th Housing Element Data Package – Humboldt County
 Farmworkers
 According to the 2007 Census of Agriculture, there were 1,347 farmworkers in Humboldt County, down
 from the reported 1,557 farmworkers in the 2002 agriculture census. Twenty-four farm operations in
 Humboldt County were family-held corporations, 735 farms were family or individual operations, and 26
 farms were large family operations. Approximately 560 employees worked on farms with ten or less
 employees, while 1,955 workers were employed on farms with 10 or more workers. According to the
 2007 Census of Farmworkers, there were 2,552 farmworkers on 315 farms in Humboldt County (HCD
 5th Housing Element Data Package – Humboldt County).
 According to the 2000 Census, there were 39 persons employed in agriculture, forestry, fishing and
 hunting, and mining in the City of Ferndale. In the Eel River Valley, farmworker housing needs are not
 very significant as most farms are managed by owner/occupants. Most farming operations in the City
 are dairies.
 City of Ferndale Housing Element                     2 - 10                                 Housing Needs
                                                                                  Adopted September 2014

Although there is little need for additional farmworker housing in Ferndale, California Health and Safety
Code Sections 17021.5 and 17021.6 require agricultural employee housing to be permitted by-right,
without a conditional use permit (CUP), in single-family zones for six or fewer persons and in agricultural
zones with no more than 12 units or 36 beds:
         17021.6 (b) Any employee housing consisting of no more than 36 beds in a group quarters or 12
         units or spaces designed for use by a single family or household shall be deemed an agricultural
         land use for the purposes of this section. For the purpose of all local ordinances, employee
         housing shall not be deemed a use that implies that the employee housing is an activity that
         differs in any other way from an agricultural use. No conditional use permit, zoning variance, or
         other zoning clearance shall be required of this employee housing that is not required of any
         other agricultural activity in the same zone. The permitted occupancy in employee housing in a
         zone allowing agricultural uses shall include agricultural employees who do not work on the
         property where the employee housing is located.
         17021.5 (b) Any employee housing providing accommodations for six or fewer employees shall
         be deemed a single-family structure with a residential land use designation for the purposes of
         this section. For the purpose of all local ordinances, employee housing shall not be included
         within the definition of a boarding house, rooming house, hotel, dormitory, or other similar
         term that implies that the employee housing is a business run for profit or differs in any other
         way from a family dwelling. No conditional use permit, zoning variance, or other zoning
         clearance shall be required of employee housing that serves six or fewer employees that is not
         required of a family dwelling of the same type in the same zone. Use of a family dwelling for
         purposes of employee housing serving six or fewer persons shall not constitute a change of
         occupancy for purposes of Part 1.5 (commencing with Section 17910) or local building codes.
Female-headed Households
The Census provides data on the total number of households with a female head and the number of
those with children and the number with incomes below the poverty level. The data is not provided
separately by owner and renter. The data required includes all female heads of household; those
without children may be supporting parents, or a single parent may be supporting an adult child or
relative. Female heads of household are often the households most in need of affordable housing,
childcare, job training and rehabilitation funds.
In Ferndale, there were 39 female headed households, according to the 2011 Census. None of those
female headed households were below the poverty level.
Table 14: Female Headed Households (2011) - City of Ferndale
                         Householder Type                                  Number            Percent
Female Headed Householders                                                   39                9.4%
   Female Heads with Own Children                                            17                4.1%
   Female Heads without Children                                             22                5.3%
Total Family Householders                                                    417              100.0%
Female Headed Householders Under the Poverty Level                            0                0.0%
Total Families Under the Poverty Level                                       21                5.0%
Source: HCD 5th Housing Element Data Package – Humboldt County
City of Ferndale Housing Element                     2 - 11                                Housing Needs
                                                                                 Adopted September 2014

Families and Persons in Need of Emergency Shelter
Contact with the Ferndale Police Chief and Director of Emergency Services indicated that, as of February
2014, there are no homeless people in Ferndale. A reason for this may be that Ferndale is located six
miles from the closest public bus service. In February 2014, the Ferndale City Council found that there
are no un-met transit needs which are reasonable to meet within Ferndale. The local community church
offers help to travelers in need of emergency shelter and food.
Overcrowded Households
The United States Census Bureau defines overcrowding when a housing unit is occupied by more than
one person per room (not including kitchens and bathrooms). Units with more than 1.5 persons per
room are considered severely overcrowded and indicate a significant housing need.
Overcrowding is not an issue in Ferndale. According to the 2011 Census, there were no overcrowded or
severely overcrowded households in Ferndale (Table 15).
Table 15: Overcrowded Households (2011) - City of Ferndale
                 Households                       Owners               Renters               TOTAL
TOTAL HOUSEHOLDS                                    452                    158                610
0.50 or less occupants per room                     379                    102                381
0.51 to 1.00 or less occupants per room              73                    56                 129
1.01 to 1.50 occupants per room                       0                     0                   0
1.51 to 20.. occupants per room                       0                     0                   0
2.01 or more occupants per room                       0                     0                   0
Source: HCD 5th Housing Element Data Package – Humboldt County
Households Overpaying
Generally, overpayment for housing considers the total shelter cost for a household compared to their
ability to pay. Overpayment is an important measure of the affordability of housing in Ferndale.
Specifically, overpayment is defined as monthly shelter costs in excess of 30% of a household’s income.
According to the Census, shelter cost is the monthly owner costs (mortgages, deeds of trust, contracts to
purchase or similar debts on the property and taxes, insurance on the property and utilities) or the gross
rent (contract rent plus the estimated average monthly cost of utilities).
In 2011, approximately 218 households (41.1%) were considered overpaying for housing. (Table 16). This
incidence of overpayment occurs fairly evenly between owner (39.9%) and renter (45.4%) households.
However, for households with lower incomes, overpayment among renters is far more prevalent
(86.9%) than among owners (47.3%). All extremely low and very low income renters were overpaying
for housing in 2011.
City of Ferndale Housing Element                    2 - 12                                Housing Needs
                                                                               Adopted September 2014

Table 16: Households by Income Category Paying in Excess of 30% of Income Toward Housing
Cost (Overpayment by Income Category) (2011) – Ferndale
                                      Extreme     Very                          Above              Lower
             Household                                       Low     Moderate            Total
                                        Low       Low                          Moderate           income
Ownership Households                       56         22        75          68      190    411        153
Overpaying owner households                35         13        25          48       43    164         73
Percentage of overpaying owners         61.5%     60.1%      33.0%      71.4%     22.6%  39.9%      47.3%
Renter Households                          30         11        11          35       32    119         52
Overpaying renter households               30         11         4           0        9     54         45
Percentage of overpaying renters       100.0%    100.0%      39.5%       0.0%     28.1%  45.4%      86.9%
Total Households                           86         33        87         103      222    530        205
Overpaying households                      64         24        29          48       52    218        118
Percentage of overpaying
households                              74.7%     73.5%      33.9%      47.0%     23.4%  41.1%      57.3%
Source: HCD 5th Housing Element Data Package – Humboldt County
Extremely Low Income Households
Extremely low income (ELI) is defined as households with income less than 30% of the area median
income. In 2000 there were 58 ELI households in Ferndale, representing approximately 9% of the total
households (Table 17). Most ELI households are renters and experience a high incidence of housing
affordability problems. Approximately 52% ELI households paid more than 50% of their income towards
housing costs.
Table 17: Extremely Low-Income Households (2000) - City of Ferndale
Households                                                        Owners        Renters        TOTAL
Total Number of ELI                                                  20           38             58
Percent with Any Housing Problems                                   60%          79%            72%
Percent with Cost burden (30% of income)                            60%          68%            65%
   Percent with Severe Cost Burden (50% of income)                  40%          58%            52%
Total Number of Households                                          218           401           619
Source: HUD Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS), 2000 Data
Housing Stock Characteristics
Housing Units by Type
In Ferndale, the proportion of single-family units increased significantly from 1990 to 2000, while the
availability of multi-family units decreased. Trends slowed in 2009, single family detached units
increased while single family attached units decreased, and there was a slight increase in multi-family
units. There was no change in units that have five or more rooms between 2000 and 2009. In 2013,
single family attached and mobile homes decreased significantly from 2009 levels, while multi-family
units increased by 140%.
City of Ferndale Housing Element                      2 - 13                             Housing Needs
                                                                                Adopted September 2014

Table 18: Housing Units by Type (1990-2013) – City of Ferndale
    Housing              1990           2000                          2009                         2013
    Unit Type          #       %      #       %         %           #      %          %          #       %        %
                                                     Change                       Change                       Change
  Single Family-     472 79.3 538 81.0                 14.0       578 81.0           7.4       593     82.5      2.6
      Detach
  Single Family-      10      1.7    27      4.1      170.0        25     3.5       -7.5        17      2.4     -32.0
      Attach
     2-4 units        97     16.3    80     12.0      -17.5        83     11.7       3.8        85     11.8      2.4
   5 Plus Units        9      1.5    10      1.5       11.1        10     1.4         0        10** 1.4           0
 Mobilehome *          7      1.2     9      1.4       28.6        10     1.4        11          0      0.0    -100.0
      TOTAL          595     100    664     100                   706     100                  719     100
Source: Census Bureau (2000 Census, SF 3: H30), (1990 Census, STF: H020) and HCD 5th Housing Element Data
Package – Humboldt County
*Mobilehomes includes “Other” (i.e., RV, Campers)
**Data provided by HCD indicate that there are 24 5-plus units in Ferndale in 2013, constituting a 140% increase
from 2009 to 2013. There have been no building permits issued in Ferndale for such units since 2009. An informal
survey of the City, as well as conversations with City staff, indicates that no 5-plus units have been constructed or
rehabilitated in Ferndale in the past decade. HCD’s data comes from the Department of Finance, which seems to
have overestimated households in general for Ferndale. Census data indicates 610 households in the City; DOF
data indicates 719.
Vacancy
Vacancy trends in housing are analyzed using a “vacancy rate” which establishes the relationship
between housing supply and demand. For example, if the demand for housing is greater than the
available supply, then the vacancy rate is low, and the price of housing will most likely increase.
Additionally, the vacancy rate indicates whether or not the City has an adequate housing supply to
provide choice and mobility. HUD standards indicate that a vacancy rate of 5% is sufficient to provide
choice and mobility. Until 2009, Ferndale’s vacancy rate had been fairly stable at 7.65%. By the 2010
Census, Ferndale’s vacancy rate had risen to 14.8%.
Table 19: Estimated Vacancy Rates (2009-2010) – Humboldt County
        Humboldt County Cities                    2009 Vacancy Rate                        2010 Vacancy Rate
                  Arcata                                  3.05%                                    4.4%
                Blue lake                                 9.08%                                    5.2%
                  Eureka                                  5.85%                                    6.2%
                Ferndale                                  7.65%                                    14.8%
                 Fortuna                                  5.21%                                    6.1%
                 Rio dell                                14.89%                                    5.2%
                 Trinidad                                26.18%                                    25.8%
Source: Department of Finance 2009, Table 2:E5 and HCD 5th Housing Element Data Package – Humboldt County
City of Ferndale Housing Element                            2 - 14                                      Housing Needs
                                                                                            Adopted September 2014

Table 20: Owners / Renters by Cities (2000) – Humboldt County
                                              Specified owners                     Specified renters
                                                   Median selected                                 Percent
                          Occupied
                                                    monthly owner                                   with
   Geographic area        housing
                                                     costs (dollars)        Median Median           meals
                            units
                                     Median         w/           w/o       contract gross         included
                                     value $ mortgage mortgage                rent       rent      in rent
California               11,502,870  211,500      1,478          305          677         747        1.4
Arcata                     7,066     149,000       973           262          485         546        0.0
Blue Lake                    495     119,000       804           240          500         583        0.0
Eureka                     10,942    114,000       875           234          428         495        0.9
Ferndale                     619     162,100      1,148          310          482         559        0.0
Fortuna                    4,190     130,700       960           234          462         526        0.0
Rio Dell                   1,234      95,800       805           237          415         491        1.2
Trinidad                     170     321,200      1,000          294          663         830        0.0
Source: 2000 U.S. Census
Housing Costs
Sales prices for homes in Ferndale have risen steadily in concert with the rise in housing across California
since 1999. Purchasing a home remains extremely expensive and is out of reach for residents in
extremely low, low, and moderate income levels. The housing market has seen a shift in recent years as
lending practices have been scrutinized, the global economy is in downturn and national unemployment
rates near 10%.
Rental units in the area vary from a Studio for $550, one bedroom apartment for $650 to $750, two-
bedroom apartment for $695, two-bedroom detached unit for $895 and two to three bedroom houses
for $1095 to $1400 (Humboldt Craigslist, accessed 3/13/2014). The median cost of rental housing in
Ferndale in 2011 was $918 (2007-2011 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates).
Table 21: Estimated Median Home Sales
Region                                                                     Average $
United States, 2006                                                          185,200
California, 2006                                                             537,700
Humboldt County, 2006                                                        316,000
Ferndale
 January, 2007                                                               427,419
 January, 2003                                                               276,693
 January, 2002                                                               230,618
 January, 2001                                                               223,019
 January, 2000                                                               171,300
 January, 1999                                                               166,634
 January, 1998                                                               157,088
 January, 1997                                                               180,066
 January, 1996                                                               149,294
 January, 1995                                                               133,000
City of Ferndale Housing Element                    2 - 15                                   Housing Needs
                                                                                  Adopted September 2014

Source: Ferndale Enterprise. These are houses listed with MLS and include houses in the Ferndale area, not necessarily inside
the Ferndale City Limits. The highest and lowest are not included.
Source: Department of Finance
Construction Trends
As mentioned previously, three new subdivisions were approved between 2004 and 2009. The total new
buildable parcels proposed are 13. These are all located in single-family zones. As shown in Table 22
below, in the last 10 years, 42 permits have been issued for single-family dwellings, and only 5 for multi-
family units. In the near future, additional single-family dwellings will be built in the subdivisions. There
is a potential for Second Dwelling Units in the Residential Single Family and Residential Suburban zones,
and some infill spots available. For the most part, single-family dwellings will continue to be prevalent
within the city limits.
Table 22: Housing Permits issued (1998-2013) – Ferndale
                     1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004    2005    2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   Total
   Unit Type
  Total Single
                      3     5      5      5      10     4      5        4      0      0      1      0      4      0      1      2      49
Family Permits
 Total Multi-
                      1     1      2      1      0      0      0        0      0      0      0      0      0      0      1      0       6
family Permits
Table 23: Types of Housing 2010 to 2013 – Ferndale
Type of Housing                    2010                                                 2013                      Percent Change
Total Housing Units                 717                                                 719                            0.3%
1-unit, detached                    591                                                 593                            0.0%
1-unit, attached                     17                                                  17                            0.0%
2 to 4 units                         85                                                  85                            0.0%
5 or more units                      24                                                  24                            0.0%
Mobile home                          0                                                   0                             0.0%
Source: HCD 5th Housing Element Data Package – Humboldt County
Housing Stock Conditions
Housing Condition
The City of Ferndale has an older housing stock with many structures noted for their historical
architecture; almost half of Ferndale’s structures date to 1939 or earlier. A majority of these structures
are well maintained and many have been rehabilitated and upgraded. Structures in the central core of
the city are subject to design review to ensure that rehabilitation efforts are consistent with
neighborhood characteristics.
City of Ferndale Housing Element                                      2 - 16                                        Housing Needs
                                                                                                           Adopted September 2014

                                   Table 24: Age of Housing – Ferndale
                        Year Built                            Number        Percent
                        1999 to March 2000                       6             0.9
                        1995 to 1998                            20             3.0
                        1990 to 1994                            27             4.1
                        1980 to 1989                            26             3.9
                        1970 to 1979                            68            10.2
                        1960 to 1969                            67            10.1
                        1940 to 1959                           123            18.5
                        1939 or earlier                        327            49.2
                        Source: 2000 US Census Data
In the final months of 2004 and the early months of 2005, the Planning Department conducted a walking
Housing Condition Survey. All buildings in Ferndale were viewed and scored using a form adapted from
the Housing and Community Development Department. Because all buildings were inspected in person,
street and sidewalk condition was also catalogued. The form used to collect housing and site condition
information is available at the end of this chapter. This survey was updated in 2014 with estimates from
the building department.
There is a need for rehabilitation in the City of Ferndale. Many of the houses requiring rehabilitation
need only minor to moderate repairs (14% minor; 13% moderate). Table 25 reveals that only 4% of total
housing units need substantial rehabilitation and 1% are dilapidated; these dilapidated units need
replacement.
Table 25: Housing Conditions (2014) - City of Ferndale
Housing Condition                        Single Family          Multiple Family              Total
                                           Dwellings                Dwellings
                                    Number        Percent     Number       Percent    Number       Percent
Sound                                 428           70%         65           60%        493         69%
Minor repairs needed                    70          11%         20           18%         90         13%
Moderate repairs needed                 80          13%           9          8%          89         12%
Substantial repairs needed              18          3%            8          7%          26          4%
Dilapidated                             6           1%            0           %           6          1%
Not Evaluated                           8           1%           7           6%          15          2%
Total Housing Units                   610          100%         109         100%        719         100%
Source: City Planner Walking Survey
City of Ferndale Housing Element                       2 - 17                               Housing Needs
                                                                                   Adopted September 2014

STRUCTURE TYPE                                           HOUSING CONDITION SURVEY
             Single Family
                                                         Address: __________________________________
             Garage Detached / Attached
             Duplex                                              Vacant           For Sale
             Multi-family _____ units                   APN# __________________________________
             Other                                      Owner ___________________________________
CONSTRUCTION TYPE                                        POB     __________________________________
             Wood Frame                                 Zone: __________________________________
             Masonry                                    HEALTH & SAFETY
             Other                                         5      Mildew Smell
FOUNDATION Pier / Perimeter-Slab / Unknown                  15     Mold visible
 0     Existing foundation good condition                   15     Dilapidated outbuildings
 5     No ventilation
 10 Repairs needed                                                 Dead Cars, Junk in yard
 15 Needs partial foundation                                       Overgrown
 25 No foundation or needs new                                     Vegetation touching house
ROOFING                                                  STREETS / SIDEWALKS
 0     No repair needed                                     OK NOT
 5     Shingles missing/wavy/moss                                         House walk, tree wells level
                                                                          w/sidewalk
 5     Chimney needs repair
                                                                          Driveway approach
 10 Needs re-roof
                                                                          Curbs
 25 Roof structure needs replace and re-roof
                                                                          Gutters
SIDING / STUCCO                                                           Site drainage
 0     No repair needed                                                   Paved street
 1     Needs re-paint                                                     Corner cut ADA compliant
 5     Needs patched and re-paint                                         Sidewalks
 10 Needs replace and painting                                                    Vertical displace less ¾”
 10 Asbestos / Lead-based                                                         Vertical displace more
WINDOWS Historic / Old / New                                                      ¾”
 0     No repair needed                                                           Sensitive Location
 1     Broken window panes                                                        Cracks/holes more ½”
 5     In need of repair                                                          Damage around Utility
 10 In need of replacement                                                        poles, lights, signs
ELECTRICAL                                                                Other Hazards
 0     No repair needed                                  Comments
 5     Minor repair                                      ___________________________________________
 10 Replace main panel                                   ___________________________________________
DILAPIDATED                                              ___________________________________________
                                                         ___________________________________________
 56 extreme neglect; bldg appears structurally
                                                         ___________________________________________
       unsound and maint nonexistent, not fit for
                                                         ___________________________________________
       human habitation in current condition; may
                                                         ___________________________________________
       be considered for demo or major rehab
                                                         ___________________________________________
SCORING SYSTEM                                           ___________________________________________
 Sound                                    9 or less      ___________________________________________
 Minor                                     10 – 15       ___________________________________________
 Moderate                                  16 – 39       ___________________________________________
 Substantial                               40 – 55       ___________________________________________
 Dilapidated                                   56+       ___________________________________________
 TOTAL Points                                            ___________________________________________
                                                         Surveyor________________________Date:_______
City of Ferndale Housing Element                    2 - 18                                    Housing Needs
                                                                                  Adopted September 2014

City of Ferndale Housing Element 2 - 19          Housing Needs
                                        Adopted September 2014
Chapter Three: Resources and Constraints
Jurisdictional Share of Regional Housing Need
A Regional Housing Needs Plan (RHNP) is mandated by the State of California (Government Code (GC),
§65584) for regions to address housing issues and needs based on future growth projections for the
area. The State of California also establishes the number of total housing units needed for each region.
In accordance with State law and to assist local governments in making projections of future housing
needs, Humboldt County Association of Governments (HCAOG) with assistance from HCD prepared a
regional housing needs plan for Humboldt County covering the period January 1, 2014 to June 30, 2019.
The purpose of the plan is to examine housing needs across jurisdictional boundaries and allocate to
each local government a “fair” share of the regional housing need. The plan consists of two forms of
projections. The first is a projection of the number and distribution of households by income group. The
income groups are defined by HCD as follows:
         • Extremely low-income: 0 to 30% of area median income (AMI);
         • Very low-income: 31 to 50% of AMI;
         • Low-income: 51 to 80% of AMI;
         • Moderate-income: 81 to 120% of AMI; and
         • Above moderate-income: 120% or more of AMI.
Table 26 provides the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) target for the planning period of 2014
to 2019 for each of the four household income groups for the City of Ferndale. Based on these
projections, the City of Ferndale needs to provide 21 houses in the years from 2014 to 2019. The
allocation is equivalent to a yearly need of roughly four housing units for the five-year period.
Table 26: Regional Housing Needs Allocation (2014-2019) – Ferndale
Income Group                                                Number                         Percent
Extremely Low                                                    3                           14.3
Very Low                                                         3                           14.3
Low                                                              3                           14.3
Moderate                                                         4                           19.0
Above Moderate                                                   8                           38.1
TOTAL                                                           21                           100
Source: HCAOG Humboldt County Regional Housing Needs Allocation Plan January 1, 2014 – June 30, 2019
Adopted December 2013
These projections are to be used as guidelines to ensure that City housing policies and programs focus
on a mix of housing types and strategies to meet the housing needs of all economic segments of the
community. The intent of the RHNP is to ensure that local jurisdictions address not only the needs of
their immediate area but also provide their share of housing needs for the entire region. Additionally, a
major goal of the RHNP is to assure that every community provides an opportunity for a mix of
affordable housing to all economic segments of its population. The RHNP jurisdictional allocations are
City of Ferndale Housing Element                      3-1                         Resources and Constraints
                                                                                  Adopted September 2014

made to ensure that adequate sites and zoning are provided to address existing and anticipated housing
demands during the planning period and that market forces are not inhibited in addressing the housing
needs for all facets of a particular community.
Projected need for extremely low income (ELI) housing was calculated by presuming that 50% of very
low-income households qualify as ELI households. This results in a projected need for 3 ELI households.
Table 27: Progress toward Meeting Regional Housing Need Allocation (2009 to 2014)
Income                                Regional Housing        Units Constructed      Surplus (Shortfall)
Group                                 Need
Very Low                                       14                        0                    (14)
Low                                             8                       10                      2
Moderate                                        9                        2                     (7)
Above Moderate                                 21                        3                    (18)
TOTAL                                          52                       15                    (37)
Source: City of Ferndale Annual Housing Element Progress Report 1/1/2013-12/31/2013
From 2009-2014 the City of Ferndale issued 3 building permits for single family homes and 4 permits for
second units. The remaining 8 units listed in Table 27 were rehabilitated units. All of these units are
market rate. Current rental prices for second units and apartments of similar size were researched in
local property listing publications. Based on this review of available second units, typical rents are less
than $800 per month depending on the unit size and number of bedrooms. Due to their smaller size and
lower rents, these units are generally affordable to lower-income households (considering the 2011
Humboldt County Annual Median Income of $40,376). Market rate single family homes are currently
being sold around $387,913 (2011, city-data.com) which is affordable to those households earning
above moderate incomes.
Ferndale Housing Acquisition
In 2011, the City acquired a 52-unit former Navy housing facility that was vacated in 2008. The City of
Ferndale took ownership of the Navy housing for low and moderate income individuals, families, and
seniors, and renamed it Ferndale Housing. An Acquisition Options and Preliminary Feasibility Analysis
(January 2010) report was prepared to assure financial feasibility and to provide the options and
requirements for the housing complex and the necessary steps and timeline of acquisition. The City
secured the federal appropriation allowing the 11.68 acre site to be transferred to the City at no cost for
the purpose of providing affordable housing. The 52 units include 24 single family homes and 28 multi-
family units, currently zoned R1H.
The City actively worked to acquire the site and recognizes the importance of providing sites for
affordable housing within the City. The existing units were rehabilitated and now provide both low and
moderate income rentals. Under a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the City, Ferndale
Housing was required to provide 25 low income and 22 moderate income units. In actual operations, a
total of 48 units are low income rentals, which exceeds the City’s 4th cycle RHNA allocation for lower
income households of 22 units. Table 28 shows the rental distribution of units based on income.
City of Ferndale Housing Element                       3-2                       Resources and Constraints
                                                                                  Adopted September 2014

                        Table 28: Ferndale Housing Rental Distribution 2014*
                                                                            No. of
                                  Unit Type & No. Bedrooms
                                                                             Units
                         Low Income ( <80% AMI)
                         Single Family - 2 BRM, 1 BA                            2
                                             3 BRM, 2 BA                       15
                                             4 BRM, 2BA                         4
                         Townhouse - 2 BRM, 1.5 BA                             19
                                             4 BRM, 2.5 BA                      8
                         TOTAL Low Income Units
                                                                               48
                          Moderate Income ( <120% AMI)
                         Single Family - 2 BRM, 1 BA                            0
                                             3 BRM, 2 BA                        2
                                             4 BRM, 2BA                         1
                                                                                1
                         Townhouse - 2 BRM, 1.5 BA
                                             4 BRM, 2.5 BA                      0
                         TOTAL Moderate Income Units
                                                                                3
                        *These numbers differ from those used to meet the 4th cycle
                        RHNA, as more units than originally anticipated were allocated
                        for low income housing.
**One 3 BRM, 2 BA unit reserved by law for Resident Manager
The City transferred the site to a non-profit to oversee the operation and management of the housing
complex. The City Council, with input from the public, developed management policies, financial
guidelines, tenant selection policies, and Codes, Covenants, and Restrictions (CC&R’s) that govern the
use of the land and its oversight by the non-profit.
Ferndale “may only credit up to 25% of [Ferndale Housing] units in each income category toward the
City’s regional need.” This is because, according to the Department of Finance, these units were
considered part of the existing housing stock for purposes of calculating the current regional housing
need. This resulted in crediting six units for low-income households and two units for moderate-income
households (based on the MOU between the City and Ferndale Housing). The City still feels these units
are applicable to meeting RHNA because the units have been vacant for three years and when they were
occupied - only available to military personnel and not part of the housing stock for the general public.
The City, however, proceeded with additional analysis to identify other sites to address the remaining 4th
cycle need of 23 units, of which 16 were for lower-income households.
The Ferndale Housing complex required substantial rehabilitation to make some of the units habitable.
These units resulted in a net increase in the City’s affordable housing stock. All 52 units have been
rehabilitated and are now occupied. Affordability and occupancy restrictions will be maintained for at
least 20 years by recorded deed restrictions (65583.1(c)(2)(A)(ii)).
City of Ferndale Housing Element                       3-3                          Resources and Constraints
                                                                                     Adopted September 2014

When considering only the units HCD allows to be credited towards meeting the RHNA, 37 of the 52
needed units were provided. Over the RHNA planning period, however, 59 units were permitted,
constructed, or rehabilitated. Table 27 shows units provided for each income category.
Land Inventory
Identification of Available Land by Zoning District and Realistic Capacity
Housing Element law requires an inventory of land suitable for residential development. An important
purpose of this inventory is to determine whether a jurisdiction has allocated sufficient land for the
development of housing to meet the jurisdiction’s share of the Regional Housing Needs, including
housing to accommodate the needs of all household income levels. The attached Ferndale Land Use/
Zoning Map (Attachment A) shows current land use and zoning within the city boundary.
This inventory has been revised for the 2014 Housing Element Update. Although the City issued three
building permits for construction of new single-family residences during the 4th cycle planning period
(2009-2014), only one of these was issued for a parcel listed on the Vacant Land Inventory by Parcel
Number in Table 31. Tables 29 and 31 and the Vacant Land Inventory Map have been updated
accordingly. Table 30 Vacant Land Summary by Income Category incorporates the updated data.
There is limited land available in Ferndale because the City has maintained its one square mile of city
limits; however, according to the Table 29 below, there is still sufficient available land to exceed the
City’s RHNA. At this time, the City does not plan to annex additional land.
Table 29: Vacant Land Summary by Zone – Ferndale
                                                                                 Maximum
                                                                        Density                Realistic
                                                                                  Dwelling
General Plan and Zone Designation                             Acres      Range                   Unit
                                                                                    Unit
                                                                        (du/ac)              Capacity**
                                                                                  Capacity
Agriculture-Exclusive (AE)                                    117.8      0-.25       29          17*
                                                                          0-7/
Split Residential, Ag-Exclusive (R1-AE)                        10.8                  18           10
                                                                         0-.25
Residential Single Family (R1)                                34.06       0-7       238          143
Residential Single Family (R1B1)                               0.23       0-7         1           1
Residential Single Family (R1B2)                               8.61       0-4        34           20
Residential Single Family (R1B3)                               5.71       0-2        11           7
                                                                         0-14/
Split Residential, Ag- Exclusive (R2-AE)                       8.34                  23           14
                                                                         0-.25
Residential Two Family (R2)                                    0.55       0-15        8           5
Residential Suburban (RS)                                     11.06       0-1        11           7
Neighborhood Commercial Design Review Qualified (C1DQ)         0.31       0-21        6           4
City of Ferndale Housing Element                      3-4                       Resources and Constraints
                                                                                Adopted September 2014

Community Commercial (C2)                                                1.56       0-21         32            19
Community Commercial Design Review Qualified (C2DQ)                      0.73       0-21         15             9
Total                                                                   199.8                    426          256
   *Although agriculture land is included in this table, it only represents a small percentage (approx. 7%) of total
   vacant land. Residences on agriculture land are generally not affordable, therefore growth is not focused in these
   areas.
   **Numbers rounded.
For the purpose of this analysis, the estimate of dwelling unit capacity in Table 28 reflects potential units
based on “realistic capacity” as well as “maximum” densities for each land use designation. The
“realistic” figure reflects a 40% density reduction over the potential maximum build-out to reflect
average new development density and to account for potential site constraints (infrastructure,
floodplain, etc.).
A conservative realistic unit density was also used on sites where accurate development potential is
hard to predict. For example, identified sites in non-residential zones (e.g. commercial zones) that allow
for residential uses may not be developed for only residential use. Ferndale’s Community Commercial
zone (C2) principally permits residential uses; therefore the realistic unit capacity reflects the potential
for both commercial and residential site uses. Residential uses are encouraged above the ground floor
commercial uses in commercial zones.
Table 30: Vacant Land Summary by Income Category – Ferndale
                                                              Minimum Density               Vacant Site Inventory
Income Group                        Total RHNA
                                                                   Guidelines                      Capacity
Very Low                                 6
                                                                 20 units/acre                         32
Low                                      3
Moderate                                 4                      ≥15 units/acre                          5
Above Moderate                           8                      <15 units/acre                        219
Total                                   21                                                            256
Housing Element law requires a site-by-site inventory of vacant/ underutilized lands sufficient to meet
the regional housing need in the next five years. Table 29 provides a vacant land inventory by parcel
including acreage, existing use, land use/ zoning designation, realistic capacity and potential constraints.
The realistic capacity is a 40% density reduction over the potential maximum build-out to reflect average
new development density and to account for potential site constraints (infrastructure, floodplain, etc.).
Figure 1 shows the vacant land inventory by Land Use/ Zone designation. As shown in Tables 29, 30 and
31, there is sufficient vacant land to accommodate the City’s RHNA share. Therefore, non-vacant and
underutilized sites were not used to determine Realistic Unit Capacity.
Table 31: Vacant Land Inventory by Parcel Number – Ferndale
City of Ferndale Housing Element                             3-5                           Resources and Constraints
                                                                                           Adopted September 2014

                   Land      Density         Realistic
      APN          Use/       Range    Acres   Unit     Existing Use         Potential Constraints
                  Zoning     (du/ac)         Capacity
030-011-002         AE        0-0.25   5.01      1     fairgrounds   Agricultural land, not for sale
030-031-001         AE        0-0.25   10.79     1     agricultural  Agricultural Land, not for sale
030-041-002         AE        0-0.25   5.03      1     agricultural  Agricultural Land, not for sale
030-051-001         AE        0-0.25   13.09     1     agricultural  Agricultural Land, not for sale
030-061-007       R1/AE    0-7/ 0-0.25 2.39      2     agricultural  Drainage, split zone
030-091-015         R1         0-7     0.20      1     vacant        None
030-091-021         R1         0-7     15.70    66     agricultural  Just subdivided into 29 lots
030-091-024         R1         0-7     1.51      6     agricultural  Just subdivided into 4 lots
                                                                     No access, Agricultural Land, not
030-101-008        R1B2        0-4     1.05      2     agricultural  for sale
030-111-003         AE        0-0.25   1.38      1     agricultural  Agricultural Land, not for sale
030-111-015        R1D         0-7     1.74      7     agricultural  Drainage
                                                                     35' entry won't support more than
                                                                     2 dwellings, creek cuts off Main
030-112-019        R1D         0-7     1.32      2     agricultural  Street
030-131-006        R1D         0-7     0.24      1     vacant        None
                                                                     60' row goes through lot to lots
030-131-024         R1         0-7     0.21      1     road          behind
                                                                     To develop must bridge Francis
030-141-010         R1         0-7     1.49      6     agricultural  Creek
030-151-006         RS         0-1     11.06     6     agricultural  Agricultural Land, not for sale
030-161-017         R1         0-7     0.43      1     agricultural  Owner uses as orchard
                                                                     Flag Lot, not for sale, existing Ag.
030-161-020         AE        0-0.25   1.31      0     agricultural  building
030-171-002         R2         0-15    0.14      1     vacant        None
030-171-005       C1DQ         0-21    0.31      4     vacant        None
030-171-008         AE        0-0.25   4.32      1     agricultural  Drainage
030-172-015        R2D         0-15    0.15      1     vacant        None
030-181-004         R2         0-15    0.28      2     vacant        None
030-181-008       R2/AE 0-15/ 0-0.25   5.39      9     agricultural  Agricultural Land, not for sale
030-191-007       R2/AE 0-15/ 0-0.25   2.95      5     agriculture   None
030-191-008       R1/AE 0-7/ 0-0.25    8.41      8     agricultural  Agricultural Land, not for sale
030-201-009        R1D         0-7     0.14      1     vacant        None
030-211-002        R1D         0-7     0.27      1     vacant        None
030-211-008         AE        0-0.25   18.18     3     agricultural  Agricultural Land, not for sale
031-013-004         AE        0-0.25   0.28      0     agricultural  No access
031-013-018         AE        0-0.25   0.54      0     agricultural  No access
                                                                     Triangularly shaped lot, difficult
031-021-009         R2         0-15    0.13      1     vacant        access
031-024-003         AE        0-0.25   0.13      0     vacant        Steep grade, difficult access
031-031-003      R1D/R1        0-7     0.63      2     vacant        Mostly steep grade, difficult access
 City of Ferndale Housing Element              3-6                        Resources and Constraints
                                                                          Adopted September 2014
                   Land      Density        Realistic
      APN          Use/       Range   Acres   Unit     Existing Use         Potential Constraints
                  Zoning     (du/ac)        Capacity
031-032-007       C2DQ         0-21   0.60      7     vacant        Difficult access, partially in creek
031-032-009        R2D         0-15   0.06      0     vacant        Undersized at 2640, no access
031-032-015        R1D         0-7    0.22      1     vacant        Steep grade
                                                                    Undersized at 3000 sf, only 30'
031-032-028        C2D         0-21   0.07      1     vacant        wide
031-032-029         R1         0-7    1.67      7     agricultural  Odd shaped lot, steep, no access
031-041-005         AE        0-0.25  3.70      1     vacant        Very steep grade
                                                                    Very steep grade, owned by Del
031-051-007         AE        0-0.25  1.87      0     agricultural  Oro Water Co.
031-051-015         AE        0-0.25  14.46     2     agricultural  Agricultural land, not for sale
031-051-017         AE        0-0.25  1.74      0     agricultural  Very steep grade
                                                                    Oddly shaped lot at end of Francis
031-051-018         AE        0-0.25  0.52      0     agricultural  Street
031-061-003         AE        0-0.25  20.00     3     agricultural  Agricultural Land, not for sale
031-071-012         R1         0-7    0.21      1     vacant        None
031-083-002        C2D         0-21   0.45      6     vacant        None
031-082-010        R1D         0-7    0.50      2     vacant        None
031-083-004        C2D         0-21   0.22      3     barn          None
031-085-022        C2D         0-21   0.80     10     vacant        Alley access, creek
031-111-010      AE/ R1B2 0-0.25/ 0-4 2.93      2     vacant        Very steep grade
031-112-001        R1B3        0-2    0.38      1     vacant        Steep access off Bluff Street
031-112-004        R1B3        0-2    0.34      1     vacant        Steep access off Bluff Street
                                                                    No access w/o building bridge over
031-121-003         AE        0-0.25  3.13      1     vacant        creek
031-121-006         AE        0-0.25  0.54      0     vacant        Steep, by creek
031-121-007         AE        0-0.25  0.18      0     agricultural  Undersized AE lot
031-121-009        R1B2        0-4    1.83      4     vacant        Steep, by creek
031-121-011         AE        0-0.25  0.33      0     vacant        Very steep grade
031-131-027        R2D         0-15   0.00      0     vacant        Unbuildable - undersized lot
031-131-048         R1         0-7    1.32      6     vacant        Access thru privately owned road
031-131-049         R1         0-7    0.45      2     barn          No access
031-131-051        R1B2        0-4    0.31      1     vacant        Access thru privately owned road
031-132-003        C2D         0-21   0.16      2     vacant        None
031-132-017        C2D         0-21   0.16      2     vacant        None
031-142-017        C2D         0-21   0.15      2     vacant        Currently used as parking lot
031-151-020         R1         0-7    0.55      2     vacant        No access
031-162-007         R2         0-15   0.00      0     vacant        Unbuildable - undersized lot
031-163-025        R1B3        0-2    0.58      1     vacant        Odd shaped lot
031-163-027        R1B3        0-2    2.05      2     vacant        Very steep, no access
031-163-028        R1B3        0-2    1.81      2     vacant        None
 City of Ferndale Housing Element             3-7                        Resources and Constraints
                                                                         Adopted September 2014
                   Land      Density       Realistic
      APN          Use/       Range  Acres   Unit     Existing Use        Potential Constraints
                  Zoning     (du/ac)       Capacity
031-171-017         AE        0-0.25 5.62     1      agricultural Agricultural Land, not for sale
                                                                   Unbuildable - too narrow at 20'
031-171-018         AE        0-0.25 0.00     0      agricultural wide
031-171-027         R1         0-7   0.30     1      vacant        Owned by Neighbor, part of yard
031-171-038        R1B2        0-4   0.28     1      vacant        Drainage
031-171-044        R1B2        0-4   0.25     1      vacant        None
031-182-005       C2DQ         0-21  0.13     2      vacant        None
031-183-032         R1         0-7   0.20     1      vacant        None
031-183-033         R1         0-7   1.91     8      vacant        Drainage
031-192-013         R1         0-7   0.25     1      barn          Alley access only
031-202-002         AE        0-0.25 3.57     1      vacant        Agricultural Land, not for sale
031-212-002        R1B3        0-2   0.55     1      vacant        Very steep grade
031-231-006        R1B2        0-4    0.6     1      vacant        None
031-231-007        R1B2        0-4   0.57     1      vacant        None
031-232-016        R1B1        0-5   0.23     1      vacant        None
031-242-018         R1         0-7   0.21     1      vacant        Owned by Neighbor, part of yard
031-251-002        R1B2        0-4   2.81     7      vacant        None
031-251-003        R1B2        0-4   0.46     1      vacant        None
031-251-005        R1B2        0-4   0.45     1      vacant        None
031-251-010         R1         0-7   0.23     1      vacant        None
031-251-016         R1         0-7   0.99     4      vacant        No access
 City of Ferndale Housing Element            3-8                       Resources and Constraints
                                                                        Adopted September 2014
 Vacant Land Inventory                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            City of Ferndale
              Ferndale City Limits
    ZONING
              A-E
                                                                                           RASMUSSEN LN                                                                                                            CALIFORNIA ST
              C-1-D-Q             BUSH ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MARKET ST
              C-2-D              BUSH ST
              C-2-D-Q
              R-1
                                                                                                                                                                                     VAN NESS AVE
              R-1-B-1
              R-1-B-2
              R-1-B-3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MILTON AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AMBROSINI LN
              R-1-D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TENNYSON AVE
              R-2
              R-2-D                                                                                  ARLINGTON AVE                                                                   ARLINGTON AVE                                                                      ARLINGTON AVE
              R-S                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MAIN ST
              R-S-B-5                                                                                                                          5TH ST
              Ferndale Housing                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HOWARD ST
                                                                                                                                                        FAIRVIEW
                                                                                                                                                                                                      LN
                                                                                                                                                                            DR   TRIDE N T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                HERBERT ST
                                            CE N
                                                   TER
                                                           V IL
                                                                  LE                                                                                                                                                                          FE R
                                                                       RD                                                                                                                                                                               NA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          VE                                   CREAM CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       JACOBSON WAY
                                                                                                                                                                            A ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LE W
                                                                                                                                                                   4TH ST          3RD ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HERBERT ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            IS A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VE
                                                                                                                 SHAW AVE
                                                                                                                                              5TH ST
                                                                                      DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ST
                                                                                    T
                                                                                    E
                                                                                  VA
                                                                                                                                                                                            AIN
                                                                                RI                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ROSE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MCKINLEY AVE
                                                                            P                                                                                                               M
                                                                                                            OC
                                                                                                                 EA
                                                                                                                      NA
                                                                                                                        VE
                                                                                                                                                                                       BR                                          W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SCHLEY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                          O                                         AS
                                                                                                                              VE                                                              W                                          HI
                                                                                                                                                                                                  N                                         NG
                                                                                                                              A                                                                       ST
                                                                                                                          T                                                                                                                    TO
                                                                                                                 IL   DC A                                                                                            ST                            N
                                                                                                             W                                                                                                                                          ST
                                                                                                                                                        EU                                                     AIG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ROSE AVE
                                                                                                                                                ST         G   EN                                             CR
                                                                                                                                              IS                  E   ST
                                                                                                                                        NC
                                                                                                                                   FR                                                                                                                                                      GRANT AVE
                                                                                                                                      A
                                                                                                                                              Franci
                                                                                                                                  BE                    s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LINCOLN ST
                                                                                                                                       RD               Cr
                                                                                                                                          I                 ee
                                                                                                                                              N G ST           k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BL U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FF RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                E UGE NE ST
                                                                                C AT RD
                                                                            W ILD
                                                   C AME
                                                    LO T
                                                             LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           °
Map Compiled 10 November 2010 (Updated 05 May 2014)
Source: (Imagery): esri World Imagery                                                                                                             0                                    700                                                1,400 Feet
        (Parcels): Derived from apnhum43sp shapefile from Humboldt CDSD
        (Zoning): Planwest Partners Inc.

Non-Vacant Sites
Underutilized parcels were not used to determine Realistic Unit Capacity in Table 29.
Zoning that Facilitates Development by Income Group
The California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) assumes, in general, that the
higher the density, the more affordable the housing. This assumption relies on the fact that many of the
costs for new construction, for example, per square foot construction costs, financing, profit and
overhead, and utility extensions, remain essentially the same irrespective of whether it is one, four or a
dozen units that are constructed on a site. The variable with the greatest influence on the cost of
housing is land; hence, the higher the density allowed by the General Plan designation and zoning, the
more affordable the housing. By providing for higher densities, the City can encourage and facilitate
affordable housing development. Additionally, the land use designations and zoning must accommodate
a variety housing types, including opportunities for rental housing.
Housing Element law requires that a city or county provide, through its General Plan, sufficient sites
suitable for the production of housing affordable to extremely low, very-low and other-low income
households. As these sites are generally higher density designations that support residential
development as a primary or mixed-use, this analysis will center on whether sufficient land has been
planned in the R2, R3, R4, C1 and C2 designations to meet the needs for the Housing Element planning
period.
In the case of Ferndale, 15 units per acre is the appropriate density to meet affordable housing needs.
Zones R3, R4, C1 and C2 are appropriately rated for lower income housing. The densities in these zones
are 0-21 dwellings per acre. The C1 and C2 zones allow for a variety of housing types including multi-
family development, in addition to commercial uses. Because adequate land is available in the C zones
for up to 30 additional dwellings, taking into consideration realistic unit capacity, it is not necessary at
this time to pursue zone changes. In the future, additional R3 and R4 zones will be set aside to allow for
more apartment-style dwellings, thereby creating more affordable housing for lower income residents;
however, in the time frame of the current Housing Element, zone changes will not be necessary. Many
extremely low income households will seek rental housing and most likely face overpayment,
overcrowding, or other housing problems. To address the range of needs of extremely low income
households, the City will encourage a variety of housing types, such as single-room occupancy units. In
addition, Program I. Adequate Sites will amend the Zoning Ordinance to allow for multi-family dwelling
of more than five units in accordance with density standards. The City will also evaluate and identify
sites of adequate size for potential rezoning to allow for multifamily uses by right (R3 and/or R4 zones)
(Program I). This program has been carried over from the 2012 Housing Element Update.
Zoning to accommodate lower income households
The Ferndale City Council unanimously approved a General Plan and Zoning Amendment (GP/ZA) on
December 1st, 2011 to increase the Residential Two-Family (R2) density from 14 dwelling units per acre
to 15 dwelling units per acre.
Per Government Code Section 65583.2(c)(3)(B) the City’s zoning must be consistent with 15 du/acre
standard for rural jurisdictions to be considered appropriate to accommodate housing for lower-income
City of Ferndale Housing Element                     3 - 10                     Resources and Constraints
                                                                                Adopted September 2014

households. The previous Residential Two-Family (R2) density in Ferndale allowed up to 14 dwelling
units per acre (du/acre). Increasing this density to 15 du/acre meets this density standard. As shown in
the vacant land inventory there are approximately 1.65 acres of vacant R2 designated land within the
City which could be developed with a maximum of 24 units at 15 du/acre. Therefore, adequate land is
available to accommodate the City’s regional need of 9 units for lower-income households. The City has
sufficient sites, as projected in the RHNA, to accommodate lower income housing needs for this
planning period.
The R2 zone is appropriate to accommodate housing development for lower income households.
Attached residential units of single or multi-story construction provide housing opportunities for lower
income households. As with second units, land costs, utilities and construction costs for attached versus
detached construction can be shared making these units more affordable. While the affordability of
these units is ultimately a function of a number of variables, including land and financing costs, many
units could rent at or below market rates. Existing R2 build densities in Ferndale average approximately
10 du/acre.
The C1 and C2 zones allow for a variety of housing types including multi-family development, in addition
to commercial uses. Single family and multi-family residential units are allowed and encouraged in both
zones. The C1 designation allows for residential uses with a use permit, and residential units are
principally permitted in the C2 zone. Lodging including hotels, motels, boarding houses, and mobile
home parks are also allowable in the C2 zone. Affordable, high density housing would integrate well in
this zone as residents would benefit from the close proximity to services. Combined short term and
permanent residential housing is an option. The density of this zone facilitates low income housing
options; these areas are also fully served by utilities and have considerable potential for mixed use and
higher density development.
Small Sites
Ferndale will need to rely on small sites to accommodate its remaining regional need for lower-income
households. The discussion below demonstrates suitability of these small sites and that Ferndale has the
zoning and densities appropriate to encourage and facilitate the development of housing for lower-
income households. Because capacity for housing production exceeds Ferndale’s total need for new
housing during the planning period ending in 2019, a primary objective for the City will be to provide
adequate sites to accommodate the housing needs of extremely low, very low and other lower income
households.
As shown in Tables 29, 30 and 31 and on Figure 1 there is a total of approximately 3.23 acres of vacant
C2 zoned land (includes C2D and C2DQ zones) for an estimated realistic unit capacity of 40 units. Three
of these sites (APNs 031-083-002, 031-083-004, and 031-085-022) are within the same vicinity of each
other off of 4th Street near Main Street and total 1.47 acres. Since these sites are not located directly on
Main Street and are adjacent to existing residential uses, affordable units would integrate well in this
area as residents would benefit from the close proximity to services. Higher density affordable housing
would likely be more desirable at these sites than commercial uses due to setback from Main Street and
other commercial areas. Although theoretically based on density standards these sites could fit 30 units,
the projected yield of these three sites based on site conditions is 18 units.
To increase development potential of small, individual lots the City will research effective methods to
develop small lots to their greatest potential (e.g. small lot consolidation, flexible development
City of Ferndale Housing Element                      3 - 11                     Resources and Constraints
                                                                                 Adopted September 2014

standards) by reviewing best practices adopted by other jurisdictions. The City will also identify small
lots that may be appropriate for lot consolidation and will encourage the use of infill for the
development of all housing types.
Due to Ferndale’s small size and historic building patterns, larger low-income housing developments (50-
80 units) are not needed or feasible at this time. Hence, the City’s low-income housing need can be
accommodated through smaller lot development as described above and the estimate of the number of
units projected on these sites is feasible. The City will pursue incentives or concessions, where
necessary, to maintain economic feasibility of lower income units; to encourage mixed-use commercial
and residential development; and to promote multi-family design that preserves community character
and provides a sense of connection to the neighborhood.
Existing mixed uses in the downtown area
Ferndale Main Street contains many larger Victorian era buildings with commercial and office uses at
street level and residential units on the upper floors. These apartment/ studio type units are generally
affordable to low/ moderate income residents due to their smaller size. Current rental prices for
apartments were researched in local property listing publications. Based on this review of available
units, typical rents are less than $800 per month, depending on the unit size and number of bedrooms.
Due to their smaller size and lower rents, these units are generally affordable to lower-income
households (considering the 2011 Humboldt County Annual Median Income of $40,376).The commercial
designations in the downtown area (C1 and C2) allow for a variety of housing types with a maximum
density of 21 du/acre. The density of these zones facilitate low income housing options; these areas are
also fully served by utilities and have considerable potential for additional mixed use and higher density
development.
Second Units
Consistent with Chapter 1062, Statutes of 2002 (AB 1866), the City amended its second-unit ordinance
and permitting process to allow second units by right on lots zoned for single-family or multifamily use.
However, permit approval is subject to a planning staff level review of the site and building plans to
ensure compliance with height, setbacks, maximum floor area, and parking requirements. Depending on
workload, the administrative plan check process can be completed within a few weeks. A summary of
these standards is as follows (Z.O. Section 7.21):
         1)      The maximum gross floor area of the secondary dwelling unit (SDU) shall not exceed
                 1,200 square feet.
         (2)     The SDU may either be attached to or detached from the existing dwelling.
         (3)     A SDU attached to the principal dwelling shall comply with the applicable development
                 standards for additions to a single-family residence; a detached SDU shall conform to
                 the applicable development standards for an accessory structure.
         (4)     The lot on which the SDU is sited shall be developed with at least two parking spaces,
                 one per dwelling, as noted in Z.O. section 7.16.
According to City building permit records, six second dwelling unit (SDU) building permits have been
issued since 2009. Based on this and the most recent trends, at least one SDU per year is expected to be
built during the current planning period. Current rental prices for second units and apartments of similar
size were researched in local property listing publications. Based on this review of available SDU’s,
City of Ferndale Housing Element                      3 - 12                     Resources and Constraints
                                                                                 Adopted September 2014

typical rents are less than $800 per month, depending on the unit size and number of bedrooms. Due to
their smaller size and lower rents, these units are generally affordable to lower-income households
(considering the 2011 Humboldt County Annual Median Income of $40,376). Considering this track
record, in concert with local housing needs and development trends second units are being applied
towards the City’s adequate sites requirement.
Environmental Constraints
Some properties in Ferndale are considered unbuildable because of steep slopes and drainage
constraints. These properties are accounted for by using the realistic unit capacity for analysis. The City’s
existing Public Safety and Unique Resources (Conservation) Elements and the draft Safety Element
Update contain analysis and policies regarding flood hazards and management in compliance with GC
Section 65302. The City has also adopted a Floodplain Ordinance (Ordinance 08-02) to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas within the City. The areas of special flood hazard are identified by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM). The City designated
Floodplain Administrator reviews all development permits within the flood hazard area for conformance
with Floodplain Ordinance requirements.
Availability of Infrastructure
During the previous planning period the City was under a sewer moratorium due to Regional Water
Quality Control Board (RWQCB) water quality concerns associated with the City’s wastewater treatment
facility. Therefore, no new sewer hook-ups were allowed, creating a significant constraint on housing
development in Ferndale. The City spent considerable time, effort and resources to comply with RWQCB
requirements and to work towards the permitting and construction of a new WWTF. Completed in 2010,
the new million gallon per day WWTF is a state-of-the-art tertiary treatment plant with an
unprecedented 1:1 dilution ratio that meets RWQCB standards and modified waste discharge
requirements (WDRs).The RWQCB approved new WDRs for the City in July 2009. The new WWTF
maintained the capacity of the previous facility; existing capacity is sufficient for current and anticipated
future growth.
Del Oro Water Company supplies water within the City of Ferndale. The City of Ferndale water supply
system’s maximum capacity is 518,000 gallons per day. 2012 production average was approximately
208,000 gallons per day. Seventy percent of the water is pulled from springs on the southern end of
Ferndale. The springs run at full capacity, with back up production from the Van Ness Street Well. Del
Oro Water Company has no plans to expand water services, as 2012 operating levels of approximately
40% of capacity are sufficient.
The availability of adequate public facilities and services in relation to the sites identified in Table 31 has
been evaluated, and the City has determined there are currently no public facilities or service
constraints that would impede development of housing units to meet the City’s RHNA. Although
adequate for the time being, the City’s sewer collection and drainage systems are in need of updating.
SB 1087 requires water and sewer providers to grant priority for service allocation to proposed
developments that include units affordable to lower income households. Pursuant to these statutes,
City of Ferndale Housing Element                      3 - 13                       Resources and Constraints
                                                                                    Adopted September 2014

upon adoption of its Housing Element, Ferndale will immediately deliver the Element to local water and
sewer providers.
Zoning that Facilitates Transitional Housing, Emergency Shelters, and Housing
for Farmworkers
State law requires that local land use regulations accommodate a range of housing types, as well as
facilities for people in need of emergency shelter and transitional housing. New State law takes this a
step further with the recently signed Senate Bill 2 (SB2). This law addresses the housing needs of the
homeless population by requiring every jurisdiction to identify potential sites where new emergency
shelters can be located without discretionary review by the local government. It also increases the
protections for providers seeking to open a new emergency shelter, transitional housing or supportive
housing development, by limiting the instances in which local government can deny such developments.
The 2012 Housing Element incorporated these requirements by eliminating the CUP required for
permitting emergency shelters and transitional housing facilities in specific zones. Additionally, the zone
identified as appropriate for emergency shelters must be analyzed to demonstrate that it is suitable for
the use and includes sufficient capacity to meet the City’s need.
Emergency shelters are defined as housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that
require a limited occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may
be denied emergency shelter because of the inability to pay. Transitional housing is rental housing that
is operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of
the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time,
which shall be no less than six months. Supportive housing has no limit on the length of stay, is occupied
by a target population, and is linked to on-site or off-site services that assist the supportive housing
resident in retaining housing, improving his/her health status, and maximizing his/her ability to live, and
when possible, work in the community.
In a city of one square mile, and with the high cost of land, the population base needed to support the
cost of building transitional housing, or permanent emergency shelters, is not available. Homelessness is
a minor issue in Ferndale. Emergency shelter for Eel River valley residents is available during floods and
earthquakes at the Humboldt County Fairgrounds. The City has not had any requests for homeless
shelters or other forms of homeless assistance. However, to comply with SB 2 the City has amended
Zoning Ordinance Section 5.17 to allow for location of emergency shelters by right in the Public Facility
zone. Existing principally permitted uses in the PF zone include public fairgrounds and related uses,
public buildings including auditoriums and hospitals, and similar uses. Hence, if needed, a year-round
emergency shelter would be considered a similar public facility type use and would be appropriate in
this zone. The County Fairgrounds includes roughly 60 acres zoned PF, so there is ample space to
accommodate Ferndale’s need. Additionally, the Fairgrounds has a number of large structures on-site
that would have the capacity to accommodate a year-round emergency shelter if required. The site is
not exposed to any hazards that the City as a whole is not exposed to; the Fairgrounds, like the majority
of the City, is in a potential liquefaction zone, has relatively stable slopes, is outside of the FEMA 100-
year and 500-year flood zones, and is in a high fire rating zone (Humboldt County Community
Development Services)
City of Ferndale Housing Element                      3 - 14                       Resources and Constraints
                                                                                   Adopted September 2014

Beginning in April 2005, the Multiple Assistance Center (MAC) in Eureka has provided shelter and
services to at-risk and homeless persons. Currently, the MAC is Humboldt County’s highest prioritized
homeless project, receiving broad based support from government, public, private, nonprofit and
community sectors. The MAC is designed to address the major gap in homeless services in Humboldt
County. However, while the City would be supportive of such services if a local need was demonstrated,
creation of a permanent shelter in Ferndale given opening of the MAC in 2005 would appear duplicative
of the County-wide effort to consolidate services and focus available community resources.
Consequently, the City has no plans for operating an emergency shelter at this time but could locate
such a facility in the Public Facility zone if conditions were to warrant.
Transitional and supportive housing provides intermediate housing opportunities for persons not
presently capable of living in a fully independent setting. The City amended Zoning Ordinance Article 3
to include the following definitions:
         §3.33 Family: One or more persons living together in a dwelling unit, which common access to,
         and common use of all living, kitchen, and eating areas within the dwelling unit. FAMILY does
         not include larger institutional group living situations such as dormitories, fraternities, sororities,
         monasteries or convents nor does it include such commercial group living arrangements as
         boardinghouses, lodging houses and the like.
         §3.74 Supportive Housing: As defined at Section 50675.14 of the Health & Safety Code has no
         limit on the length of stay, is linked to onsite or offsite services, and is occupied by a target
         population as defined in Health & Safety Code Section 53260. Services typically include
         assistance designed to meet the needs of the target population in retaining housing, living and
         working in the community, and/or improving health and may include case management, mental
         health treatment, and life skills.
         §3.81 Transitional Housing: Defined in Section 50675.2 of the Health & Safety Code as buildings
         configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that call
         for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible
         program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six
         months.
Transitional and supportive facilities are residential uses similar in nature to rooming and boarding
houses but also include a component of counseling and support often provided by a resident facility
manager. Transitional and supportive facilities are permitted as a residential use and are only subject to
those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone.
Since Ferndale is roughly one square mile, nearly any site in the City is near the services provided in the
downtown commercial district. Ferndale does not have a hospital, homeless services, or access to public
transit.
In the Eel River Valley, farmworker housing needs are not significant as most farms are managed by
owner/occupants. Most farming operations in the City are owner operated dairies with workers either
housed on employer’s farms or in rental housing in the region. Within Ferndale, the Zoning Ordinance
encourages a variety of housing types that would accommodate farmworker housing needs, including
multifamily housing, manufactured housing, and second units. In addition, Program II.7 calls for an
City of Ferndale Housing Element                        3 - 15                    Resources and Constraints
                                                                                  Adopted September 2014

amendment to the Zoning Ordinance to allow agricultural employee housing by-right, without a
conditional use permit (CUP), in single-family zones for six or fewer persons and in agricultural zones
with no more than 12 units or 36 beds as required by Health and Safety Code §17021.6.
Analysis of Governmental Constraints
It is in the public interest for the government to regulate development to protect the general welfare of
the community. At the same time, government regulations can potentially constrain the supply of
housing available in a community if the regulations limit opportunities to develop housing, impose
requirements that unnecessarily increase the cost to develop housing, or make the development
process so arduous as to discourage housing developers. State law requires Housing Elements to contain
an analysis of the governmental constraints on housing maintenance, improvement, and development
(GC §65583(a)(4)).
Land Available for Residential Development
The General Plan Land Use Element guides the physical development of the City. The Land Use Element
balances the need for available land with the desire to efficiently provide services and infrastructure and
to limit public exposure to natural hazard areas, such as hillsides and the flood plain. The local planning
direction advocated by the Land Use Element development is not to restrict growth but to guide it in an
efficient and cost effective manner.
As described in above, the Land Use Element has designated sufficient land to accommodate future
growth projections. By analyzing vacant and underutilized land, the holding capacity of the General Plan,
conservatively estimated at 253 dwelling units, is more than sufficient to accommodate the projected
population increase through the planning period. This estimate does not include second units on
residentially zoned parcels or density bonuses authorized by Government Code Section 65915.
Land Use Controls
Land use controls consist of the General Plan, Zoning Ordinance, Building Code and Subdivision
regulations. Local land use policies and regulations can impose costs upon development. While these
measures are often necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare, the effect of any particular
requirement must be weighed carefully to ensure that it does unduly burden the ability to provide for
the housing needs of the community.
General Plan
The General Plan establishes policies that guide new development including residential development.
These policies, along with zoning regulations, control the amount and distribution of land allocated for
different land used in the City. The land use designations established by the General Plan allow single-
family and multiple-family residential developments. To reflect a variety of living environments and
infrastructure and service limitations, the Land Use and Unique Resources Element and Map provide for
both urban and rural designations. The characteristics of the land use designations found in the Land
Use and Unique Resources Element are as follows:
City of Ferndale Housing Element                      3 - 16                     Resources and Constraints
                                                                                 Adopted September 2014

         Residential Suburban: This designation is intended to be applied in areas of the City which are
         particularly suited to large lot development of single family homes.
         Residential One-Family Building Site Combing: This designation is intended to be applied to
         those areas generally suited for single family home development, but where sound and orderly
         planning indicates that lot area and yard requirements should be modified.
         Residential One-Family: This designation is intended to be applied in areas of the City where
         topography, access, utilities, public services and general conditions make the area suitable and
         desirable for single family home development.
         Residential Two-Family: This designation is intended to be applied in areas of the City close to
         urban centers where all utilities and services are available and where housing demand justifies a
         density of two families on each building site.
         Residential Multi-family: This designation is intended to be applied in areas of the City where it
         is reasonable to permit and protect low-density apartment developments.
         Apartment-Professional: This designation is intended to apply in areas of the City suitable for
         higher density residential uses and for professional and business offices and instructional uses.
         Density is to be determined by community character.
         Neighborhood Commercial: This designation is intended to provide for neighborhood shopping
         centers which will provide convenient sales and service facilities for residential areas, without
         detracting from the residential desirability of such areas.
         Community Commercial: This designation is intended to be applied to areas of the City where
         more complete commercial facilities are necessary for community convenience.
         Agricultural Exclusive: This designation is intended to be applied in areas where agricultural use
         is and should be the desirable predominant use of land and in which it is desired to protect
         agricultural operations from incompatible or detrimental uses.
         Public Facility: This designation is intended to be applied to lands owned by public agencies or to
         lands upon which such agencies operate public facilities.
Zoning Ordinance
The Zoning Ordinance further describes the land use designations. These land use designations provide
for a range of residential densities ranging from one residence per acre to 21 residences per acre.
Table 32: Zoning District Descriptions
Zone                                  Lot Size              Allowable Uses               With Use Permit
Agriculture-Exclusive (AE)             4 acre               Farm Dwellings                      B&B
                                     minimum
Residential-Suburban (R-S)             1 acre       1 family dwelling, guest house           B&B, SDUs
                                     minimum
City of Ferndale Housing Element                       3 - 17                     Resources and Constraints
                                                                                  Adopted September 2014
Zone                                Lot Size               Allowable Uses               With Use Permit
Residential One-Family (R-1)         6,000sf              1 family dwelling            Guest house, B&B,
                                   minimum                                                    SDUs
Residential Single Family            8,000sf              1 family dwelling            Guest house, B&B,
(R1B1)                             minimum                                                    SDUs
Residential Single Family           10,000sf              1 family dwelling            Guest house, B&B,
(R1B2)                             minimum                                                    SDUs
Residential Single Family,          20,000sf              1 family dwelling            Guest house, B&B,
(R1B3)                             minimum                                                    SDUs
Residential Two-Family (R-2)         6,000sf           1 or 2 family dwellings          Guest house, B&B
                                   minimum
Residential Multiple Family          6,000sf       1 to 4 family dwellings, B&B       Hotels, mobile home
(R-3)                              minimum                                               parks, boarding
                                                                                             houses
Apartment-Professional (R-4)         6,000sf        1 family dwelling, boarding        Mobile home parks
                                   minimum              houses, hotels, B&B
Neighborhood Commercial              2,000sf              1 family dwelling               2 to 4 family
(C1DQ)                             minimum                                               dwellings, B&B,
                                                                                        boarding houses
Community Commercial (C2)            2,000sf        Dwellings, hotels, boarding        No residential uses
                                   minimum          houses, mobile home parks
Community Commercial                 2,000sf              1 family dwelling               2 to 4 family
(C2DQ)                             minimum                                               dwellings, B&B,
                                                                                        boarding houses
In the City’s Zoning Ordinance, a ‘farm dwelling’ is defined as a dwelling on farm premises for
permanent residents of the farm, such as the owner, lessee, foreman, or others whose principal
employment is the operation of the farm, as distinguished from quarters for seasonal labor.
Single-family dwellings are principally permitted in all the residential zones, as are two-family dwellings
in the R-2 zone. Secondary Dwelling Unit permits are approved ministerially on lots zoned for single-
family or multifamily use (Zoning Ordinance 02-02 Section 7.21.4). Although multiple dwellings up to
four-family are allowed in the R-3 zone, and boarding houses in the R-4 zone, at this time Ferndale does
not have any land zoned R3, and a very small section zoned R4.
Mobile homes shall be considered compatible in those areas outside of the Design Control Combining or
-D zones, as shown on the City of Ferndale Zoning Map. The designated Design Control district is of
significant historical value and overall unique architectural character, warranting protection of
preservation efforts and infill development of comparable nature. Therefore, mobile homes, as defined
here, are not found to be compatible with these areas, but shall be permitted in all other areas of the
City where single-family dwellings are a principal permitted use of land.
Private institutions, including group homes, are permitted with a use permit in all residential zones,
except the Residential One Family Zone (R1). The Zoning Ordinance previously defined family as: A
City of Ferndale Housing Element                     3 - 18                      Resources and Constraints
                                                                                 Adopted September 2014

person living alone, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or a group of not
more than five (5) unrelated persons living together as a single non-profit housekeeping unit in a
dwelling unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, motel, hotel or fraternity or
sorority house. This definition was restrictive in allowing a residential care facility in a single-family zone
unless limited to five unrelated persons. To remove this restriction, the Ordinance was amended to
define family as “one or more persons living together in a dwelling unit, with common access to, and
common use of all living, kitchen, and eating areas within the dwelling unit. FAMILY does not include
larger institutional group living situations such as dormitories, fraternities, sororities, monasteries or
convents nor does it include such commercial group living arrangements as boardinghouses, lodging
houses and the like.” (Zoning Ordinance 02-02 §3.33).
The City of Ferndale allows group homes in the R4 zone and the C2 zone as a principally permitted use.
The C1 zone allows a group home with a use permit. Private institutions are allowed with a use permit in
the R2, R3, and R4 zones.
Table 33: Housing Types Permitted by Zoning District - City of Ferndale
Housing Types Permitted                   R1      R2        R3     R4        RS         PF       C1*      C2*
Single Family Attached                     P       P         P      P         P         No         C        P
Single Family Detached                     P       P         P      P         P         No         C        P
Duplexes                                  No       P         P      P        No         No         C        P
Fourplexes                                No      No         P     No        No         No         C        P
Multifamily (5+ Units per Structure)      No      No        No     No*       No         No         C        P
Mobile Homes**                             P       P         P      C         P         No         C        P
Manufactured Homes                         P       P         P      P         P         No         C        P
Second Units                               C       C        C       C         C         No         C        C
Transitional and Supportive Housing        P       P         P      P         P         No         P        P
Emergency Shelters                        No      No        No     No        No          P        No       No
Source: Local Zoning Code
Notes: P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use Permit
* Although the R4 zone is named Apartment-Professional, neither the principal permitted uses nor the
uses permitted with a Use Permit include apartments or anything for 5+ units. However, multifamily
dwellings with 5+ units are allowed with a use permit in the C1 and by right in the C2; these sites can be
developed 100% residential (no commercial component required).
** Manufactured and Mobile Homes on individual lots: A mobile home or manufactured home shall be
permitted on an individual lot as a single-family dwelling unit, only if it meets the following
requirements: The mobile home must be certified under the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974; The mobile home must be installed on a permanent
foundation system designed in accordance with Health and Safety Code Section 18551; Installation of a
manufactured or mobile home shall be prohibited if more than 10 years have elapsed between the date
of manufacture of the manufactured home and the date of the application for the issuance of a permit
to install the manufactured home; The manufactured or mobile home must comply with all
development standards specified in the zone in which the home is to be placed; The manufactured or
City of Ferndale Housing Element                       3 - 19                     Resources and Constraints
                                                                                   Adopted September 2014

mobile home must be located within an area of the City determined to be compatible with mobile home
use.
Development Standards
The requirements for building heights, set-backs, design, parking and other property development
standards are comparable to other communities in the region, and do not pose undue constraint to the
development of housing in Ferndale. Allowable lot coverage ranges from 35 to 60%, depending on
zoning density, with allowable heights ranging from 35 feet to 45 feet.
Table 34: Development Standards – Ferndale
     Zoning
                        R1             R2             R3             R4            RS              C1           C2
    District
Density Range        0-7 per       0-15 per       0-21 per       0-21 per       0-1 per
                                                                                                  0-21         0-21
                       acre           acre           acre           acre          acre
Setbacks                                                                                      F 0’*; R 15    F 0’*; R
                     F 20’; R       F 20’; R       F 20’; R       F 20’; R       F 20; R
                                                                                                ft.**; S   15 ft.**; S
                   15’; S 10%     15’; S 10%      10’; S 5’      10’; S 5’     15’; S 10%
                                                                                                 0’***        0’***
Lot Coverage           35%            40%            60%            60%           None            N/A          N/A
Minimum Lot
                    6,000 sf       6,000 sf       6,000 sf       6,000 sf        1 acre        2,000 ft2    2,000 ft2
Size
Minimum
                      None           None           600 sf         600 sf         None            N/A          N/A
Unit Size
Parking               1 per          1 per          1 per          1 per          1 per          1 per        1 per
                    dwelling       dwelling       dwelling       dwelling       dwelling       dwelling      dwelling
Height
                        35’            35’            45’            45’           35’             35’          45’
Maximum
*Except where frontage is in a block which is partially in an “R” zone, the front yard shall be the same as that
required in such “R” zone.
**Except where a rear yard abuts on an alley, such rear yard may be not less than 5 feet.
***Except that a side yard of an interior lot abutting on an “R” Zone shall be not less than the front yard required
in such “R” Zone.
Codes and Enforcement
New construction in Ferndale must comply with the Uniform Building Code (UBC). The City adopted the
UBC in 2011 with no major revisions, meaning that there are no extraordinary building regulations that
would adversely affect the ability to construct housing in Ferndale. Enforcement in the City of Ferndale
is conducted on a complaint basis.
City of Ferndale Housing Element                           3 - 20                        Resources and Constraints
                                                                                          Adopted September 2014

On/Off-site Improvement Standards
Site improvements such as frontage improvements, street work, storm drainage, street lights, utilities
and landscaping may be required for new development to ensure conformity to, and implementation of,
the Ferndale General Plan, any adopted specific plans, and/or any applicable Ordinances of the City of
Ferndale. All utilities within a subdivision and along peripheral streets shall be placed underground
except those facilities exempted by the Public Utilities Commission regulations. Site improvements are
required as a condition prior to Final Map or Parcel Map approval and must either be completed or the
developer must have an agreement with the City to do such work. Improvements shall be constructed in
accordance with the City of Ferndale Standard Specifications and/or when applicable with standards as
adopted by local utility companies and approved by the City Engineer.
All subdivision projects are required to construct onsite and offsite improvements according to
approved standards adopted by the City, or as otherwise determined by the City Engineer.
Improvements may include frontage, storm drainage, sewer, street lights, water lines, and other utilities
as deemed appropriate. Site improvements are an important component of new development in order
to ensure a safe and well-planned community. Improvement standards are established by the City's
Improvement Standards and Specifications. The City's Improvement Standards for subdivisions identify
types of streets for new developments. Typical residential development will include provisions for minor
streets and collector streets, each of which have a right-of-way between 40 and 50 feet, and include
pavement, curbs, gutters, and sidewalks. The pavement width is the generally accepted minimum
necessary to provide for one lane of vehicular traffic in each direction and on-street parking on one or
two sides.
Providing streets for new residential developments add to land development costs, but are necessary to
ensure safe access to comply with City standards. Smaller infill projects typically are only required to
improve adjacent street frontages, including the installation of curb, gutters, and sidewalks. In most of
Ferndale's urbanized area, streets and other improvements are already in place. Therefore,
development of Ferndale's vacant residential infill sites requires few or no frontage or off-site
improvements and costs of such improvements would not substantially impact the cost of the housing
supply.
Fees and Exactions
Similar to other City and County jurisdictions, Ferndale collects development fees to recover the costs of
providing public services and the administrative costs associated with application processing. The City
collected fees are important to ensure new development does not result in inadequate public facilities.
If new development occurs without improving public facilities, the long-term costs for maintenance and
upgrades would be much greater. The approach the City has taken is to have new development pay its
fair share of the cost of the public infrastructure needed to accommodate it so that the costs are not
borne by the existing residents through general fund subsidies. Line item fees related to processing,
inspections and installation services are limited by California law to the cost to the agencies of
performing these services. The City of Ferndale does not charge impact fees that are commonplace in
larger California jurisdictions except for a drainage fee. The table below describes City fees for typical
planning permits. The fees are comparable or less than those charged by other jurisdictions in Humboldt
County and are not considered a barrier to residential development.
City of Ferndale Housing Element                     3 - 21                    Resources and Constraints
                                                                                Adopted September 2014
The following discussion of fees does not take into consideration land costs or other mitigation fees
outside the control of the City. There are several planning and development fees that are charged for
the review and approval of general plan amendments, zone changes, conditional use permits, variances,
subdivision maps, site plans and service requests. Depending on the complexity of the requests, these
fees can total several hundred to several thousand dollars per unit.
Table 35: Planning and Development Fees – Ferndale
Fee Category                                                                  Fee Amount
BUILDING, PLANNING AND APPLICATION FEES
Variance                                                                      $696.00
Conditional Use Permit                                                        $696.00
Home Occupation Permit                                                        $150.00
General Plan Amendment                                                        $2,000.00
Zone Change                                                                   $1,500.00
Lot Line Adjustments                                                          $1,196.00
Minor Subdivision (cost varies on number of lots and complexity)              $2,200.00
Major Subdivision (cost varies on number of lots and complexity)              $4,000 + $ 50.00/lot
Plan Check, Single Family Residence                                           $ cost
Design Review                                                                 $0.00-377.00
Plot Plan Review                                                              $40.00
Sewer Hookup Fees- First new hookup; (each additional hookup up to 4          $5,180.16
units $400, over 4 units $200)
Drainage Fee for new Single Family Residence                                  $1,500.00
New housing typically requires payment of the following fees: sewer and water connection, building
permit, and drainage. In addition, subdivisions and multifamily projects may incur the cost of preparing
environmental documents, soils reports, and tentative and final map filing fees. In 2012, typical fees for
a new single family home would be approximately $9,913 and fees would be approximately $13,030 for
a four-plex. This represents about 4.4% of the total development cost for a single family unit and 3.3%
for a four-plex. Fees for sewer and water connection and the drainage fee have not increased since
2012. While fees increase residential construction costs, Ferndale’s fees are generally lower than those
charged throughout the County and do not act as an undue constraint on development.
City of Ferndale Housing Element                   3 - 22                      Resources and Constraints
                                                                               Adopted September 2014

                   Table 36: Typical Fees for New Residential Development (2012)
                 Development Cost                  Single Family            4-unit Multi-family
            Total Estimated Fees                      $ 9,913                    $ 13,030
            Typical Estimated Cost                  $ 223,389*                 $ 400,000**
            Estimated proportion of fee
                                                       4.4%                        3.3 %
            cost to overall cost
           * Based on average of seven houses constructed in Ferndale between 2004 and 2010.
           ** Based on 1,000 square foot units and $100/ square foot development costs.
Processing and Permit Procedures
Developers must negotiate several steps to secure all necessary approvals to build housing on a given
parcel of land. From the standpoint of the City, this process is necessary to ensure that new
development adequately complies with local regulations that are meant to protect the health, safety,
and welfare of the community. From the developer’s standpoint, this process can complicate and
lengthen the development process, increasing difficulty and cost to develop new housing.
Often, the building permit process can act as a governmental constraint. City staff continuously
endeavors to streamline the building and land use permit processes. The application guides for
development permits continue to be revised and standardized, and all updated permits and procedures
are available on the city’s web page (http://ci.ferndale.ca.us/permits.html ). This has made it easier for
citizens to obtain applications and to understand the period of time involved in processing the
application.
The City currently contracts for Planning and Engineering services; all planning and development
application are reviewed and processed by the contract City Planner and Engineer as applicable. The City
also contracts for Building Inspection services, which are conducted on an as needed basis.
The City Clerk continues to organize the City’s filing system and enter new permits in a database. This
ongoing effort has made previous permit information more accessible and, along with other City efforts,
has streamlined the permit process. City staff has made progress toward implementing a long-term plan
to re-write and standardize all city ordinances. The City has recently amended its Zoning Ordinance,
including revisions to clarify the Design Review process and to allow secondary dwelling units by right in
single- and multi-family zones, adopted a new Sign Ordinance, and is currently updating its Nuisance
Ordinance. As the ordinances are adopted by the City Council, they are posted to the City’s web page.
Amendments to the Design Review section of the Zoning Ordinance included clarification of the
Committee’s roles, responsibilities and appointment process; addition of a provision to impose time
limits on projects requiring a building permit; and allowance for a ministerial Design Review Permit
extension. The amendments also changed language to specify the City’s commitment to protecting the
historic appearance of the Design Review zone rather than just the Victorian appearance. This clarifies
to applicants, City staff, committees and commissions that the City will review projects for consistency
with all historical styles represented within the City. The City has additionally revised the Design Review
Permit application materials to clarify the process and review criteria. These and other efforts by the
City of Ferndale Housing Element                       3 - 23                      Resources and Constraints
                                                                                   Adopted September 2014

City serve to reduce uncertainty and standardize the Design Review process, with the ultimate goal of
facilitating restoration and rehabilitation of historic buildings.
Use Permits
Use permits may be granted by the Planning Commission for any use for which the City of Ferndale
Zoning Ordinance requires a use permit. The purpose of the use permit process is to ensure consistency
of a proposed land use with City regulations and compatibility of the use with surrounding properties.
Use permits are required for any use permitted with a use permit as specified in the Zoning Ordinance
regulations for the Principal Zones. Applications are filed at the office of the City Clerk and are
accompanied by such information as may be required to describe fully the proposed use for which the
permit is sought. A Public Hearing date is set. Staff prepares a report outlining the proposed project and
recommends conditions for approval as necessary.
The Planning Commission may impose whatever conditions it deems appropriate or necessary in
approving a Use Permit and may periodically review a use which was granted in a Use Permit to ensure
that the use continues to operate in accordance with conditions of approval.
Home Occupation
A home occupation is any use which, as determined by the Zoning Ordinance, is customarily carried on
within a dwelling or unattached structure by the inhabitants thereof, and which is clearly incidental and
secondary to the residential use of the dwelling.
Home occupations are permitted as appurtenant and accessory uses to any residential uses. If the
applicant complies with Zoning Ordinance Section 7.11, the permit is issued administratively (over the
counter). The Home Occupation Permit shall:
     • Be a legal and lawful business.
     • Produce no evidence of its existence in the external appearance of the dwelling or premises
          including but not limited to exterior displays such as signs, or in the creation of offensive noise,
          vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare, parking or traffic, or other nuisances to a degree
          greater than normal for the neighborhood.
     • Is confined completely within the dwelling or unattached structure and occupies not more than
          25% of the total floor space of the main dwelling (or its equivalent in an unattached structure).
     • Be an owner- or renter-occupied home and business.
     • Meet the requirements of the building inspector and fire district of jurisdiction.
     • Possess a current business license.
     • At time of business license renewal, produce a copy of the applicant’s Liability Insurance on
          which a rider has been placed for the Home Occupation.
Lot Line Adjustment
The Lot Line Adjustment process is intended solely for adjustments in the boundary lines between two
or more parcels in instances where no additional parcels are created. This process may also be used to
dissolve property lines.
Due to the relatively simple nature of lot line adjustments, applications may be handled administratively
(i.e. principally the City Engineer and City Planner) in order to expedite processing. Referral to the
City of Ferndale Housing Element                        3 - 24                      Resources and Constraints
                                                                                     Adopted September 2014

Planning Commission and City Council is not required, except in instances of an appeal of an
administrative determination, in which case the application is referred to the Planning Commission.
Plan Check/ Plot Plan Review
Plan Check for a Single Family Residence is an administrative approval process. The plans are reviewed
by the City Planner for land use issues, and by the Plan Checker for construction issues. As noted
elsewhere, the plan check process takes about a week.
The Plot Plan Review is performed by the in-house Planner and generally takes no more than a day. The
Planner prepares a memo for the file and for the plan checker outlining any land use issues discovered
during the review.
Design Review
All external changes to any structure within the Design Control Combining Zone (-D) require a Design
Review Permit granted by the Design Review Committee (DRC) or Planning Commission. Per Zoning
Ordinance Section 6.05 a Design Review Permit must be obtained before any structure may be erected,
structurally altered, or in any way remodeled or improved so as to change the outward appearance. The
DRC is made up of two Planning Commissioners and three Ferndale residents, preferably with design
background in planning, architecture, landscape architecture, historical restoration, or other similar
experience.
Design Review Permit applications are reviewed by the DRC; if three members approve the project, the
City Clerk issues the permit; if three members deny the project the applicant can change the design, or
request that the application go to the Planning Commission at a fee as set by the Fees and Fines
Schedule. The Design Review procedures are established to:
     •   Ensure that new structures and/or modification, alteration, enlargement of existing structure
         occur in a manner consistent with Ferndale General Plan policies.
     •   Preserve the natural beauty of the town’s site and setting.
     •   Ensure that the architectural design of structures and their materials and colors are visually
         harmonious with and conceptually consistent in character and scale with surrounding area.
     •   Ensure that the design and location of signs and their material and colors are visually
         harmonious with surrounding development.
     •   Allow the City to make appropriate determination of environmental effects.
Subdivisions
The Subdivision process and procedures apply to all land divisions governed by the City of Ferndale
Subdivision Ordinance, including Parcel Maps and Tentative Subdivision Maps. Requirements for
Tentative Subdivision Maps and requirements for Final and Parcel Maps are described in the Application
Process. Requirement checklists for tentative and parcel/final maps are also included, as well as a
timeline.
Tentative Parcel Maps require action by the Planning Commission only, except where public dedications
are offered or when action is appealed to the City Council. Tentative Subdivision maps are considered by
City of Ferndale Housing Element                      3 - 25                     Resources and Constraints
                                                                                 Adopted September 2014

the City Council, following advisory action by the Planning Commission. A legislative body of a city or
county (or advisory agency (i.e. Planning Commission) shall deny approval of a tentative map if it makes
any of the following findings:
      •    That the proposed map is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans.
      •    That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with applicable
           general and specific plans.
      •    That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development.
      •    That the site is not suitable for the type of development.
      •    That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements is likely to cause substantial
           environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat.
      •    That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public
           health problems.
      •    That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements,
           acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of, property within the proposed
           subdivision.
Variances
Variances are required in instances where strict application of the terms of the zoning regulations, other
than regulations directly pertaining to the use of land and buildings which are not existing
nonconforming uses, may be granted upon certain findings:
      • That any variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that the
           adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privilege, inconsistent
           with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which the subject
           property is situated, and
      • That because of special circumstances applicable to subject property, including size, shape,
           topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of the zoning regulations is found
           to deprive the subject property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and
           under identical zone classification, or
      • That any variance granted will not be contrary to the intent of the zoning regulations or to the
           public interest, safety, health and welfare, and,
      • Where due to special conditions or exceptional characteristics of such property, or its location
           or surroundings, a literal enforcement of the zoning regulations would result in practical
           difficulties or unnecessary hardships.
A variance can only be approved by the Planning Commission following a noticed Public Hearing. Staff
prepares a report outlining the proposed project. Conditions may be imposed in the approval of a
variance in order to reduce or eliminate potentially adverse impacts of proposed development allowed
by the variance.
Zone Change and General Plan Amendment
The Zoning Ordinance may be amended as other ordinances are adopted or amended; regulations may
be amended by changing the boundaries of zones, changing property from one zone to another, and by
removing or modifying adopted regulations whenever the public necessity, convenience, and welfare
require such amendment, in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Zoning Ordinance, or by
action of the Planning Commission, or the City Council.
City of Ferndale Housing Element                        3 - 26                    Resources and Constraints
                                                                                  Adopted September 2014

General Plan amendments may only be initiated by the City Council based upon a recommendation by
motion of the Planning Commission or requested by members of the public. Applications by the public
are submitted on forms provided by the Planning Department. Fees are established by the City Council.
All amendments must follow the procedures outlined in the California Government Code. An
amendment to the General Plan constitutes a project under the California Environmental Quality Act
(CEQA) and, therefore, must be evaluated for its effect on the environment. In addition, proposed
amendments should be referred to all interested government agencies for comment prior to adoption.
As with adoption of General Plan elements themselves, a legally noticed Public Hearing is required
before both the Planning Commission and City Council prior to adoption of any plan amendment. Any
changes made by the City Council must have been considered previously by the Planning Commission, or
the City Council must refer the amendment back to the Commission for its consideration and report.
Timeliness
The City processes various permits related to residential development. It must be recognized that State
law dictates much of the time required for permit processing. Statutory time frames are specified for
noticing of discretionary permits and environmental review under the California Environmental Quality
Act (CEQA). Additionally, the time frames are dependent upon factors beyond the control of the City,
including the completeness of the application, whether the application requires submittal of technical
studies (e.g." geological reports), and the applicant's ability to respond promptly to requests for
clarification or supplemental materials.
The City continually evaluates how to streamline permit processing procedures and updates handouts
that clearly explain the process and requirements. The estimated time for processing is largely dictated
by the complexity of the individual project application. However, minimum processing timeframes do
apply since the City must comply with procedural requirements set forth in State law as noted above.
These requirements are not only mandatory but require a specific sequence of processing steps,
including public notification and review periods for various actions which local governments must
comply with. Table 37 describes typical timelines for permit procedures.
The City maintains a tracking system of permits and development applications based on a system that
shows where projects are within the review process from submittal date, to application completion
date, to approval date. The City’s Zoning Ordinance defines the residential types permitted, permitted
with a use permit, or prohibited in each zoning district. Permitted uses are those uses allowed without
discretionary review except for design review, in designated areas, as long as the project complies with
all development standards. Conditional use permits are approved by the Planning Commission. Typical
use permit findings include that the project is consistent with the General Plan, the use is compatible
with surrounding uses, and the project does not impact public health, safety, and general welfare.
For a typical project, an initial pre-application meeting with City staff can be arranged to discuss the
development proposal. Then an application with a description of project and a site plan must be filed,
which is first reviewed for application completeness and then by the City staff and other agencies such
as public works for consistency with City ordinances and General Plan guidelines. If design review is
required the project is forwarded to the Design Review Committee which meets once per month.
Depending on the complexity of the project, a single-family project is approved in 4 to 6 weeks from
date of plan submission; if no variances, exceptions, or zone changes are needed. After the project is
City of Ferndale Housing Element                    3 - 27                     Resources and Constraints
                                                                               Adopted September 2014

approved, the building official performs plan checks and issues building permits. Larger projects
requiring use permits are sent to the Planning Commission. Use permit hearings are publicly noticed and
generally take place at the regular Planning Commission meetings which occur once per month. This
process does not seem to put an undue time constraint on most developments.
There have been no multi-family development projects in the recent past, therefore a typical or average
permit processing and City review time is not available. With the inclusion of the new program to allow
for more than 4 units in the R3 and R4 zones (Program I) and revision of the zoning ordinance, review
procedures for multi-family development would expect to be similar to single-family development,
depending on the number of units, site constraints and project complexity.
As noted previously, changes in the review process and personnel has reduced the turn-around time on
building permits; due to the relatively small number of permits applied for in Ferndale, the City’s
processing and permit procedures have effectively been reduced to about a week including building plan
review, plot plan review, and design review.
Table 37: Timelines for Permit Procedures - City of Ferndale
Type of Approval or Permit                                                Typical Processing Time
Conditional Use Permit                                                    30-60 days
Zone Change                                                               60-90 days
General Plan Amendment                                                    60-90 days
Plot Plan Review                                                          7 days
Plan Check                                                                7 days
Design Review                                                             7 - 14 days
Tract Maps / Major Subdivision                                            90 days
Parcel Maps / Minor Subdivision                                           90 days
Initial Environmental Study                                               30-60 days
Environmental Impact Report                                               90-180 days
Constraints on Persons with Disabilities
Government Code §65583(a)(4) requires an analysis of potential and actual governmental constraints
upon the maintenance, improvement, or development of housing for all income levels and for persons
with disabilities, including land use controls, building codes and their enforcement, site improvements,
fees and other exactions required of developers, and local processing and permit procedures. The
analysis shall also demonstrate local efforts to remove governmental constraints that hinder the locality
from meeting its share of the regional housing.
This section analyzes the governmental constraints that may exist on the development of housing for
persons with disabilities. Recent legislation (SB520) requires the City to analyze the governmental
City of Ferndale Housing Element                      3 - 28                    Resources and Constraints
                                                                                 Adopted September 2014

constraints on the development of housing for persons with disabilities and demonstrate the City's
efforts to remove such constraints, including accommodating procedures for the approval of group
homes, ADA retrofit efforts, and evaluation of the Zoning Code for ADA compliance or other measures
that provide flexibility in development of housing for persons with disabilities. Constraints can take
many forms including inflexibility within zoning and land use regulations, unduly restrictive permit
processing or procedures, and outdated building codes. The City’s analysis of actual and potential
governmental constraints in each of these areas is discussed below.
The City has analyzed its land use, zoning and building code provisions and processes to determine what
accommodations and constraints exist relative to housing for persons with disabilities. Persons with
disabilities may reside in residential units in any zoning district that allows residential uses. Some may
choose to reside in a residential facility or group home designed for occupancy by or with supportive
services for persons with disabilities. One or more persons inhabiting a residence are treated as a matter
of right in all zoning districts that permit single family residences in accordance with state law. There is
no limit to the number of group homes that may be located in an area.
Larger institutional group homes may also locate in the zoning districts that allow group homes (private
institutions), subject to approval of a conditional use permit. Conditional use permits require a public
hearing and are subject to conditions of approval that may be imposed by the Planning Commission in
order to ensure compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood. There are no established standards
for group homes in the City, so the Planning Commission looks to the individual circumstances of each
group home and its particular neighborhood context. The requirement for a conditional use permit for
large institutional group homes is an appropriate requirement because the impacts of such a home
would generally be greater than that for a principally permitted residential use and therefore warrants a
determination of the adequacy of the facility and improvements to ensure compatibility with the
residential neighborhood.
The State has removed any City discretion for review of small group homes for persons with disabilities
(six or fewer residents). The City does not impose additional zoning, building code, or permitting
procedures other than those allowed by State law. The City Zoning Ordinance facilitates access for
persons with disabilities by allowing uncovered porches, fire escapes, landings, and ramps to extend into
setbacks. The City has not identified any zoning or other land-use regulatory practices that could
discriminate against persons with disabilities and impede the availability of such housing. Additionally,
the City has adopted Ordinance 2014-05 Reasonable Accommodation that establishes procedures to
provide people with disabilities reasonable accommodation in rules, policies, practices and procedures
that may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing. No unique restrictions are in place for disabled
housing, such as minimum distances, special conditions for disabled housing, or other such regulations
that could constrain the development, maintenance, improvement, or alteration of housing for disabled
persons.
In an effort to bring the city’s sidewalks and curb corners up to date, any sidewalk replacement in the
city must be ADA compliant. During a walking tour, intersections were identified that need ADA corners,
and these have been entered in a request for funding using Transportation Funds. ADA requires one
handicap-parking stall for up to 25 parking spaces where parking is provided for the public, guests, or
employees.
City of Ferndale Housing Element                       3 - 29                    Resources and Constraints
                                                                                  Adopted September 2014

Residential parking standards for persons with disabilities are the same as other parking standards. The
Reasonable Accommodation procedure may allow for the reduction of parking requirements for special
needs housing if a project proponent can demonstrate a reduced need for parking.
Analysis of Non-Governmental Constraints
The ability to address the underserved needs of the citizens of the City of Ferndale is challenging,
especially since so many of the impediments to providing services are beyond the scope of municipal
governments. Funding limitations exist at all levels. All resources needed to develop housing in Ferndale
are subject to the laws of supply and demand, meaning that these resources may not always be
available at prices that make housing development attractive. Thus, cost factors are the primary non-
governmental constraint upon development of housing in Ferndale. This is particularly true in the case
of housing for low- and moderate-income households, where the basic development cost factors such as
the cost of land, required site improvements, and basic construction are critical in determining the
income a household must have in order to afford housing.
Land Costs
The cost of raw, developable land has a direct impact on the cost of a new home and is, therefore, a
potential non-governmental constraint. The higher the raw land cost, the higher the price of a new
home. Normally, developers will seek to obtain City approval for the largest number of lots obtainable
on a given parcel of raw land. This allows the developer to spread the costs for off-site improvements
over the maximum number of lots.
Construction Costs
The costs of labor and materials have a direct impact on the price of housing and are the main
components of housing costs. Residential construction costs vary greatly depending upon the quality,
size, and the materials being used. In 2014, residential construction costs were on average $101per
square foot (estimated by City of Ferndale Building Official April 2014).
Financing Availability
An important consideration in the assessment of the housing needs in Ferndale is the availability of
financing. This issue raises several concerns: the ability of homebuilders to obtain construction
financing, the ability of households to obtain single-family home loans, and the opportunity for all
households of similar economic characteristics to have equal access to financing. Fluctuating interest
rates can eliminate many potential homebuyers from the housing market or render a housing project
infeasible that could have been successfully developed or marketed at lower interest rates.
First-time homebuyers are the group most impacted by financing requirements. Mortgage interest rates
for new home purchases range from 6.5% to 8% for a fixed-rate 30-year loan. Lower initial rates are
available with graduated payment mortgages, adjustable rate mortgages, and buy-down mortgages;
however, the subprime crisis has affected the availability of dollars for home mortgages. Variable
interest rate mortgages on affordable homes may increase to the point where the interest rate exceeds
City of Ferndale Housing Element                     3 - 30                    Resources and Constraints
                                                                                Adopted September 2014
the cost of living adjustments, which is a constraint on affordability. Although rates are currently low,
they can change significantly and substantially impact the affordability of housing stock. Interest rates at
the present time are not a constraint to affordable housing. Financing for both construction and long-
term mortgages is generally available in Humboldt County subject to normal underwriting standards. A
more critical impediment to homeownership involves both the affordability of the housing stock and the
ability of potential buyers to fulfill down payment requirements. Conventional home loans typically
require 5% to 20% of the sales price as a down payment, which is the largest constraint to first-time
homebuyers. This indicates a need for flexible loan programs and a method to bridge the gap between
the down payment and a potential homeowner’s available funds. The availability of financing for
developers under current economic conditions may also pose a constraint on development outside of
the City’s control (City of Eastvale Housing Element June 30, 2013).
Units At-risk of Converting to Market Rate Uses
According to California Housing Partnership Corporation (CHPC) and USDA Rural Development, there are
no State or Federally assisted units in Ferndale at risk of converting to market rate uses in the planning
period. There are no locally assisted units at risk of converting to market rate between 2014 and 2024.
Energy Conservation
The purpose of this analysis is to ensure localities consider the long- and short-term benefits of energy
conservation in residential development, including how energy conservation requirements can
contribute to reducing overall development costs and monthly payments for households.
Major Subdivisions in Ferndale are required to provide a solar-shading map to assist lot purchasers and
homebuilders to site their homes to make best use of natural light. Pacific Gas and Electric Company
(PG&E), Ferndale’s regional utility company, has several programs that help homeowners and renters
with energy conservation. PG&E customers have expressed great interest in being part of the solution to
the energy situation in California. The utility has developed a simple 3-step program to make saving
energy easy. Customers can reduce energy consumption if they take advantage of the information and
incentives available for:
     1. Taking no-cost, energy-saving actions.
     2. Installing low-cost, energy-saving measures.
     3. Investing in energy-efficient equipment, appliances and building shell retrofits.
In addition, “Energy Partners” is Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s free weatherization program. Utility-
approved contractors work with low-income customers to make their homes more energy efficient.
On a local level, the Redwood Coast Energy Authority (RCEA) was formed in 2003 as a Joint Powers
Association, representing seven municipalities including the Cities of Arcata, Blue Lake, Eureka, Ferndale,
Fortuna, Trinidad and Rio Dell, and Humboldt County. RCEA's purpose is to develop and implement
sustainable energy initiatives that reduce energy demand, increase energy efficiency, and advance the
use of clean, efficient and renewable resources available in the region.
City of Ferndale Housing Element                       3 - 31                    Resources and Constraints
                                                                                 Adopted September 2014

Chapter Four: Review and Revision of Prior Housing
Programs
Review and Revise*
*This entire section has been updated from the 2012 Housing Element Update.
The review and revise requirement is an important feature of the Housing Element update. The review
analyzes the City’s accomplishments over the past planning period. This information provides the basis
for continuing to develop a more effective housing program. Generally, the City has made progress
implementing the policies of the previous Housing Element, including completing construction of
wastewater treatment facility (WWTF) improvements; amending the Zoning Ordinance for state housing
compliance; and finalizing the acquisition and rehabilitation of 52 Navy housing units as affordable
housing in the City. The City prepared a General Plan Housing Element Implementation Plan 2013 in
order to organize the 2012 Housing Element policies and programs into manageable phases, with
actions required to complete each phase clearly defined and assigned. Phase 1 of this plan encompasses
all Zoning Ordinance amendments required for state housing regulation compliance; this phase was
completed in early 2014.
Due to resource constraints and the short timeframe between 2012 Housing Element adoption and the
2014 update, the City was unable to complete all program actions, and the completed actions are too
newly implemented for staff to accurately evaluate their effectiveness. No units were built as a result of
relaxed constraints due to City actions.
The 2012 Housing Element programs/policies, along with progress, effectiveness and appropriateness of
each program/policy are detailed below.
Program I. Adequate Sites
This program was designed to sufficiently accommodate regional housing need for all levels of
household income.
     1) Encourage the acquisition of housing by lower income persons to achieve a greater balance of
         affordable owner- and renter-households by ensuring sites are available and/or zoned to allow
         owner-occupied and rental multifamily residential uses by right.
     2) Research and analyze governmental and non-governmental constraints to providing affordable
         housing to City residents.
     3) Maintain GIS database to reflect all vacant and underutilized parcels in the City so that
         information is easily accessible for developers.
     4) Amend Zoning Ordinance to include definitions of an emergency shelter, transitional housing,
         and supportive housing and to allow for emergency shelters by right in specific land use
         designations/zones. The City is currently considering the Public Facility (PF) land use
         designation/zone where emergency shelters could be allowed without discretionary approval
         for compliance with SB2.
     5) The City will amend the Zoning Ordinance to permit multi-family housing with more than four
         units by right in the R3 and R4 zones.
City of Ferndale Housing Element                     4-1  Review and Revision of Prior Housing Programs
                                                                               Adopted September 2014

    6) The City will evaluate and identify sites of adequate size for potential rezoning to allow for
         multifamily uses by right (R3 and/or R4 zones).
    7) The City will at least annually contact property owners and developers, including affordable
         developers, to encourage development and consolidation on identified target sites to
         accommodate the housing needs of lower income households. To encourage development and
         consolidation on target sites, the City will adopt incentives by September 30, 2012 for
         consolidation of smaller sites including priority processing, parking reductions, modification of
         development standards and ministerial lot line adjustments. When available, the City will
         consider providing or assisting with applying for financial resources to facilitate lot
         consolidation.
Progress: The City has made significant progress towards implementation of this program. City staff has
researched and analyzed governmental and non-governmental constraints to providing affordable
housing during the 4th and 5th cycle Housing Element updates and for preparation of the Housing
Element Implementation Plan 2013. The Zoning Ordinance has been amended to include definitions of
an emergency shelter, transitional housing, and supportive housing and to allow for emergency shelters
by right in the Public Facility (PF) land use designation/zone. These actions have helped alleviate
governmental constraints while bringing the City into compliance with state housing regulations. The
City has maintained its GIS database, including vacant and underutilized parcels in the City, as well as
made the database available for use by staff and the public at City Hall.
Effectiveness: The 2012 Housing Element projected that many of the actions in Program I. Adequate
Sites would be ongoing actions, while discrete actions would be completed in 2012 and 2013. The City
did not complete discrete actions until 2014.
Although the City has worked to implement all program actions, two phases of the Implementation Plan
remain to be completed. Included in the remaining phases are the following actions from Program I:
    1) Encourage the acquisition of housing by lower income persons to achieve a greater balance of
         affordable owner- and renter-households by ensuring sites are available and/or zoned to allow
         owner-occupied and rental multifamily residential uses by right.
    2) The City will evaluate and identify sites of adequate size for potential rezoning to allow for
         multifamily uses by right (R3 and/or R4 zones).
    3) The City will at least annually contact property owners and developers, including affordable
         developers, to encourage development and consolidation on identified target sites to
         accommodate the housing needs of lower income households. To encourage development and
         consolidation on target sites, the City will adopt incentives by September 30, 2012 for
         consolidation of smaller sites including priority processing, parking reductions, modification of
         development standards and ministerial lot line adjustments. When available, the City will
         consider providing or assisting with applying for financial resources to facilitate lot
         consolidation.
Appropriateness: The City has adequate sites available for all types of residential dwellings. Existing R4
and C2 zoned lands allow for sufficient multi-family units in the City at this time. The City has not had
any requests for homeless shelters or other forms of homeless assistance.
City of Ferndale Housing Element                    4-2     Review and Revision of Prior Housing Programs
                                                                                 Adopted September 2014
While the actions for this program are appropriate for increasing site availability, the timeframe set by
the last update was too restrictive for the City to complete all actions. This program will be continued to
ensure adequate site availability is maintained; however, actions will be set to a more realistic timeline
to ensure completion in sufficient time for beneficial impact in the 2014-2019 planning period.
Program II. Permanent Housing Availability
This program was designed to address permanent housing needs in the City and ensure that there is
permanent housing available to all household income levels through the use of incentives and grants.
    1) Evaluate whether density bonuses or a mix of density bonuses and other concessions and/or
         incentives should be used.
    2) Determine aspects of development that should be given consideration for an increase in density
         bonus percentage or additional incentives.
    3) Support site identification for lower-income housing, including ELI households, and assist with
         entitlement processing, and funding applications.
    4) Consider applying for CDBG funding.
    5) Consider implementing the Federal HOME first time homebuyers assistance program (FTHAP)
    6) Consider offering incentives such as density bonuses, permit streamlining and/or permit fee
         reductions/ waivers to developers to build senior housing and low-moderate income housing.
    7) Prioritize funding and regulatory concessions to encourage the development of Single Room
         Occupancy (SRO) and Family Room Occupancy (FRO) units, and other units affordable to low
         income, such as supportive and multifamily housing. Implement incentive based programs (e.g.
         fee reductions, fee waivers, flexible development standards, density bonuses, streamlining
         permit process, etc.) to encourage development of ELI housing.
Progress: The City has evaluated density bonuses, waivers, and incentives, as well as what aspects of
development should be given consideration for density increases. The resulting Density Bonus
Ordinance was adopted in May 2014. The Ordinance allows for granting of density bonuses, waivers,
and incentives in all zoning districts, including mixed use zoning districts, where residential
developments of five or more dwelling units are proposed and where the applicant seeks and agrees to
provide low, very low, senior or moderate income housing units in the threshold amounts specified in
state density bonus law such that the resulting density is beyond that which is permitted by the
applicable zoning. State law provides that if a developer proposes to include at least 20% of the dwelling
units in a project at rents/prices affordable to low-income households or 10% of the dwelling units in a
project at rents/prices affordable to very low-income households, the City must permit a 25% minimum
density bonus. The City of Ferndale Density Bonus Ordinance has undergone legal review for compliance
with state regulations.
The General Plan Housing Element Implementation Plan 2013 identifies specific actions and responsible
parties for the remaining Program II actions.
Effectiveness: The City of Ferndale implemented many of the program actions from the 2012 Housing
Element Permanent Housing Availability Program. Actions pertaining to density bonus ordinance
adoption were effective in guiding the City through the process of ordinance creation and adoption. No
applications for bonuses, waivers, or incentives have been received.
City of Ferndale Housing Element                     4-3   Review and Revision of Prior Housing Programs
                                                                                  Adopted September 2014
Although the City has worked to implement all program actions, two phases of the Implementation Plan
remain to be completed. Included in the remaining phases are the following actions from Program II:
      3) Support site identification for lower-income housing, including ELI households, and assist with
         entitlement processing, and funding applications.
      4) Consider applying for CDBG funding.
      5) Consider implementing the Federal HOME first time homebuyers assistance program (FTHAP)
      7) Prioritize funding and regulatory concessions to encourage the development of Single Room
         Occupancy (SRO) and Family Room Occupancy (FRO) units, and other units affordable to low
         income, such as supportive and multifamily housing. Implement incentive based programs (e.g.
         fee reductions, fee waivers, flexible development standards, density bonuses, streamlining
         permit process, etc.) to encourage development of ELI housing.
Appropriateness: While the actions for this program are appropriate for addressing permanent housing
needs in the City, the timeframe set by the last update was too restrictive for the City to complete all
actions. This program will be continued to ensure that permanent housing continue to be available to all
household income levels; however, actions should be set to a more realistic timeline to ensure
completion in sufficient time for beneficial impact in the 2014-2019 planning period.
III. Design Review
This program was intended to strengthen the design review process in the City.
      1) Research and analyze best practices in design guidelines and Design Review Committee roles.
      2) Clarify design guidelines so that Design Review Committee members will have clearly defined
         criteria to analyze projects.
Progress: The City has continued to strengthen the design review process using several approaches. In
2013, an orientation was held for Design Review Committee members in order to clarify roles and
responsibilities and to review the City’s design guidelines. Zoning Ordinance Section 6.05 pertaining to
design review was amended in 2009 and again in 2013 in order to clarify the City’s procedures, review
criteria, and roles of the Committee. The Design Review Permit Application Packet, which contains the
application materials as well as information on the design criteria and permitting process for applicants,
was updated extensively in 2012 and 2013 and is posted online for easy access. Staff has coordinated to
ensure a standard method for processing applications and preparing Committee agendas.
Effectiveness: The City’s actions to implement this program have greatly strengthened the design
review process by clarifying the Committee’s role, clarifying the design guidelines for both Committee
and applicant, clarifying the application process, and overall improving the commitment to the design
review process within the City. The actions were initiated in the anticipated timeframe, although
completion of the actions was later than anticipated. The effects are evident in both the streamlined
processing of permits and the increased compliance among residents. The process is not time-
consuming or costly, and has not hindered construction or rehabilitation of dwellings in the City.
Appropriateness: Although the City has completed the actions in this program, it is appropriate to
continue to refine and strengthen the design review process. The program will be continued into the
next planning period, with both discrete and ongoing actions identified.
City of Ferndale Housing Element                     4-4    Review and Revision of Prior Housing Programs
                                                                                Adopted September 2014

IV. Infrastructure Needs
This program was intended to address infrastructure needs, specifically associated with the sewer
hookup moratorium.
     1) Construct WWTF upgrades to comply with Waste Discharge Requirements.
     2) As hookups become available, priority will be granted to developments that include housing
          units affordable to lower income households (GC65589.7).
Progress: The City has completed this program. The City has successfully permitted, secured funding for,
and constructed a new state-of-the-art tertiary wastewater treatment facility that meets an
unprecedented 1:1 dilution ratio. The new WWTF facility was completed and online in 2012. The Cease
and Desist Order (CDO) that was placed on the facility has been successfully rescinded.
Effectiveness: The City’s efforts toward meeting the infrastructure needs of current and potential
development, including construction of the new WWTF and rescinding of the sewer hookup
moratorium, were completed within the anticipated timeframe and have effectively removed a major
constraint to new development.
Appropriateness: The City has completed the actions in this program. The City’s infrastructure capacity
is sufficient for current and anticipated future growth. It is not necessary to continue the program into
the next planning period.
V. Housing Equity
This program was designed to address accessibility to safe, sanitary and affordable housing for all City
residents regardless of race, color, religion, sex, marital status, familial status, national origin, ancestry,
sexual orientation or disability.
     1) Revise the Zoning Ordinance regarding persons with disabilities and establish reasonable
          accommodation procedures. Pursuant to the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and the
          requirements of Chapter 671, Statutes of 2001(SB520), the City will adopt reasonable
          accommodation procedures to provide people with disabilities reasonable accommodation in
          rules, policies, practices and procedures that may be necessary to ensure equal access to
          housing.
     2) Research and identify definitions, such as “family” that may act to limit access to housing due to
          familial status, age or disability. Amend the City’s definition of ‘family’ to ensure that equal
          access to housing is provided.
     3) Disseminate fair housing information throughout the City in a variety of public locations (e.g.
          City Hall, City website, library, and post office).
     4) The City will work with affordable housing providers and managers and other social service and
          non-profit tenant and landlord rights advocacy groups to inform the public of their
          responsibilities and rights under the law and to improve access to landlord and tenant
          mediation and fair housing services to resolve fair housing complaints. Additionally, the City will
          maintain State complaint forms and refer fair housing complaints to appropriate agencies such
          as California Department of Fair Employment and Housing.
Progress: The City has adopted Ordinance 2014-05 Reasonable Accommodation that establishes
procedures to provide people with disabilities reasonable accommodation in rules, policies, practices
and procedures that may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing. The Ordinance was modeled
City of Ferndale Housing Element                        4-5   Review and Revision of Prior Housing Programs
                                                                                    Adopted September 2014

after Mental Health Advocacy Services, Inc. September 2003 Model Ordinance for Providing Reasonable
Accommodation Under Federal and State Fair Housing Laws, which was identified as an example of a
successful ordinance in the May 15, 2001 letter from the Office of the Attorney General re: Adoption of
a Reasonable Accommodation Procedure.
To ensure equal access to housing, Zoning Ordinance Article 3 was amended to include the following
definition of “family”:
         One or more persons living together in a dwelling unit, with common access to, and common
         use of all living, kitchen, and eating areas within the dwelling unit. FAMILY does not include
         larger institutional group living situations such as dormitories, fraternities, sororities,
         monasteries or convents nor does it include such commercial group living arrangements as
         boardinghouses, lodging houses and the like.
The General Plan Housing Element Implementation Plan 2013 identifies specific actions and responsible
parties for the remaining Program V. actions.
Effectiveness: The 2012 Housing Element projected that many of the actions in Program V. Housing
Equity would be ongoing actions, while discrete actions would be completed in 2012. The City did not
complete discrete actions until 2014. Completion of these actions has effectively removed limitations on
access to housing due to familial status, age or disability.
Although the City has worked to implement all program actions, two phases of the Implementation Plan
remain to be completed. Included in the remaining phases are the following actions from Program V:
    3. Disseminate fair housing information throughout the City in a variety of public locations (e.g.
         City Hall, City website, library, and post office).
    4. The City will work with affordable housing providers and managers and other social service and
         non-profit tenant and landlord rights advocacy groups to inform the public of their
         responsibilities and rights under the law and to improve access to landlord and tenant
         mediation and fair housing services to resolve fair housing complaints. Additionally, the City will
         maintain State complaint forms and refer fair housing complaints to appropriate agencies such
         as California Department of Fair Employment and Housing.
Appropriateness: While the actions for this program are appropriate for ensuring equal access to
housing, the timeframe set by the last update was too restrictive for the City to complete all actions.
This program will be continued in the 2014 Housing Element; however, actions should be set to a more
realistic timeline to ensure completion in sufficient time for beneficial impact in the 2014-2019 planning
period.
VI. Manufactured Housing
This program aimed to determine and clarify the City’s commitment to mobile and manufactured
housing as part of providing affordable housing to residents.
     1) Address the use of “manufactured housing” vs. “mobile home” terminology and amend Zoning
          Ordinance accordingly. Add the following definitions to the Zoning Ordinance:
City of Ferndale Housing Element                       4-6   Review and Revision of Prior Housing Programs
                                                                                  Adopted September 2014

              §3.49 Mobile homes/ manufactured housing:
              Mobile home: A trailer, transportable in one or more sections, that is certified under the
              National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, which is
              over eight feet in width and 40 feet in length, is tied down (a) to a permanent
              foundation on a lot either owned or leased by the homeowner or (b) is set on piers, with
              wheels removed and skirted, in a mobile home park and not including recreational
              vehicle, commercial coach or factory-built housing.
              Manufactured housing: Residential structures that are constructed entirely in the
              factory, and which since June 15, 1976, have been regulated by the Federal
              Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 under the
              administration of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
              Manufactured housing shall be allowed in all residential zoning districts, subject to
              applicable requirements, including design review.
      2) Revise the Zoning Ordinance to permit manufactured homes in certain residential zones.
Progress: The City has completed this program. The Zoning Ordinance was amended to include a
definition and applicable requirements for manufactured housing. Zoning Ordinance Sections 7.14-7.15
were amended to permit manufactured homes in certain residential zones. The following above
definitions were incorporated into Zoning Ordinance 02-02 Section 3 Definitions:
     Manufactured Home: A residential structure constructed entirely in the factory, and which since
     June 15, 1976, has been regulated by the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and
     Safety Standards Act of 1974 under the administration of the U.S. Department of Housing and
     Urban Development (HUD).
     Mobile Home: A trailer, transportable in one or more sections, that is certified under the
     National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, which is over
     eight feet in width and 40 feet in length, is tied down (a) to a permanent foundation on a lot
     either owned or leased by the homeowner or (b) is set on piers, with wheels removed and
     skirted, in a mobile home park and not including recreational vehicle, commercial coach or
     factory-built housing.
In amending the Zoning Ordinance in accordance with this program, the City has effectively lessened
constraints to erecting manufactured homes in Ferndale.
Effectiveness: The City’s completion of this program has effectively removed a major constraint to
location of manufactured and mobile homes within the City. Although the completion deadline was set
at 2012 in the previous element, the City completed this task in 2013.
Appropriateness: The City has completed the actions in this program. It is not necessary to continue the
program into the next planning period.
VII. Housing Unit Preservation and Rehabilitation
This program highlights the necessity for housing preservation and rehabilitation and identifies methods
to achieve these housing goals.
City of Ferndale Housing Element                     4-7   Review and Revision of Prior Housing Programs
                                                                                 Adopted September 2014

     1) The City will explore the potential to adopt and implement a rehabilitation loan program to
         income-qualified households to correct Health and Safety Code violations and make essential
         repairs.
     2) Apply for Federal and State grants to address housing rehabilitation needs.
     3) There are currently no housing units at risk of conversion, but if this issue is presented in the
         future, the City will work to preserve at-risk housing units.
     4) Partner with RCAA to take advantage of their Housing Rehabilitation program.
Progress: The City has made progress in encouraging the preservation and rehabilitation of housing by
several means—the streamlining and clarification of the Design Review process has removed constraints
to home-owner initiated preservation and rehabilitation projects, while the City’s acquisition and
renovation of the Navy Housing (renamed Ferndale Housing) successfully rehabilitated 52 housing units
in the City.
Effectiveness: The 2012 Housing Element projected that many of the actions in Program VII. Housing
Unit Preservation and Rehabilitation Equity would be ongoing actions, while discreet actions would be
completed in 2013. Although the City has made progress on housing rehabilitation and preservation, the
actions of Program VII have not yet been completed.
Appropriateness: While the actions for this program are appropriate for encouraging and facilitating
housing preservation and rehabilitation, the timeframe set by the last update was too restrictive for the
City to complete all actions. This program will be continued in the 2014 Housing Element; however,
actions will be set to a more realistic timeline to ensure completion in sufficient time for beneficial
impact in the 2014-2019 planning period.
VIII. Energy Conservation and Weatherization
This program is designed to encourage energy efficiency in new and existing housing developments and
make energy efficiency and weatherization techniques available to City residents.
     1) Research and analyze information on how to incorporate energy saving features and materials
         into new and existing housing units that either meet or exceed Title 24 energy efficiency
         standards for California.
     2) Post and distribute information on energy conservation and weatherization techniques.
     3) Develop and update a referral listing of public and private grant/loan assistance programs for
         weatherization.
     4) The City will research and analyze conservation incentives for the building industry and residents
         including services offered by local organizations (e.g. Redwood Coast Energy Authority (RCEA)).
         RCEA services include compact fluorescent light bulb exchanges and energy conservation
         awareness campaigns.
     5) The City shall support RCEA efforts to provide community education on energy issues, including
         reduced energy consumption and increased energy efficiency benefits.
     6) The City will promote energy conservation educational programs and sustainable building
         techniques such as construction waste recycling and energy efficient retrofits. Research and
         compile information on how to incorporate energy saving features and materials, and energy
         efficient systems and designs into residential development and retrofits and make the
         information available to the public (e.g. at City Hall and the library).
City of Ferndale Housing Element                      4-8    Review and Revision of Prior Housing Programs
                                                                                  Adopted September 2014

Progress: In 2013, the City partnered with the California Energy Commission’s Local Energy Assurance
Planning program to prepare an Energy Assurance Plan (EAP). The purpose of the EAP is to help Ferndale
become more resilient to energy supply interruptions during an emergency, ensuring that critical
facilities within the community continue to function. A major component for energy resilience is
reduced demand for energy, which is facilitated by encouraging energy efficiency. The EAP ties in with
the City’s draft Safety Element, anticipated to be adopted in 2014, and the Hazard Mitigation Plan. In
addition, the City has begun drafting a General Plan Air Quality Element that contains a greenhouse gas
inventory and emissions reductions plan focused on energy efficiency and conservation. The City has
integrated these plans, as well this Housing Element Update, to ensure consistency in information and
implementation measures.
Effectiveness: The 2012 Housing Element projected that many of the actions in Program VIII. Energy
Conservation and Weatherization would be ongoing actions, while discreet actions would be completed
in 2011 and 2012. Although the City has made progress on encouraging energy efficiency, the actions of
Program VIII have not yet been completed.
Appropriateness: While the actions for this program are appropriate for encourage energy efficiency
and conservation, the timeframe set by the last update was too restrictive for the City to complete all
actions. This program will be continued in the 2014 Housing Element; however, actions will be set to a
more realistic timeline to ensure completion in sufficient time for beneficial impact in the 2014-2019
planning period.
IX. Ferndale Housing Project
This program is intended to facilitate and acknowledge the City’s commitment to the Ferndale Housing
Project and compliance with the provisions set forth in Government Code Section 65583.1(c).
     1) The City will enter in to an Agreement for operation, management, and maintenance of the
          units as affordable housing for individuals and families earning low to moderate incomes. The
          City will require rehabilitation of the housing units, where necessary, prior to occupancy.
     2) The Agreement will contain specific restrictions on who can occupy the units based on income
          standards including a total of 25 low income units and 27 moderate income units.
     3) Support the phased rehabilitation and occupancy of the units, with the first phase occupied by
          the end of 2011.
     4) All units will be available for occupancy within two years of this Agreement.
Progress: The City has completed this program. The City entered into a Memorandum of Understanding
(MOU) for the operation, management, and maintenance of the units as affordable housing for
individuals and families earning low to moderate incomes. The MOU contains specific restrictions on
who can occupy the units based on income standards including a total of 25 low income units and 27
moderate income units. In actual operations, a total of 48 units are low income rentals, 3 are moderate
income units, and one unit is reserved for the Resident Manager. The City rehabilitated the housing
units, where necessary, prior to occupancy. All 52 units are currently occupied.
Effectiveness: The City’s completion of this program has effectively rehabilitated 52 units of affordable
housing. Although the completion deadline was set at 2011 in the previous element, the City completed
this task in 2012.
City of Ferndale Housing Element                       4-9    Review and Revision of Prior Housing Programs
                                                                                   Adopted September 2014

Appropriateness: The City has completed the actions in this program. It is not necessary to continue the
program into the next planning period.
Quantified Objectives
Under State law, the Housing Element must include quantified objectives which estimate the number of
units likely to be constructed, rehabilitated conserved, or preserved by income level during the planning
period.
While ideally the housing objectives will equal the housing needs identified in the Housing Element, the
identified needs in many cases exceed available resources. Realistically, most of the factors are beyond
the control of local government. However, the 2012 Housing Element addressed regional housing needs
by setting City housing allocations based on needs, resources and constraints.
The HCAOG new construction estimates under the previous (4th cycle) Regional Housing Needs Plan call
for the development of 52 new housing units: 13 for growth, 0 for replacement, 9 rental, and 0 to
increase vacancy by 2014. This projection was based on Ferndale’s share of the County’s estimated
housing needs. However, this projection did not (nor would it have any method to) account for
economic and market trends.
This projected rate of construction necessary to meet this allocation (10 units per year) exceeded
Ferndale’s 5 units per year average for the last decade. Accordingly, the Quantified Objectives from the
4th cycle Housing Element in Table 38 estimated that the City would likely develop approximately 24 of
the 52 units identified in the HCAOG Regional Housing Needs Plan for the period 2009 to 2014. This
figure factored in historical growth and economic trends.
Based on the trends, goals, polices and action plan outlined in Chapter 5 of the 4th cycle Housing
Element, the City anticipated new construction of 24 new units, rehabilitation assistance with 52 units,
and conservation/ preservation of 0 units over the 2009-2014 planning period. The Ferndale Housing
rehabilitation was expected to result in an additional 52 affordable housing units including 25 low
income rentals and 27 moderate income rentals. The projected unit conservation/ preservation was 0
because no dwellings are at threat of being converted during the planning period.
The following table shows Ferndale’s projected housing units constructed, rehabilitated, conserved or
preserved in the 2009-2014 planning period. Numbers that differed from what was projected are shown
in red underline.
Table 38: Quantified Objectives - City of Ferndale
    Income Group                 New Construction        Rehabilitation         Conservation      and
                                                                                Preservation
    Extremely Low                0                       0                      0
    Very Low                     0                       0                      0
    Low                          10                      48                     0
    Moderate                     2                       3                      0
    Above Moderate               3                       0                      0
    TOTAL                        15                      51                     0
City of Ferndale Housing Element                    4-10   Review and Revision of Prior Housing Programs
                                                                                Adopted September 2014

Housing Needs Summary
The table below summarizes housing needs, resources and constraints and incorporates what was
learned from the prior Housing Element review. The combination of the housing needs summary
synthesized with what was learned from the past planning period provides a meaningful framework for
developing the housing program strategy for the current planning period.
         Table 39: Summary of Conclusions
  Category       Statement                                                       Need
  Population     For all age groups below 44 years of age, Ferndale              Help for First Time
                 percentages run below state figures. Because of the cost of     Homeowners.
                 real estate in Ferndale, younger families might be less able    Supply fair housing
                 to afford to live in here. Ferndale’s ethnic makeup is          information throughout
                 predominantly white.                                            the city.
  Employment Technology dependent activities including consulting,               Support for Home Based
                 design, and computer support are a growing segment of           Businesses and Long
                 the local economy. Arts, entertainment, recreation and          Distance work offices.
                 hospitality (accommodation) services have expanded over         Preservation of prime
                 the last decade, as have finance, insurance, and real estate    agricultural land.
                 services, and agriculture, forestry, fishing, hunting and
                 mining.
  Income         Relative to Humboldt County or the State of California,         Low Income Housing.
                 fewer Ferndale residents fall within the two lowest income
                 categories.
  Seniors        Seniors in Ferndale make up 29.9 percent of the                 Senior Housing for when
                 population, higher than the Humboldt County percentage.         our Seniors can no longer
                                                                                 live in their homes.
  Female-        In Ferndale, there were 39 female-headed households,             None.
  headed         according to the 2011 Census. Of these, zero were below
  Households     the poverty level.
  Persons        Residential parking standards for persons with disabilities     None
  with           are the same as other parking standards. The Reasonable
  Disabilities   Accommodation Ordinance provides a process for the
                 reduction of parking requirements for special needs
                 housing if a project proponent can demonstrate a reduced
                 need for parking.
  Group          The Zoning Ordinance addresses housing needs for persons         None
  Homes          with disabilities.
  Households     In 2011, approximately 218 households (41.1 percent) were       Rental Assistance,
  Overpaying     considered overpaying for housing. This incidence of            additional low to
                 overpayment occurs fairly evenly between owner (40%)            moderate income
                 and renter (45%) households.                                    houses.
  Housing        In 2013, single family attached and mobile homes                Additional multi-unit,
  Units by       decreased significantly from 2009 levels, while the             mobile/manufactured
City of Ferndale Housing Element                     4-11    Review and Revision of Prior Housing Programs
                                                                                  Adopted September 2014

 Category        Statement                                                       Need
 Type            proportion of 5+ unit-housing structures (i.e., multifamily)    home and single family
                 has remained stable.                                            attached construction.
 Government      Ferndale’s Zoning Ordinance has been amended to allow           None
 Constraints     for persons with disabilities, emergency shelters, and
                 transitional housing. A Density Bonus Ordinance has been
                 adopted to increase the availability of permanent housing
                 for all community residents.
 Vacancy         HUD standards indicate that a vacancy rate of five percent      None
                 is sufficient to provide choice and mobility. According to
                 the 2010 Census, the vacancy rate in Ferndale was 14.8%.
 Housing         Many Housing Elements use age of housing stock to infer         A rehabilitation program.
 Condition       condition and need for rehabilitation. This approach is not
                 totally valid in Ferndale, which is noted for its historic
                 architecture. However, minor to substantial rehabilitation is
                 needed on 29% of the housing stock.
 Land Use        In Ferndale, land use designations provide for a range of       Encourage multi-family
 Controls        residential densities ranging from one residence per acre to    dwellings.
                 21 residences per acre.
 Realistic       The City constructed a new wastewater treatment plant           None
 Capacity        and the CDO has been rescinded.
 Land Costs      Cost factors are the primary non-governmental constraint        Work with/ offer
                 upon development of housing in Ferndale. This is                incentives to developers
                 particularly true in the case of housing for low- and           / contractors to build
                 moderate-income households, where the basic                     multiple dwellings.
                 development cost factors such as the cost of land, required
                 site improvements, and basic construction are critical in
                 determining the income a household must have in order to
                 afford housing.
 Financing       Mortgage interest rates for new home purchases range            Look into CDBG and
 Availability    from 6.5% to 8% for a fixed-rate 30-year loan. Housing          HOME funding and
                 prices in the City remain too high for persons of lower         development of a First
                 incomes, even with the low interest rate.                       Time Buyer program.
                                                                                 Housing Rehab program.
 Housing         Although the R4 zone is named Apartment-Professional,           Zoning Ordinance
 Types           neither the principal permitted uses nor the Uses permitted     Amendment to include
                 with a Use Permit include apartments, or anything for 5+        apartment dwellings and
                 units. In other words, there are no places in Ferndale where    a Rezone to include R3
                 apartments are allowed.                                         zones at some time in
                                                                                 the future.
City of Ferndale Housing Element                     4-12    Review and Revision of Prior Housing Programs
                                                                                  Adopted September 2014

Chapter Five: Housing Goals, Policies and Programs
The purpose of this section is to formulate a housing program that will guide the City of Ferndale and all
of its housing stakeholders toward the preservation, improvement and development of housing for all
economic levels. It is the City’s intent to encourage quality, varied, affordable housing development by
both the public and private sectors. The following are goals, policies and programs for specific activities.
Goals are general statements of values or aspirations held by the community in relation to each issue
area. They are the ends toward which the jurisdiction will address its efforts.
Policies are more precise expressions of the community’s position on particular issues, or how particular
goals will be interpreted or implemented. Polices may include guidelines, standards, objectives, maps,
diagrams, or a combination of these components.
Implementing Programs present specific actions that the city or other identified entity will undertake to
address policy issues and move closer to the community’s goals. These might include ongoing programs
sponsored by the city (e.g. a rehabilitation loan program), discrete time-specific actions (e.g. adopt an
ordinance or establish a housing trust fund), or further planning action (e.g. develop a specific plan).
Quantified Objectives establish short-range targets to achieve the goals by identifying the maximum
number of housing units by income category that can be constructed, rehabilitated and conserved over
the five-year period. They should represent “realistic yet aggressive targets that will guide program
implementation and serve as the basis for ongoing monitoring and evaluation.”
Goals and Policies
GOAL A: Provide adequate sites for all types of residential dwellings
POLICIES:
          A-1: Preserve existing ordinances that allow mixed-use of commercial/residential development
         in various zones.
         A-2: Develop and update, on a regular basis, an accurate and current inventory of the City’s
         housing stock, building permit activity and vacant lands.
         A-3: Encourage the development of presently available vacant and under-utilized parcels served
         by sewer and water to full potential under the Zoning Ordinance.
GOAL B: Increase the availability of permanent housing for all community residents.
POLICIES:
         B-1: Encourage a density bonus for developments containing at least 10% of the units set aside
         for lower income households, or at least 5% of the units for very low-income households, or
City of Ferndale Housing Element                       5-1                    Goals, Policies and Programs
                                                                              Adopted September 2014

         50% of the units for qualifying residents (i.e., seniors) as provided in Government Code Section
         65915 and where consistent with local regulations. Allow additional concessions/incentives with
         increased affordable units (GC 65915) and where necessary to maintain economic feasibility of
         the lower income units.
         B-2: Encourage low to moderate income housing development by the private sector.
         B-3: Explore financial alternatives to promote low-income housing in new development projects.
         B-4: Encourage infill development.
         B-5: Encourage senior housing developments.
         B-6: Encourage agricultural employee housing development where appropriate.
GOAL C: Review and revise ordinances addressing housing supply and affordability.
POLICIES:
         C-1: Continue to revise and standardize all City ordinances and make available online.
GOAL D: Develop and define criteria for Design Review
POLICIES:
         D-1: Research historical preservation guidelines, techniques, and best practices to continue to
         clarify design review process.
         D-2: Supplement design guidelines with information on affordable housing design.
GOAL E: Address infrastructure needs in a timely manner.
POLICIES:
         E-1: Continue to maintain the upgraded Wastewater Treatment Facility.
         E-2: Minimize housing construction in environmentally hazardous areas.
         E-3: Seek Federal and State funding for sewer and drainage facility improvements and expansion
         throughout the City.
         E-4: Periodically review and update the city-wide drainage master plan and drainage impact fee
         ordinance.
City of Ferndale Housing Element                        5-2                    Goals, Policies and Programs
                                                                               Adopted September 2014
GOAL F: To promote equal opportunity to secure safe, sanitary, and affordable housing for everyone in
             the community regardless of race, color, religion, sex, marital status, familial status, national
             origin, ancestry, sexual orientation or disability.
POLICIES:
         F-1: Give special consideration in housing programs to the needs of special groups, including the
         handicapped, large families, the elderly, and families with low incomes.
         F-2: Promote handicapped access in new housing development.
         F-3: Encourage equal housing opportunities per CG Section 65583(c)(5).
         F-4: Promote the enforcement activities of the State Fair Employment and Housing Commission.
GOAL H: Encourage maintenance, preservation, rehabilitation and improvement of housing units.
POLICIES:
         H-1: Increase low-income housing stock.
         H-2: Support efforts to maintain and improve housing supply.
         H-3: Determine income levels of occupants in those houses that need rehabilitation and apply
         for CDBG funding to maintain, preserve, and improve those houses.
         H-4: Apply for federal and state funding for rehabilitation of housing for lower income
         households.
         H-5: Encourage compliance with State and local building codes in conjunction with the
         availability of federal and state programs for rehabilitation.
         H-6: Use state and federal funding assistance to the extent these subsidies exist and are needed
         to develop affordable housing in Ferndale.
         H-7: Pursue those housing finance programs that do not require Article 34 Referendum.
         H-8: Increase the City’s capacity to package federal and state loans and grants.
         H-9: Encourage the formation of, or partner with an existing local non-profit housing sponsor to
         make maximum use of federal and state programs for new housing construction and
         rehabilitation. The non-profit housing sponsor will assist the City with preparation of a strategy
         for development of affordable housing in Ferndale.
         H-10: Assist developers in taking full advantage of state and federally funded programs, when
         feasible.
City of Ferndale Housing Element                         5-3                   Goals, Policies and Programs
                                                                               Adopted September 2014

         H-11: Allow for the use of the State Historical Building Code for rehabilitation of eligible units.
GOAL I: Encourage energy efficiency in all new and existing housing and reduce greenhouse gas
            emissions.
POLICIES:
              I-1: Promote the use of energy conservation features in the design of all new residential
              structures.
              I-2: Promote the use of weatherization programs for existing residential units, including the
              programs operated by Pacific Gas and Electric Company and the Redwood Community
              Action Agency.
              I-3: Ensure that the City’s Housing Element policies are in compliance with SB 375.
Programs
    I. Adequate Sites
    This program is designed to sufficiently accommodate regional housing need for all levels of
    household income.
    1) Encourage the acquisition of housing by lower income persons to achieve a greater balance of
         affordable owner- and renter-households by ensuring sites are available and/or zoned to allow
         owner-occupied and rental multifamily residential uses by right.
    2) Research and analyze governmental and non-governmental constraints to providing affordable
         housing to City residents by end of 2015.
    3) Maintain GIS database to reflect all vacant and underutilized parcels in the City so that
         information is easily accessible for developers.
    4) Preserve Zoning Ordinance amendments that include definitions of an emergency shelter,
         transitional housing, and supportive housing and allow for emergency shelters by right in
         specific land use designations/zones for compliance with SB2.
    5) Consider amending the Zoning Ordinance to permit multi-family housing with more than four
         units by right in the R3 and R4 zones.
    6) Evaluate and identify sites of adequate size for potential rezoning to allow for multifamily uses
         by right (R3 and/or R4 zones).
    7) At least annually contact property owners and developers, including affordable developers, to
         encourage development and consolidation on identified target sites to accommodate the
         housing needs of lower income households. To encourage development and consolidation on
         target sites, the City will adopt incentives by 2016 for consolidation of smaller sites including
         priority processing, parking reductions, modification of development standards and ministerial
         lot line adjustments. When available, the City will consider providing or assisting with applying
         for financial resources to facilitate lot consolidation.
    8) Analyze parking regulations to assess whether they facilitate or restrict mixed-use development.
City of Ferndale Housing Element                          5-4                 Goals, Policies and Programs
                                                                               Adopted September 2014

      Policies Addressed:      A-1, A-2, A-3
      Responsible Agency:      City Manager, City Planner
      Funding Source:          City Council Budget
      Time Frame:              Encourage affordable housing - Ongoing. Maintain GIS database - Ongoing.
                               Amend Zoning Ordinance for multi-family housing by right in R3 and R4
                               zones - 2015. Multi-family site evaluation and potential rezoning for multi-
                               family use (R3 and/or R4) – 2016. Small lots research and identification –
                               2015. Outreach to developers- Ongoing. Analyze parking regulations – 2014.
      II. Permanent Housing Availability
      This program is designed to address permanent housing needs in the City and ensure that there is
      permanent housing available to all household income levels through the use of incentives and
      grants.
      1) Determine aspects of development that should be given consideration for an increase in density
           bonus percentage or additional incentives.
      2) Support site identification for lower-income housing, including senior housing and ELI
           households, and assist with entitlement processing, and funding applications.
      3) Consider applying for CDBG funding.
      4) Consider implementing the Federal HOME first time homebuyers assistance program (FTHAP)
      5) Consider offering incentives such as density bonuses, permit streamlining and/or permit fee
           reductions/ waivers to developers to build senior housing and low-moderate income housing.
      6) Prioritize funding and regulatory concessions to encourage the development of Single Room
           Occupancy (SRO) and Family Room Occupancy (FRO) units, and other units affordable to low
           income, such as supportive and multifamily housing. Implement incentive based programs (e.g.
           fee reductions, fee waivers, flexible development standards, density bonuses, streamlining
           permit process, etc.) to encourage development of ELI housing.
      7) Amend the Zoning Ordinance to allow agricultural employee housing by-right, without a
           conditional use permit (CUP), in single-family zones for six or fewer persons and in agricultural
           zones with no more than 12 units or 36 beds as required by Health and Safety Code §17021.6.
      Policies Addressed:      B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, B-5, B-6
      Responsible Agency:      City Manager, City Planner
      Funding Source:          City Council Budget, CDBG, FTHAP
      Time Frame:              Evaluate for increase in density bonus percentage or additional incentives-
                               2016. Support site identification – Ongoing. Apply for grant funding –
                               Annually. Prioritize funding, concessions, and incentives – Ongoing. Amend
                               Zoning Ordinance to allow agricultural employee housing by right – 2015.
III. Design Review
This program is intended to strengthen the design review process in the City.
      1) Research and analyze best practices in design guidelines and Design Review Committee roles.
      2) Continue to clarify design guidelines appropriate for Ferndale so that Design Review Committee
           members will have clearly defined criteria to analyze projects.
      Policies Addressed:      D-1, D-2
City of Ferndale Housing Element                          5-5                  Goals, Policies and Programs
                                                                               Adopted September 2014

     Responsible Agency:       City Manager, City Planner
     Funding Source:           City Council Budget
     Time Frame:               Research best practices in design guidelines – Ongoing. Clarify design review
                               process – Ongoing.
IV. Infrastructure Needs
This program is intended to address infrastructure needs.
     1) Complete the Safety Element update to minimize housing construction in environmentally
         hazardous areas and for compliance with Government Code §65032.
     2) Apply for Federal and State funding for sewer and drainage facility improvements and expansion
         throughout the City.
     3) Periodically review and update the city-wide drainage master plan and drainage impact fee
         ordinance.
     4) Give sewer hookup priority to developments that include housing units affordable to lower
         income households (GC §65589.7).
     Policies Addressed:       E-1, E-2, E-3, E-4
     Responsible Agency:       City Manager, City Planner, City Engineer
     Funding Source:           USDA Rural Development grant/loans and rate payers
     Time Frame:               Complete Safety Element Update – 2014. Apply for funding – Biennially.
                               Review and update drainage master plan – 2014. Prioritize hookups –
                               Ongoing.
V. Housing Equity
This program is designed to address accessibility to safe, sanitary and affordable housing for all City
residents regardless of race, color, religion, sex, marital status, familial status, national origin, ancestry,
sexual orientation or disability, including developmental disability.
     1) Disseminate fair housing information throughout the City in a variety of public locations (e.g.
         City Hall, City website, library, and post office).
     2) Work with affordable housing providers and managers and other social service and non-profit
         tenant and landlord rights advocacy groups to inform the public of their responsibilities and
         rights under the law and to improve access to landlord and tenant mediation and fair housing
         services to resolve fair housing complaints. Maintain State complaint forms and refer fair
         housing complaints to appropriate agencies such as California Department of Fair Employment
         and Housing.
     3) Seek State and Federal grants, as funding becomes available, in support of housing construction
         and rehabilitation targeted for persons with disabilities, including persons with developmental
         disabilities.
     Policies Addressed:       F-1, F-2, F-3, F-4
     Responsible Agency:       City Planner
     Funding Source:           City Council Budget
     Time Frame:               Disseminate fair housing information - 2015 and Ongoing. Resolve fair
                               housing complaints - Ongoing. Seek funding – Ongoing.
VI. Housing Unit Preservation and Rehabilitation
City of Ferndale Housing Element                          5-6                   Goals, Policies and Programs
                                                                                Adopted September 2014

This program highlights the necessity for housing preservation and rehabilitation and identifies methods
to achieve these housing goals.
     1) The City will explore the potential to adopt and implement a rehabilitation loan program to
         income-qualified households to correct Health and Safety Code violations and make essential
         repairs.
     2) Apply for Federal and State grants to address housing rehabilitation needs.
     3) There are currently no housing units at risk of conversion, but if this issue is presented in the
         future, the City will work to preserve at-risk housing units.
     4) Partner with RCAA to take advantage of their Housing Rehabilitation program.
     Policies Addressed:       H-1, H-2, H-3, H-4, H-6, H-9
     Responsible Agency:       City Manager, City Planner
     Funding Source:           State and Federal Government
     Time Frame:               Explore City adoption of a rehabilitation loan program - 2016. Research and
                               apply for rehabilitation funding grants - Biennially. Partner with RCAA –
                               2015.
VIII. Energy Conservation and Weatherization
This program is designed to encourage energy efficiency in new and existing housing developments and
make energy efficiency and weatherization techniques available to City residents.
     1) Research and analyze information on how to incorporate energy saving features and materials
         into new and existing housing units that either meet or exceed Title 24 energy efficiency
         standards for California.
     2) Post and distribute information on energy conservation and weatherization techniques.
     3) Develop and update a referral listing of public and private grant/loan assistance programs for
         weatherization.
     4) Research and analyze conservation incentives for the building industry and residents including
         services offered by local organizations (e.g. Redwood Coast Energy Authority (RCEA)). RCEA
         services include compact fluorescent light bulb exchanges and energy conservation awareness
         campaigns.
     5) Support RCEA efforts to provide community education on energy issues, including reduced
         energy consumption and increased energy efficiency benefits.
     6) Promote energy conservation educational programs and sustainable building techniques such as
         construction waste recycling and energy efficient retrofits. Research and compile information on
         how to incorporate energy saving features and materials, and energy efficient systems and
         designs into residential development and retrofits and make the information available to the
         public (e.g. at City Hall and the library).
     Policies Addressed:       I-1, I-2, I-3
     Responsible Agency:       City Manager, City Planner
     Funding Source:           City Council Budget, Other Grants
     Time Frame:               Research and promote energy conservation strategies - 2015 and Ongoing.
                               Develop grant/loan assistance program list - 2016 and Update as Necessary.
City of Ferndale Housing Element                         5-7                   Goals, Policies and Programs
                                                                               Adopted September 2014

Quantified Objectives
Under State law, the Housing Element must include quantified objectives which estimate the number of
units likely to be constructed, rehabilitated conserved, or preserved by income level during the planning
period.
While ideally the housing objectives will equal the housing needs identified in the Housing Element, the
identified needs in many cases exceed available resources. Realistically, most of the factors are beyond
the control of local government. However, this Housing Element addresses regional housing needs by
setting City housing allocations based on needs, resources and constraints.
The HCAOG new construction estimates under the Housing Needs Plan call for the development of 21
new housing units in Ferndale. This projection is based on Ferndale’s share of the County’s estimated
housing needs. However, this projection does not (nor would it have any method to) account for
economic and market trends.
This projected rate of construction necessary to meet this allocation (4.2 units per year) exceeds the
units per year average for the last decade. The housing construction trend in Ferndale has been
declining; between 2001 and 2008, 37 units were constructed in Ferndale, for an average of 7.4 houses
per year. Between 2009 and 2014, only 15 units were constructed, for an average of 3 per year. The
majority of the houses constructed in the earlier period were affordable to above moderate income
households, while the majority of units in the later period were low income units (see Table 27).
Accordingly, the Quantified Objectives in Table 40 estimate that the City will likely develop
approximately 19 of the 21 units identified in the HCAOG Regional Housing Needs Plan for the period
2014 to 2019. This figure factors in historical growth and economic trends, as well as the trends, goals,
polices and action plan outlined in Chapter 5.
The City anticipates new construction of 19 new units, rehabilitation assistance with 0 units, and
conservation/ preservation of 0 units over the next planning period. The projected rehabilitation is 0
because no rehabilitation projects have been identified in the City to date; however, this Element
includes programs to apply for funding and assist homeowners with redevelopment projects should any
be identified. The projected unit conservation/ preservation is 0 because no dwellings are at threat of
being converted during the planning period.
       Table 40: Quantified Objectives - City of Ferndale
          Income Group             New Construction         Rehabilitation*       Conservation and
                                                                                     Preservation
          Extremely Low                     2                      1                        0
             Very Low                       2                      1                        0
                Low                        10                      1                        0
             Moderate                       2                      1                        0
         Above Moderate                     3                      1                        0
               TOTAL                       19                      5                        0
*Subject to funding availability
City of Ferndale Housing Element                      5-8                    Goals, Policies and Programs
                                                                             Adopted September 2014

                                             RESOLUTION 2014-19
                                THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF FERNDALE
                          GENERAL PLAN HOUSING ELEMENT UPDATE ADOPTION
WHEREAS, the City of Ferndale updates the General Plan Housing Element periodically to comply with state
requirements and regional housing needs allocations; and
WHEREAS, the General Plan Housing Element Update 2014 has been prepared to comply with Department
of Housing and Community Development (HCD) certification requirements; and
WHEREAS, a certified Housing Element allows the City to apply for various housing program grants (CDBG,
HOME, etc.) and implement regional housing goals, and provides an opportunity to build support for, and
review, local housing goals; and
WHEREAS, the Planning Commission conducted a study session and public meeting on the Draft Housing
Element Update 2014 on May 21, 2014 and recommended that the City Council authorize staff to
submit the draft to HCD; and
WHEREAS, the City Council conducted a public meeting on the Draft Housing Element Update 2014 on
June 5, 2014 and authorized staff to submit the draft to HCD; and
WHEREAS, HCD reviewed the Housing Element Update and requested minor revisions to comply with
state housing regulations; and
WHEREAS, a letter from HCD received on July 3, 2014 verifies that these revisions bring the Housing
Element into compliance with HCD statutory requirements and therefore will comply with State housing
element law when the revisions are adopted and submitted to the HCD; and
WHEREAS, General Plan Element Updates are a discretionary Act Subject to the California Environmental
Quality Act (CEQA); and
WHEREAS, on December 1, 2011, the City Council adopted an Initial Study/Negative Declaration (SCH#
2011112001) that programmatically evaluated the Housing Element Update 2012; and
WHEREAS, the Initial Study/Negative Declaration reflects the City’s independent analysis and judgment;
and
WHEREAS, an Addendum to the Initial Study/Negative Declaration was prepared demonstrating that the
2014 Housing Element update would not result in any of the conditions under which a subsequent EIR or
Negative Declaration would be required pursuant to Public Resources Code §21166 or CEQA Guidelines
§15164; and
WHEREAS, the Planning Commission and City Council have considered the Addendum along with the Initial
Study/Negative Declaration and found that, on the basis of the whole record, there is no substantial
evidence that the project will have a significant effect on the environment; and

WHEREAS, at a public meeting on July 16, 2014 and a public hearing on August 20, 2014 the Planning
Commission reviewed and recommended that the City Council adopt the Revised Draft 2014 Housing
Element Update; and
WHEREAS, the City made the Draft Housing Element Update 2014 available, held noticed public hearings,
and heard testimony as part of those hearings, prior to taking action.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED that the City Council of the City of Ferndale adopts the General Plan
Housing Element Update 2014.
PASSED AND ADOPTED on this 4th day of September, 2014 by the following vote:
AYES:   5
ABSENT:~
ABSTAIN:                                        ________________________
                                                St a    Titus, Mayor
AI~test:
     Clerk / De~ty Cit~I Clerk
FERNDALE GENERAL PLAN
• General Provisions
• Land Use Element
• Unique Resources Element
• Final EIR
                      Adopted by Ferndale
                      City Council
                      August 4, 1986

                                 RESOLUTION NO. 560
                      A RESOLUTION O.~’ ‘~lf~ CITY COUNCIL
                      Of’ THE CITY OP F’~RNDALJI~ ADOPTING
                     TJ~E FERNOALE GENERk[, Pl~AN REVISION
                 WHEREAS, the California Government Code requires
  all cities to have a General Plan; and
                 WHEREAS, the City has prepared a revision to the
  1967 City—County General Plan (Land Use Element) arid the
  Conservation and Open Space Elements of the Ferndale General
  Plan; and
                WHEREAS, the Ferridale General Plan Revision meets
  all the requirements specified in the Government Code; and
                WHER~S, in accordance with provisions of ldw, the
  PlanFlirlU Commission did conduct a public hearing on           said
 Plan Revision, with notice having been given in the time and
  manner specified by law in which all interested persons were
 a~fordec1 op~ortuniLy to be heard thereon; and
                WHEREAS, the Commission duly considered all
 written comments and all testimony received at the aforesaid
 hearing; and
                WHEREAS, an Environmental Impact Report has been
 prepared pursuant to the requirements of the California
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the State CEQA
 Guidelines; and
                WHEREAS, the Commission reviewed and considered
 the Environmental Impact Report; and
                WHEREAS, the Commissi~~ adopted Resolution No.
 ~.5—fl1. reco.LI~í~er~jjflcJ the adoption of the Envirnnm~ienta1 Impact
Report and the Fernda.le General Plan Revision            —  Planning
 CO!rlmiE.siofl 1-learlng Draft; and
                WHEREAS, the City Council held a public hearing on
January 6, 19D6, which was opened and continued for several
subsequent Council meetings, with notice having been given
 in the time an’.l mariner specified by law in which all
intereste~1 persons were afforded opportunity to he heard
thereon; and

                    T~IT~RT~S, the City Council duly considered all
  written comments and all testimony received at af~ocesaid
  hearings; and
                   WHER1~LS, the City Council , based on testimony
  received, revised ti~c~ ~)r p~s~~l land use map designation as
  pt~esentetI i.e the Planning Commission T{e-uing Draft Plan; and
                      1)P~EAS, the tentativc~1.y approved Ferndale General
  Plan Revision was referred to the Planning Commission ~oc a
  report on the changes made which were not previously
  consi(leree1 by the Com’aissiOfl and
                    WHEREAS, the Planning Commission received the
   materials and met to review the changes at their regular
   meeLlnrj of June 25, 1986; and
                    WHEREAS, the Commission reported to the City
  Council on July 7, 1986 recomneriding the adoption of the
   Fern;1ali~        ~n’~r~il Plan Revision wi th an addi tionril aiiiendnent
   to the land use map; and
                    ~{ER~AS, the City Council considered the
   Commissions report in the Council’s final deliberations on
   the Ferndale General Plan Revision.
                     NO~1, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the City Council
   of the City of Ferodale that the following findings be and
    are hereby made:
            1.     The Erivirorinental Impact Report: Which has been
    prepared regarding the Ferndai.e General Plan Revision has
   been duly considered by the City Council. and is hereby found
    to be prepared pursuant to the requirements of the
    (Dali )‘~nia Ewicorlmental Quality Act.
             2.    Measures have been incorporated ~riLo the Plan which
     ui Li’j;t  te or av~.i.l I:n the iciaxi. icim extent possible, the
     sitjili ~ icant environmental effects ther~o(~ as ideuti ~          L Lu
     the General Plan Revision.
             3.    The Ferndale Genera]. Plan Revision is hereby found
     to b~ (1OflSlSteflt with the other adopted elements of the
     ?~~•1~le General Plan.
(

      4.   The adoption o~ the      ic~ale General Plan ~evis~o~
 is in the public interest and Consistent with State law.
            ~E IT FURTl~;~R RESOLV;~n by the City Council of the
 City of FerncIa.le that the document entit.~ed Ferridale General
 Plan Revision is hereb~’ adopted and will become effective
 Coilcucrently with the adoption of this resolution.
            PASSED AND ADOPTED this    4th day of August, l9RE~ by
the following vote:
           AYES:   Mayor Farrington, Councilmembers Busch, Etter,
                   Lorenzen and Ring
            NOES:
           ABSENT:
ATTEST:
           ~
Mary CJJorg     se
City Clerk

                           TABLE OF CONTENTS
   THE FERNDALE GENERAL PLAN    - GENERAL PROVISIONS   PART I
   1000    INTRODUCTION                                      1
   1100    CHARACTERISTICS                                   1
   1200    LEGISLATIVE REQUIREMENTS                          2
   1210    Organization                                      2
   1220    Consistency. . .                                  2
   1230    Amendments. . .                                   4
   13 0 0  USE OF PLI.N                                      5
   1310    Integrated General Plan Elements                  6
   1320    Key Terms                                         6
   1330    Maps                                              7
   1340    Planning Area                                     7
   1350    Relationship to County General Plan               8
   1400    APPLICATION OF THIS PART                          8
   LAND USE AND UNIQUE RESOURCES ELEMENTS              PART II
   2000    INTRODUCTION                                      9
   2100    STATUTORY AUTHORITY                             10
   2200    COMMUNITY PROFILE                               11
   2300    AREA OF SPECIAL CONCERN                         11
   2400    OVERALL GOAL                                    17
   2500    SPECIFIC GOALS AND POLICIES                     17
   2510    Residential Growth Goals                        17
   2520    Residential Growth Policies                     18
   2530    Economic Well Being Goals                       19
   2540    Economic Well Being Policies                    19
   2550    Unique Resources Goals                          20
   2560    Unique Resources Policies                       20
   2600     GENERAL PLAN LAND USE DESIGNATIONS             22
   2610     Introduction                                   22
   2620     Principal Land Use Designations                22
   2630     CombiningDesignations                          26
    2700    IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
    2710    Residential Growth Implementation               30
    2720    Economic Well Being Implementation              31
    2730    Unique Resources Implementation                 32
    2740    Land Use/Zoning Map Changes              ~      34
(,  2800    ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORT                    35
    2900    TECHNICAL APPENDICIES                           48
                                                               Page 1
PART I   THE FERNDALE GENERAL PLAN   - GENERAL PROVISIONS
1000     INTRODUCTION
         The General Plan is a comprehensive,    long—range policy
guide to promote efficient and desireable community development.
The purpose of this plan is to present a positive, clear definition
of the direction Ferndale wants to go in the next ten years;     it
is to be a plan developed and supported by the citizens of Ferndale
with the intent that it will be implemented.
1100     CHARACTERISTICS
         All general plans,  regardless of the location of the
planning area, have certain characteristics:
1.   A General Plan should be long-range   - the plan should be forward
     looking and attempt to provide for, the future needs of the
     community.
2.   A General Plan should be comprehensive   - the plan should
     recognize and define its relationships with all significant
     factors that affect the development of the community    (e.g.,
     physical and non-physica,  local and regional).
3.   A General Plan should be general   - the plan should focus on
     the main issues, and should not include any details that would
     tend to obscure or detract attention from the major policies
     and proposals.
4.   The General Plan should be flexible   - the plan should allow
     for change in light of new developments or conditions.

                                                                  Page 2
1200      LEGISLATIVE REQUIREMENTS
          In addition to City concerns to provide direction for
community development, the State of California has a long history
of legislative requirements for planning and regulation of
development consistent with those plans.
          Article 5 of the California Government Code defines the
statutory authority and the manditory scope of the General Plan.
It requires a plan that is internally consistent be adopted by
the legislative body of the local agency (City Council).         The
Government Code also requires that the plan consist of “a statement
of development policies and shall include a diagram or diagrams
and text setting forth objectives, principles, standards and plan
proposals.”
          Also required, to the extent that they are applicable
within the City, are the following nine elements:
Land Use                   Conservation                  Noise
Circulation                Open Space                    Scenic Highways
Housing                    Seismic Safety                Safety
1210      ORGANIZATION
          Because of the great overlap between the nine manditory
General Plan elements, the State General Plan Guidelines suggest
various methods for consolidating the elements.         The method used in
the Ferndale General Plan is diagrammed below.
                Components of the Comprehensive
                          GENERAL PLAN
       .1                   I                         I                 1
 Public Safety         Land Use                Transportation        Housing
  - Safety             Unique Resources         (Circulation)
  -Seismic Safety       — Open Space
 Noise                  - Conservation
 Scenic Highways
     (1975)                   (1985)                (1967)            (lyA≤
 1220      CONSISTENCY
           In 1975, the Legislature added Government Code Section
 65300.5 to State Planning Law.      This section, called the Internal
 Consistency Requirement, states:
          “In constructing this article,   the Legislature intends
           that the General Plan and elements and parts thereof
           comprise an integrated, internally consistent and
           compatible statement of policies for the adopting agency.”

                                                                 Page 3
           This requirement implies that:
          First, all the elements of the General Plan must be
          consistent.    For example, if the Public Safety Element
          identifies hazardous areas, then the Land Use Element
          should designate land use activities and density that
          take the hazard into consideration.
          Second, all the goals, policies and standards must be
          consistent, and the implementation program must support
          the goals and policies.
          Third, the General Plan text and diagrams must support
          each other and show the same conclusions.
          Fourth, the data base must be consistent for all elements
          of the General Plan.
         And finally, when a portion of the plan is amended, then the
          rest of the plan and its implementing programs must be
         brought into conformity.
 1221    Local Actions
         In addition to consistency within the General Plan itself,
 the State has also enacted a number of statutes requiring certain
 local actions to be consistent with the General Plan.     Among these
 are the following:
Local Action            State Statute and Consistency Requirement
Zoning                  Government Code Section 65860  - requires that
                        zoning ordinances be consistent with the General
                        Plan.
Subdivisions            Government Code Sections 66473.5 and 66474   —
                        require that subdivision and parcel map approvals
                       be consistent with the General Plan.
Capital                Government Code Sections 65401 and 65402    - require
Improvements            the review and report on the consistency of
                       proposed city, county and special district capital
                        improvement projects, including land acquisition
                       and disposal, with the applicable General Plan.
Planning               Government Code Section 65855   - requires that the
Commission             Planning Commission’s written recommendation to
Recommendations        the legislative body (City Council) on adoption
                       or amendment of a zoning ordinance include a
                       report on the relationship of the proposed ordinanc
                       or amendment to the General Plan.
Project Review         Title 14, California Administrative Code Section
Under CEQA             15080  —  requires examination of projects subject

                                                               i~age 4
Project Review              to the provisions of the California
Under CEQA (Continued)      Environmental Quality Act for consistency
                            with the General Plan.
1230      AMENDMENTS TO THE GENERAL PLAN
          It must be recognized that even if the General Plan were
assumed to bea perfect interpretation, analysis and fórcast of
community development needs as determined from available base
information, the base information itself may change over time
necessitating amendment of the plan.     Changes in the base informa
tion, as well as the underlying community values and any corrective
measures that may need to be taken constitute valid reasons for
amending the General Plan.
1231      Annual Report to the City Council
          The Planning Commission is required by State law (Government
Code Section 65400(b)) to report annually to the City Council on the
status of the General Plan and progress in its implementation.
1232      Amendments
          Amendments may only be initiated by the City Council based
upon a recommendation by Resolution of the Planning Commission or
requested by members of the public.     Applications by the public
shall be submitted on forms provided by the Planning Department.       Fee
shall be as established by the City Council.
1233      Procedures
          All amendments must follow the procedures outlined in the
California Government Code.    An amendment to the General Plan
constitutes a project under the California Environmental Quality Act
 (CEQA) and, therefore, must be evaluated for its effect on the
environment.    In addition, proposed amendments should be referred
to all interested government agencies for comment prior to adoption.
As with the adoption of the General Plan elements themselves, a
 legally noticed public hearing is required before both the Planning
Commission and City Council prior to adoption of any plan amendment.
Any changes made by the City Council must have been considered
previously by the Planning Commission, or the City Council must refer
the amendment back to the Commission for its consideration and report
  (Government Code Section 65356).
 1234     Findings Required
          In reviewing proposals for general plan amendments, the
 City Council and Planning Commission should remember that the General
 Plan is a policy document for the entire City and that it may only
 be amended “in the public interest” (Government Code Section 65356.1)
 as determined by the City Council.    In other words, the plan should
 only be amended when the City, with the support of a broad consensus
 of the community, determines a change is necessary, not merely becaus
 a property owner or group of citizens desires an     amendment.   Every
 general plan amendment, additionally, must be consistent with the

                                                                i~age ~
rest of the General Plan or appropriate changes need to be made
to maintain consistency.
         Amendment of this plan shall be considered upon making
any of the following findings:
1.   Base information (e.g., population projections) or physical
     conditions have changed; or
2.   Community values and assumptions have changed; or
3.   There is an error in the plan; or
4.   To maintain established uses otherwise consistent with a
     comprehensive view of the plan.
1235     Statutory Limitations
         The City may amend manditory elements of the General Plan
no more than four (4) times in one calendar year (Government Code
Section 65361).   While the law does not clearly define what constitutes
an amendment, case law has interpreted this section to allow each of
the four amendments to encompass several different changes (Karlson
vs. City of Camarillo (1980) 100 Cal. App. 3d 789).      Because of this
limitation, the City will establish a regular schedule for periodically
reviewing, and if necessary, amending the plan.      Plan amendments will
be processed on a quarterly basis (March, June, September, and December
For each quarterly period, the City will consider proposals for plan
changes, analyze their cumulative effects, and act upon them as a
package.   Any one proposal in the package, however, can be altered
or deleted up until the time of adoption.
         The Planning Commission should conduct a major review of the
plan and its component elements once every five years.      Citizen
participation in the element review process should be maximized.        If
it is determined after such a review process that major changes or
revisions in the plan are necessary, a formal plan amendment program
should be intiated by the City Council upon the recommendation of
the Planning Commission.. Major plan revisions should be processed
separately from minor plan changes addressed in the quarterly review
process.
1300     USE OF PLAN
         The General Plan has five basic uses for the community
of Ferndale:
1.   Policy Determination   -  permits the evaluation of a definite
     set of policies to govern the future development of the City,
     and the general physical design for the City.
2.   Policy Effectuation  -   provides for the evaluation of specific
     projects in terms of a definite framework for long-range
     development of the City
                                                                   Page 6
3.   Communication     -  permits the communication of the City’s
     long-range policies to the public; encourages constructive
     debate and stimulates polictical action.
4.   Conveyance of Advise      — allows the City Planning Commission and
     other advisory boards to make recommendations to the City
     Council on development of the City in a coherent, unified form.
5.   Education   —  facilitates the education of government officials
     and the community regarding problems and opportunities of
     Ferndale and its environs (physical, economic, environmental
     and social)
1310      INTEGRATED GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS
          The General Plan consists of seven component elements (refer
to Section 1210 for chart of plan organization).         Although the
various component elements of the General Plan have been adopted
separately as permitted in Government Code Section 65301, it is
important to note that each element is interdependent and vitally
related to all other elements of the General Plan.          In using the plant
it is imperative that the reader use no single element of the plan
in isolation without consideration of all component elements as an
integrated general plan.
1320      KEY TERMS
          The General Plan consists of both text and maps.        The text
contains direction in several different forms described as the follow~
key terms.     An understanding of these terms is required in order to
use the plan.      These key terms are described below.
Goal   - The ultimate purpose of an effort stated in a way that is
general and immeasurable.        Example: “To strive for economic stability
and diversity while maintaining the small scale and local character
of the community.”
Policy (General)     —   A collective term describing those parts of a
general plan that guide action, including goals, objectives, policies
and standards in both the text and diagrams.
Policy (Specific)      —  A specific statement guiding action and implying
clear commitment.        Example: “Development shall occur only where
public services can be adequately provided.”
 Standard   - A specific, often quantified guideline defining the
 relationship between two or more variables.        Standards can often
 directly transfer into regulatory controls.        Example: Three to six
 dwelling units per net acre (low-density residential).
 Implementation Measure      — An action, procedure, program, or technique
 that carries out general plan policy. Example: “The City should adop
 guidelines for the preparation of geological reports.”
           The policies contained in the General Plan are expressed in
 terms of “shall” or “should”.        There is an important distinction

between these two terms.     As used in the Plan, “shall” indicates
an unequivocal commitment, while “should” indicates a slightly
less rigorous commitment to be followed in the absence of complelling,
countervailing factors as specified in the General Plan.
1330     MAPS
         In addition to text, the General Plan contains maps, of
which there are two types    -  official and illustrative.    Official maps
show the geographic application of General Plan policies, while
illustrative maps are presented as visual aids for the reader.        Only
official maps shall be consulted to determine how Plan policies
apply to geographic areas Within the City and its environs.
1331     Land Use/Zoning M~p
         One official map  -   the Land Use Map  -  has a special function
apart from its purpose of illustrating the geographic application
of General Plan policies.      The Land Use Map also functions as the
official Zoning Ordinance map for the City.        The map, therefore, has
both a general and specific purpose.      Under its zoning function, the
Land Use/Zoning Map provides a legal statement of permitted uses
for the present and near future on a parcel specific basis.
1340     PLANNING AREA
         Several distinct planning areas exist for the component
elements of the General Plan.      This is due, in large part, to the
context in which the elements were prepared (e.g., County-City
General Plan Program) as well as the scope and purpose of the Plan
component itself (e.g., housing re~habilitation need in Ferndale).       All
component elements share common ground in that they each include
as the basic planning study area the incorporated City limits of
Fernda].e.  A description of the planning areas for the General Plan
component elements is shown below.
Land Use and Unique Resources Elements     — the planning area consists
of the incorporated boundaries of the City and that unincorporated
territory surrounding Ferndaie located within the described “Area
of Special Concern”, which the City has determined bears relationship
to the City’s long-range planning (See Map 2-1        , Area of Special
Concern, and Discussion, page 11)
Circulation Element   — the planning area is that certain nine square
mile area described in the Ferndale Planning Area General Plan Report,
County-City General Plan Project-1967, adopted by the Ferndale City
Council on January 24, 1967.
Other Elements  -  the planning area for the other component elements
of the General Plan (e.g., Housing Element) is the incorporated City
limits of the City of Ferndale, except for the Public Safety, Noise
and Scenic Highway Elements which also include that portion of the
unincorporated territory surrounding the City which lies within the
potential sewer service area of the City as defined in the adopted

 sewer plan.1 It would appear, however, that the recommendations in
 the sewer plan have been superseded by the LAFC0 adopted Sphere of
 Influence report which identifies the City service area boundary as
 the Ferndale City limits.
 1350     RELATIONSHIP TO COUNTY GENERAL PLAN
          Ferndale General Plan policies which may have a direct or
 indirect affect on those areas outside of the City, but which are
 located within the defined planning area, are intended to be
 interpreted as a general statement of the land use and development
 policy of the City of Ferndale for these areas.   It is not the
 purpose or intent of the General Plan that these policies function
 as an independent Specific or Area Plan for these areas, but rather
 as a guide to assist the City and its elected and appointed officials
 in formulating their response to present and future land use and
 development actions in these areas which may have an impact on
 Ferndale.
          To the extent that specific actions can be identified
 which address land use and development concerns affecting the
 community, the City should work in cooperative efforts with local
 property owners, the County, and/or other responsible state of federa]
 agencies to bring about regulatory changes or other measures found
 necessary to mitigate potential short— and long—term impacts upon
 the health, safety or welfare of community residents.
          Where a City General Plan policy is found to be in conflict
 with any goal, policy, standard or objective contained in any adopted
 County land use plan or regulation, reasonable efforts should be taker
 on behalf of the City and County to reconcile such conflict.    When
 ever possible, reconciliation of differences in City and County plans
 should be addressed through amendment of the conflicting plan text
 or map designation.   It is recognized that the reconciliation of
 City and County plans may not be possible in all cases.   In such
 situations, the City’s statement of land use and development policy
 contained in the General Plan shall remain as the basis for the
 City’s evaluation and response to future land use or development
 projects before the County affecting territory within the planning
 are a.
  1400    APPLICATION OF THIS PART
          The general statements of purpose, characteristics, legislati~
 requirements and use described in this Part shall be applicable to
 each and every component element of the Ferndale General Plan.
‘Humboldt County Water Supply and Waste Disposal Comprehensive Plan,
   Winzler and Kelly, 1973.

                                                             Page 9
PART II     LAND USE AND UNIQUE RESOURCES ELEMENT
2000       INTRODUCTION
           The Land Use Element provides a general picture of
anticipated physical development as well as criteria for
making land use decisions.      While it does not serve to
develop an exact picture of what Ferndale will look like ten
years in the future, it does serve as a tool to relate land,
resources and community needs to urban functions, while
allowing for a variety of land use types.
2100       STATUTORY AUTHORITY
           Section 65302(a) of the California Government Code
requires that a city’s comprehensive general plan include as
one of its component elements “a land use element which
designates the proposed distribution and general location
and extent of the uses of the land for housing, business,
 industry, open space, including agriculture, natural
resources, recreation, and enjoyment of scenic beauty,
education, public buildings and grounds, solid and liquid
waste disposal facilities, and other categories of public
and private uses of land.”      State law further provides that
 “the land use element shall include a statement of the
 standards of population density and building intensity
recoimnended for the various districts and other territory
 covered by the plan.”     In addition, the statutes direct that
  the land use element identify areas which are subject to
 flooding and requires annual review with respect to such
  areas.
            Being the earliest State required general plan
  element (1955), the land use element has the broadest scope
 of the nine manditory plan elements (refer to discussion in
 Part I, Section 1200).     By its definition in Government Code
  Section 65302(a), the land use element subsumes most of the
 concerns in the other eight elements and plays a central
  role in synthesizing all the land use issues, constraints
  and opportunities.    According to the State General Plan
  Guidelines, the land use element should:
        “.  Promote a balanced and functional mix of land uses
            consistent with community values;

                                                        Page 10
       • Guide public and private investments;
       • Reflec   the opportunities and constraints affecting
         land use identified in the other elements of the
         general plan; and,
       • Reduce the loss of life, injuries, damage to
         property, and economic and social dislocation
         result ing from flooding.”
         State law also requires that a city’s comprehensive
general plan include a “conservation element” which is
intended to address the conservation, development, and
utilization of natural resources including water, forests,
soils, rivers and other waters, fisheries, wildlife, and
other natural resources within the city (Government Code
65302(d)).   Among the concerns to he addressed in the
conservation element are flood control, prevention and
control of the pollution of streams, reyulation of the use
o[ land in stream channels and other areas, protection of
watersheds, and the prevention, control, and correction of
the erosion of soils.
         State law further provides tiiat rt city’s general
plan include and “open space element” (Cal~ Govt~ Code
             The T..,egislature in establishing the requirement
i:or an open space element intended for local jurisdictions
to provide an “open space plan” for the identification and
protection of land and water resources which are needed for
the following uses:
•    Open space ~or tlie preservation of natural resources,
including but not limited to, areas required for the
preservation of plant and animal life, including habitat for
fish and wildlife species; areas required for ecologic and
other scientific study purposes; rivers, streams and other
waters; and banks of rivers and streams, and watershed
lands.
•    Open space for the managed production of resources,
including but not limited to, forest lands, rangeland,
agricultural lands and areas of economic importance for the
production of food or fibre; and areas required for the
recharge of ground water basins.

                                                                   Page 11
•         Open space for outdoor recreation, including but not
limited to, areas of outstanding scenic, historic and
cultural value; and areas particularly suited for park and
recreation purposes, including access to rivers and streams,
banks o.E rivers and streams, trails and scenic highway
c~ oridors.
 •        Open space for the public health and safety, including
hut not limited to, areas which require special management
or regulation because of hazardous or special conditions
such as unstable soil areas, flood plains, watersheds, and
areas required for the protection of water quality and water
r eserviors.
 2200          COMMUNITY PROFILE
               The City of Ferndale is located on the southern edge
 of the fertile Eel River Valley about four miles from the
 Redwood Highway and railroad to the east and the Pacific
  Ocean to the west.         The community is situated on the
 alluvial plain created by Francis Creek as it leaves the
   steep tecrain to the south and proceeds northerly across the
  Salt River and Eel River flood plains~          The City extends up
   the timbered mountainside to the south, and spreads onto the
   flat valley floor to the north.        This places the community
   just above the historical flood limits of the Eel River with
  prime agricultural lands to the west, north and east and
   steep forest lands to the south.        Francis Creek runs through
   thc~ heart of the city and presents a periodic flooding
  !)roble~n in the business district and in the residential area
   along i4aLn Street to the north.
                The somewhat isolated location of the city and the
   agricultural use of the surrounding lands have contributed
    to the slow growth which has protected the City from the
    detrimental effects of rapid expansion and has preserved its
   peaceful character and architectural charm.         In addition,
    this slow rate of growth and absence of land speculation and
    extensive subdividing has resulted in a pattern of historic
   development in which different landuses were located in a
    logical and orderly manner.
     2300       AREA OF’ SPECIAL CONCERN
                The State Legislature has recognized that a special
     interrelationship exists between a city and the
     uriiric~orporacec1 territory which surrounds it.    Decisions
    aEEecting land use and development activities in these
      in irworpor:a~:ec1 areas often have identifiable impacts upon

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Page        12
                                                                                                 —                                      ~
                                                                                                                                                                                U 5GS~I ~
                                                                                                                                                                                         -  ~j~’Lo1eta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     /I
                                          /                         H                                           ~
                                                                                                                                                                            MAP                2-1
                                                                                           COckRob~n.
                     -                 ~ -_—-                                                ~stan~   -                           23            -           AREAS OF SPECIAL CONCERN
            ••                  V        .-~f                        - V     I                   1      . -
                                        :      -~                     .~    L              .—    -               .--—-..V--.----      ~
             ~                                                                 —~---~-~- —               ~
                           ~ ~                   ~                    ~  4~,.                                               _.~        Ranch
                       ~                           ‘‘~SLi                     9•Q~!.S~3     ~‘    ~          ll~....—             ~
                 !~9..4’!                                ~..     ...            ~                        .~. Lsland                  .—--     -~
               (                                                                -              P0;;                    &h          )26                                                     30
                                                                                                                                                                                            •0
                                                                                  V                                              ~        w.,jsV~     ~.
                   V   *                                                                                              •—.—.
                                                                                                                        GoaLc:
                                                                                                                                        •         •                                              LAWS                  -t——--—--.~
      ‘~A9l4’~2               —                                                                                      V
                 I       c_(      ‘_~.j                                                                      •.,—~                                        I       Well
   .7      .—~               .‘   ::~
                                                                                                                                                                          lJ.~:.           ~                      II.
                -         /          ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        32
                                                    ~:‘       ‘~-;~       ~                                                                                                      Vi
             •               •       32
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1..
                                                                                                                                                                            •~L                              _____________
                                                                     C.)                     COASTA_~_~~_~                                               -
                                                                                                                                                                                          -~.           •
            TZN
                                                                                          AGRI~tJLTl_If~E
                                                                                        :~ ~1
                                                                                                                               _______
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Will    (~....
                                          ~ i I                                                                                              ~-
                                                                                                                                                                                               C
                                                                                                                                                                                               ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   •~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Well
                                            •~.—~•4 Fern             4
 -     ...,,.~                                                                                 3~.4                      ~                           :~
                       ~                                                                ~ 1~                                                                   __
                                                                                                                                                              We” .               ..•••—~             ~                  •
                                                                                                                                                               ___                 V.                        ______              ___
                                                                                                                                                            ~                                                                :~
                                                                                                                                                                    e.—~  ••~-• --.-•_                V
                                                                                                                                                                                      - ~                                    • U
                                                                                                        i~J$~                                       ‘~
                                                                                                                                                         •                               C•Oft•~qC~~~ Widdjngton~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S   •~
                                                                                                                                                                                                             V                                V
                                                                                                                                                            -  •  ~
                       ~
                                                                                                                                                           1~ ~ ~4
                                                                                                                                                            ~~UPL&ND
                                                                                                                                                           —L-      )    ~‘
                                                                                                                                                                                   TIMBER
                                                                                                                                                                                       -             ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                          an~
                                                                                                                                                                                                               .~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 :~. V -.j:~ ~4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           rj’r r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ~:
                                                                                                                                                               ~ ~iI~AZINc~                               ~1;I     /  —
                       ~        2                    , ~                   ,—       •~.    ~                              -V
                                                                                                                                                         IL                 1i         —          -.~N~    ~   -                      l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ~
9-.            -~:~‘                       -           t   —---~
                                                          ~:.~4~::c                                          -     .
      ~                                        /j~
                                                           ~-                                               -
                                                                                                                         ‘-
                                                                                                                             ~
                                                                                                                                 -
                                                                                                                                               -
                                                                                                                                                         J~ms,
 m~~’_~               —_._-—-                .~._         —                              ~       —  ~..   —~           ‘~i,    r     ~
                                      :‘                     ~
~(j   ~                                 ~                             ~-Jr~—-~~                 ~               •~               ~
                                                                                                                                                       -fr
               ~                                                                                                                                         -       —~          ~                 I    ~ -~ ~
                                                                                          ~fl—~c ~                                                                       .4.     ~                             ~ ~              —~        .~-

                                                            Page 13
the neighboring community, and the converse also holds true
 for a city’s development policies and actions.    For this
reason, State planning law encourages cities to incorporate
 into their general plan those geographical areas outside a
city which are found to “bear relationship to the city’s
long range planning”.
          Identified on Map 2—1 are the geographic areas in
proximity to Ferndale which the City has determined bear
relationship to its long—range planning.
          The mapped “Area of Special Concern” has been
identified for the purpose of focusing attention upon
certain land use planning issues which may have a direct or
indirect affect on the City of Ferndale.    The listed
concerns are intended to highlight unique resources,
identify potential constraints to development, and provide a
benchmark for City review and comment on land use and
development activities in these areas.
         For clarity, the described “Area of Special Concern”
has been divided into three categories: Francis Creek
Watershed, Coastal Agriculture, and Upland Forest and
Grazing.    Each category is representative of a distinct
combination of resource values, land use opportunities and
constraints, and potential community impacts.
          It should be made clear that the Area of Special
Concern categories are presented solely for illustrative
purposes, and are not presented as independent land use or
zoning designations for these areas.
AREj~ #1   FRANCIS CREEK WATERSHED
Item 1.
   Resource:   Developed and undeveloped ground and surface
               water sources.
   Concern/Issue:   Prevent contamination of groundwater and
               surface water sources.  Require the burdon of
               proof for demonstrating that an activity, will
               not result in contamination to be borne by
               the developer.

                                                             Page 14
   Relationship:    Developed springs provide the principal
               source of domestic water supply for the City.
               Contamination could force the abandonment of
               the spring or water source, or could result
               in the need for costly treatment facilities.
               Undeveloped springs, groundwater and surface
               water are a potential source of domestic water
               for Ferndale’s future needs.
Item 2.
    Resource;  Francis Creek.
    Concern/Issue:    Sedimentation resulting from soil erosion
               and landslide activity in the upper watershed
               could increae the frequency and intensity of
                downstream flooding.
    Relationship:    The Francis Creek watershed is
                characterized by steep slopes and geologically
                unstable areas.    Road building, home site
                development and logging activities could
                accelerate land movement and soil erosion
                unless proper mitigation measures are provided.
                The deposition of sediment within the stream
                channel would result in a decrease in carrying
                capacity and increase the potential for
                downstream flooding.
 Item 3.
    Resource:   Timber and Agricultural Grazing Lands.
    Concern/Issue:    Premature conversion to non—resource
                production uses, and maintenance of viable
                agricultural/timber economic units.
    Relationship:    The economy of the County and the Ferndale
                area is linked to its resource base.    The
                 steep, geologically unstable slopes within the
                watershed are not well suited to homesite
                 development.   The City does not intend to annex
                or provide urban services to the watershed
                 area within the term of this Plan.
 AREA #2    COASTAL AGRICULTURE
  Item 1.                          -
 ~Resource:      Prime Agricultural Lands.

   Concern/Issue:     Conversion of prime agricultual lands to
               non—resource productive uses, and the
               maintenance of viable agricultural units.
   Relationship:     The economic well—being of the Ferndale
               area is linked closely to the success of the
               dairy and other agricultural operations on the
               Eel River bottomlands.     Extension of public
               utilties by the City of other purveyor could
               encourage premature conversion of agricultural
                land holdings to homesites or other non
               agricultural use.     Rezoning of City
               A—E Zoned lands could result in the removal
               of buffer between developed and agricultural
                areas increasing the potential for conflicts
               with agricultual operations and eliminating
                land available for use as supplemental pasture
               by small—scale operations.
Item 2.
   Resource:    Eel River Flood Plain
   Concern/Issue:      Incorporation of flood damage prevention
                measures in new construction.     Potential public
                 financial liablities for repair or replacement
                of public facilities damaged by future flood
                 event.
    Relationship:    Much of the coastal agricultural land
                 on the periphery of the City is located within
                 the 100 and 500 year flood plain of the Eel
                 River.   New construction will require elevation
                 and flood proofing of new structures.    Repair
                 and replacement of public facilities damaged
                 by a future flood event may require extensive
                 public finacial assistance.   The City does not
                 intend to pursue annexation of Arlynda Corners
                 or other lands within the Eel River flood plain
                 during the term of the Plan.
AREA #3     UPLAND FOREST AND GRAZING
 Item 1.
    Resource:    Groundwater sources within the Reas Creek
                  watershed.

                                                          Page 16
   Concern/Issue:  Contamination or degredation of
              groundwater resulting from development
              activity
   Relationship:  Springs within the Reas Creek watershed
              provide the potable water source for the
              Riverside Water Company.   Contamination of the
              the groundwater source could necessitate the
              abandonment of the system and force the
              re—establishment of an interconnection with
              the Francis Land and Water Company system
              which serves the City.   Such an interconnection
              between systems would result in a net decrease
              the capacity of the system to supply the future
              domestic water needs of the City, and would
              have unknown economic effects upon the cost of
              water service to the residents of Ferndale.
Item 2.
   Res6urce:  Tributary Watercourses to the Salt River  —
              Reas Creek and Williams Creek Watersheds.
   Concern/Issue:  Sedimentation from soil erosion and land
              destabilization resulting from land use
              activities in the upper watersheds may increase
              flooding on coastal agricultural lands reducing
              land available for resource production.
   Relationship:  Sediment deposited in the lower reaches of
              the Salt River from tributary streams,
              including Reas, Williams and Francis Creeks,
              has raised the elevation of the channel bed.
              With this deposition of sediment, the gradient
              of the stream is reduced limiting the natural
              scouring action of the stream channel.   Channel
              capacity is thereby decreased and flooding
              becomes more frequent and wide—spread.   The
              deposition of sediment similarly affects
              tributary streams clogging drainage structures
              and increasing the potential for flooding.
Item 3.
   Resource:  Timber and Agricultural Grazing Lands.
   Concern/Issue:  Premature conversion to non—resource
              production land uses, and the maintenance of
              viable agricultural/timber economic units.

                                                        Page   1~!
  Relationship:   The Reas Creek and Williams Creek watershed
              areas are similar to the Francis Creek
              watershed in that both are characterized by
              steep, geologically unstable areas.    A recent
              trend has been the subdivision of agricultural/
              timber parcels into 20 acre honiesites.   Access
              to these areas is primarily from Centerville
              Road and Grizley Bluff Road, both being narrow
              roads without shoulders.    Traffic generated by
              these rural homesite developments must pass
              through Ferndale.   Homesite development has
              resulted in the removal of these parcels from
              resource production use.
2400     OVERALL GOAL
         The Ferndale General Plan should encourage the
following:
         a)  A small town living environment.
         b)  A sense of community cohesiveness.
         c)  Balanced use of economic and residential
             community resources.
         d)  The Victorian architecti.~ral heritage.
         e)  Maximum reliance on local decision—making.
         f)  Maintenance of the agricultural economic
             base of the community.
2500     SPECIFIC GOALS AND POLICIES
2510     RESIDENTIAL GROWTH GOALS
  1 ) To phase residential development so that it is
      adequately supported by City and community services.
  2)  To provide for residential development which will
      not interfere with the preservation and maintenance
      of agriculturally zoned lands.
  3)  To encourage the design of buildings and residential
      areas in harmony with the surrounding area.
  4)   To encourage the maintenance and preservation of
       structures having Victorian, historic, or unique
       architectural features.

                                                        Page 18
2520      RESIDENTIAL GROWTH POLICIES
  1)   The infilling and completiou of residential
       neighborhoods should he encouraged to achieve the
       efficient use of public services.
  2)   Developuerit shall occur only where public services
       can be adequately provided.
  3)   Rehabilitation of existing structures should he
       encouraged so as to preserve the City’s Victorian
       character and to increase housing options where the
       zoning is appropriate.
  4)  Energy efficient design should be encouraget-1 ~or
       subdivisions, new construction, and retrofitting of
      existing residences, commercial structures and
      Public :rJui1-1ir~gs.
  5)  Development should be limited in areas with steep
       slopes, designated drainage courses, and. wi thin the
      lOfl—year flood pl~tin of the ~e]~ River for reasons
      of public health and safety.
  6)  Developers of major subdivisions should be encouraged
      to set aside open space for recreational use and for
     Iaaintenance of natural features.
  7) Lands that are zoned for agricultural use, and lands
      used for mountain grazing and timber uses, shall be
     preservec~ for continued agricultural, resource
     production, and open space uses.
 8)  The cost of improvements to existing off—site drainage
      facilities made necessary by new development shall
     be the responsibility of the developer.
 9)  All new residential and commercial development
     proposals shall be evaluated for their impact upon
     local or neighborhood drainage areas.

                                                         Page 19
 10)  Any development project to be located within an area
      of low— or moderate—slope stability shall require
      the preparation of a. geological report.
 11)  The City should be open to and encourage good design
      in housing layouts.
2530      ECONOMIC WELL BEING GOALS
  1)  To strive for economic stability and diversity while
      maintaining the small scale and local character of
      the community.
  2)  To strengthen the role of Ferndale as a commercial
      and small scale manufacturing center for the daily
      and specialized needs of the region.
  3)  To enhance Ferndale’s unique ability to serve local
       residents, regional shoppers, and visitors through its
      Victorian character and creative small businesses.
  4)  To avoid conflicting uses of residential and
       commercial facilities and resources.
2540      ECONOMIC WELL BEING POLICIES
   1)  Commercial businesses should be the principal activity
       in the Central Business District; other activities
       should not interfere with this focus.
   2)  The primary location for local and regional retail
       and professional service activities should be the
       Central Business District.
   3)  Alternatives should be encouraged so as to decrease
       downtown parking congestion.
   4)  Any alteration of buildings or new construction in the
        Central Business District should be in keeping with
        the existing Victorian architecture and historic
        features.                                     V
   5)   Local government should encourage small—scale
        businesses and compatible manufacturing in commercial
        areas and not place any unnecessary restrictions
        upon them.

                                                          Page 20
  6)   The City should consider ownership, control and
       operation of a public water system.
  7)   The City should encourage the use of appropriate
       programs and economic incentives to enhance the
       long—term productivity of agricultural operations.
2550       UNIQUE RESOURCES GOALS
  1)   To retain the scenic aspect of the City and its
        surrounding open countryside.
  2)    To preserve and protect the existing architectural
        and historic features of Ferndale and its surrounding
        area.
  3)    To protect the Francis Creek watershed from land use
        and development activities which could degrade the
        quality of the resource.
2560       UNIQUE RESOURCES POLICIES
   1)   The Francis Creek privately owned riparian cooridor
        shall be maintained or improved to permit free flow
        and prevent flooding, and to maintain its use as
         natural habitat where appropriate.
   2)   Natural features such as streams and trees should be
         preserved whenever possible.
   3)    Developed and potential spring and surface water
         sources shall be protected within the Francis Creek
         watershed.
   4)    Open spaces should be set aside for public use when
         appropriate.
    5)   Utility lines serving new buildings and utility
         connections to existing poles should be undergrounded
         for all new construction where appropriate.
    6)   Design control should be maintained for the portion
         of the City with Victorian structures and Main Street.
    7)   Facilities which allow for a variety of recreational
          activities should be encouraged.

                                                      Page 21
 ~) Z~esthetjc considerations, such as viewsheds, are an
    asseL to the community and should be considered for
    P~:oLection where appropriate.
 9) Land use, density and development controls should
    be adopted for the Francis Creek watershed to assure
    the long term protection of Ferndaie ‘s’.loiiestic water
    supply, and to control flooding and sedimentation
    of Francis Creek.
10) Low density, agricultural and timber land uses should
    he maintained and protected within the Francis Creek
    watershed and other areas adjacent to the City.
11) The Francis Creek watershed shall be designated as
    a “Critical Watershed” for the City of Ferndale.
       A Critical Watershed is defined as the specific
        watershed, used by a municipality or community
        for its water supply system, which is so limiLed
        in area that it is susceptible to the potential
        risk of contamination from land use and
        development activities within the watershed.
12) Land use and cb-~veiopment activities proposed within
    the Francis Creek watershed shall demonstrate that no
    risk of contaminaLion to the water supply area ~~ouid
    occur due to the land use or development acLiviLy
    proposed.
13) All development should be designed to minimize
    erosion and sedimentation.
14) Cumulative impacts resulting from water withdcr-~wals
     from surface and groundwater sources, and impacLs
    associaLed with the siting of individual on—site
     sewage disposal systems, should be assessed during the
     environmental review process for subdivisions and
     other development projects located within the Francis
     Creek watershed.

                                                              Page 22
2600      GENERAL PLAN LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
2610      INTRODUCTION
          The land use designations which are described in
this section are applied to the Land Use Map to establish
the general distribution, location and extent of the uses of
land in the City of Ferndale.       The land use designations are
derived from two sources: (1) the principal and combining
zone classifications contained in the Ferndale Zoning
Ordinance, and (2) supplemental designations which have been
developed from the policies set forth in the Land Use and
Unique Resources Elements of the General Plan.
           For the purpose of clarity and application, the land
 use designations have been divided into two descriptive
 components: chief charteristics, and primary and compatible
 uses.   The character component of the designation aggregates
 distinctive land use qualities, while the primary and
 compatible use component describes principal uses ond other
 uses capable of existing harmoniously with adjacent lands.
  In addition, a minimum parcel size or a density range has
 been established for each land use designation.
           The various designations used in the Plan are
  described in the following paragraphs and are represented on
  the Land Use Map.     Certain of the described land use
  designations may not have a corresponding zoning map
 designation at the time of the initial adoption of the Plan
  revision.    In these few cases, the land use designations
  will appear only on the illustrative Land Use Constraints
  Map, and will not have a precise zoning function until after
  comparable zoning provisions are adopted.
  2620      PRINCIPAL LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
     1.  RESIDENTIALSUBURBAN      (RS)
         Character:    The Residential—Suburban designation is
         intended to be applied in areas of the City which are
         particularly suited to large lot developemnt of
         single family homes.
         Primary and Compatible Uses:      Permitted uses of land
         ~Ti~a1l be those uses enumerated in Section 4.02 of
          the Ferndale Zoning Ordinance, as amended.

                                                           Page ~c
      Density_Range:    0—i dwelling unit per acre.
2.    RESIDENTIAL ONE-FAMILY BUILDING SITE COMBINING
      (R—l-B-3 and R-i-B-2)
      Character:    The Residential One—Family Building Site
      c~i?EIiiThg designation is intended to be applied to
      those areas generally suited for single family home
      development, but where sound and orderly planning
       indicates that lot area and yard requirements should
      be modified.
       Primary and Compatible Uses:     permitted uses shall be
       those uses enumerated in Section 4.03 of the Ferndale
       Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
        Density Ran~:    R—l-B—3:   0-2 dwelling units per acre
                         R—i-B—2:   0—4 dwelling units per acre
  3.    RESIDENTIAL ONE-FAMILY    (R—l)
        character:   The Residential One-Family designation is
        intended to be applied in areas of the City where
        topography, access, utilities, public services and
        general conditions make the area suitable and
        desirable for single family home development.
         Primary and Compatible Uses:    Permitted uses of land
         shall be those uses enumerated in Section 4.03 of
         the Ferndale Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
         Density Range:   0-7 dwelling units per acre.
   4.    RESIDENTIAL TWO-FAMILY    (R-2)
          Character   The Residential Two—Family designation
          T~intended to be applied in areas of the City close
          to urban centers where all utilities and services
          are available and where housing demand justifies a
          density of two families on each building site.

                                                          Page 24
    Primary and Compatible Uses:      Permitted uses shall be
    those uses enumerated in Section 4.04 of the
    Ferndale Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
    Density Range:    0—14 dwelling units per acre.
5.  RESIDENTIAL MULTIPLE-FAMILY      (R-3)
    Character:    The Residential Multiple—Family
    designation is intended to be applied in areas of
    the City where it is resonable to permit and
    protect low—density apartment developments.
    Primary and Compatible Uses:      Permitted uses of land
     shall be those uses enumerated in Section 4.05 of the
    Ferndale Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
     Density Range:   0—21 dwelling units per ,acre.
6.   APARTMENT-PROFESSIONAL    (R-4)
     Character:   The Apartment—Professional designation
     is intended to apply in areas of the City suitable
     for higher density residential uses and for
     professional and business offices and instructional
     uses.   Density is to be determined by community
     character.
     Primary and Compatible Uses:     Permitted use of land
     shall be those uses enumerated in Section 4.06 of
     the Ferndale Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
      Density Range:   0—21 dwelling units per acre.
 7.  NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL    (C-i)
      Character:   The Neighborhood Commercial designation
      is intended to provide for neighborhood shopping
      centers which will provide convenient sales and
      service facilities for residential areas, without
      detracting from the residential desirability of
      such areas.

   Primary and Compatible Uses:     Permitted uses of land
   shall be those uses enumerated in Section 4.07 of
   the Ferndale Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
   Minimum Parcel Size Range:     2,000 sq. ft. or larger
   as necessary to provide adequate parking, setbacks,
   and compatibility with planned uses of adjacent lands.
   Density Range (Residential Use):     Density for
   residential use shall not exceed the permitted
   density for the Residential Multiple—Family
   designation.
8. COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL    (C-2)
   Character:    The Community Commercial designation
    is intended to be applied to areas of the City where
   more complete commercial facilities are necessary for
   community convenience.
   Primary and Compatible Uses:      Permitted uses of land
    shall be those uses enumerated in Section 4.08 of
   the Ferndale Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
   Minimum Parcel Size Range:     2,000 sq. ft. or larger
   as necessary to provide adequate parking, setbacks,
    and compatibility with planned uses of adjacent lands.
    Density Range (Residential Use):     Density for
    residential use shall not exceed the permitted
    density for the Residential Multiple—Family
    designation.       C -
9.  AGRICULTURAL EXCLUSIVE    (A-E)
    Character:   The Agricultural Exclusive designation
     is intended to be applied in areas where agricultural
    use is and should be the desirable predominant use of
     land and in which it is desired to protect
    agricultural operations from incompatible or
     detrimental uses.
    Primary and Compatible Uses:     Permitted uses of land
     shall be those uses enumerated in Section 4.15 of
     the Ferndale Zoning Ordinance, as amended.

                                                              Page 26
      Minimum Parcel Size:     4 acres.
      Maximum Density:    1 farm dwelling per four    (4) acres.
 10.  PUBLIC FACILITY    (P-F)
      Character:   The Public Facility designation is
      intended to be applied to lands owned by public
      agencies or to lands upon which such agencies operate
      public facilities.
      Primary and Compatible Uses:      Permitted uses of land
      shall be those uses enumerated in Section 4.16 of
      the Ferndale Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
      Minimum Parcel Size Range:      Not applicable.
2630     COMBINING DESIGNATIONS
         The designations set forth in this section shall
modify the regulations for the principal land use
designations with which they are combined.      All uses and
regulations established for the principal designation shall
apply in the combining designation, except insofar as they
are modified or augmented by the specific Combining
Designation regulations.
  1.   BUILDING SITE COMBINING     (—B)
       Character:   The Building Site Combining designation
       is intended to be combined with any principal
       designation in which sound and orderly planning
       indicate that lot area and yard requirements should
       be modified.
       Primary and Compatible Uses:     Permitted uses of land
       shall be those specified for the principal land use
       designation.
       Other Regulations:    Lot area and yard requirements
        shall be those specified in Section 5.03 of the
       Ferndale Zoning Ordinance, as amended.

                                                         Page 27
2. EROSION/FLOOD HAZARD COMBINING      (-E/FH)
   Character:   The Erosion/Flood Hazard Combining
   designation is intended to be applied in combining
   designation to the Francis Creek Stream Management
   Area (FCSMA).   The FCSMA shall include the Francis
   Creek stream channel and lands located within 25 feet
   of the stream bank.    This designation shall apply
   only to that portion of Francis Creek within the
   City of Ferndale.
   Primary and Compatible Uses:      Permitted uses of land
   shall be those specified for the principal land use
   designation except as modified or augmented by this
   part. A listing of modified and/or augmented uses
   shall be developed during the zoning implementation
   phase of the general plan program.
   Other Regulations:   Development standards and
   mitigation measures for streamside protection and
   flood control shall be established during the zoning
    implementation phase of the general plan program.
   The Plan should be amended to incorporate these
    standards and mitigation measures.
3.  DESIGN CONTROL COMBINING    (-D)
    Character: The Design Control Combining designation
    is intended to be combined with any principal
    designation in which the appearance and design of
    buildings and structures form a substantial
    contribution to the desirability of the area for the
    uses intended therein, and in which it is desired to
    protect significant examples of early—California
    architecture and the over—all Victorian appearance of
    the area by regulating the design of proposed
    buildings and structures.
    Primary and Compatible Uses:     Permitted uses of land
     shall be those ~ecified for the principal land use
    designation.
     Other Regulations:  New construction and structural
     alterations to existing buildings and structures

                                                          Page 28
   shall comply with the requirements for design review
   specified in Section 5.05 of the Ferndale Zoning
   Ordinance, as amended.
4. FLOOD PLAIN COMBINING     (-FP)
   Character:   The Flood Plain Combining designation
   is intended to be applied in combining designation
   with any principal land use designation located within
   the 100— or 500— year flood plain of the Eel River.
   Primary and Compatible Uses:      Permitted uses of land
   shall be those uses specified for the principal land
   use designation.
   Other_Regulations:    Flood damage prevention measures
   will be developed and adopted as part of a
   comprehensive Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.
   Adoption of these measures will permit the City to
   become eligible for National Flood Insu~ance under
   the federal Flood Insurance Program.       The Plan should
   be amended to incorporate these flood protection
   measures, once adopted.
5. HILLSIDE COMBINING     (-H)
   Character:    The Hillside Combining designation is
    intended to be applied in combining designation with
   any principal land use designation to areas which are
    described in the Ferndale Public Safety Element of
    the General Plan as being of low— or moderate—slope
    stability, and to other areas with average slopes
    exceeding 20 percent.
    Primary and Compatible Uses:      Permitted use of land
    shall be those specified for the principal land
    use designation.
    Other Regulations:    Development standards and
     guidelines for geological reports are to be
    developed under the zoning implementation phase of
     the general plan program.     The Plan should be amended
    to incorporate these standards and guidelines once
     developed and adopted as part of the Zoning
     regulations.

6. QUALIFIED COMBINING   (-.Q)
   Character:   The Qualified Combining designation is
   intended to be combined with any principal commercial
   designation in which residential uses constitute the
   predominant use of land in such area, and in which it
   is desired to protect the general peace, safety,
   comfort, health and welfare of persons residing in
   such areas from impacts which may result from the
   introduction of new commercial uses, by regulating
   those uses allowed in the underlying principal
   designation to those certain uses which the Planning
   Commission finds are compatible with the maintenance
   of a healthful residential living environment and
   preservation of the residential character of the area.
   Primary and Compatible_Uses:   Permitted uses of land
    shall be ~ThpecTIied 1ñ the underlying principal
   designation as modified by the regulations set forth
    in Section 5.06 of the Ferndale Zoning Ordinance, as
   amended.
   Other Regulations:   The use of land and buildings
   existing upon the effective date of the adoption of
   this combining designation, where said uses are in
   conformance with the uses and regulations specified
    for the underlying principal designation but are not
    in conformance with the uses and regulations as set
    forth above, shall be permitted to be continued and
   maintained without becoming subject to the provisions
   of Section 7.60 of the Ferndale Zoning Ordinance,
    “Non—Conforming Buildings and Uses”.  Expansion of
    such pre-existing use subject to exemption under this
   part may be approved by the Planning Commission
    provided such expansion is found to be consistent
   with the character of the Qualified Combining
    land use designation set forth above.

                                                             Page 50
2700       IMPLEMF~TTATION~I~TJRES
           Many of the goals contained in this Plan can be
accomplished by using the policies mentioned earlier.         In
addition, the Land Use/Zoning Map represents individual land
use types which amplify these policies.        Other policies will
require further action on part of the community.        This
section discusses the Land Use/Zoning Map and other
implementation measures the City should take to carry out
the goals and policies of this plan.       (Note:   In this plan,
both the Land Use Designations and Zoning Classifications
are illustrated on a single map.)
2710      1~E~ffDE~’IAL GROWTH IMPLEME~TATIQ~7
  1)    The City should consider the adoption of land use
        c2ontrois for new residential developineni: for the
       pcOtectioi-i of solar access, as authorized under the
        Solar Rights Act of 1978 (AB 3250).
  2)   The City should amend the Zoning Ordinance to
       establish a Hillside Combining Zone whidh
        would set minimum area and slope standards for new
       building sites, and require slopes of 20 percent or
       greater to be maintained in undeveloped open space.
  3)   The City should adopt guidelines for the preparation
       of geological reports.
  4)   The City should study and, where appropriate,
       implement the recommendations contained in the report,
        “Storm Drainage System Report      Southeastern
       Ferridale”, prepared by Winzler and Kelly Consulting
       Engi:rteers in April 1981.
  F)   Tue Cjtv should examine alternatives for Einancing
       the installation of shorn drainage improvements in
       ~treas ~iiiich evidence severe drainage problems.
  ()   The City should adopt a local, flood hazard pr~vention
       ordinance to enable community residents to obtain
       :~lood insurance under the National Flood Insurance
       Program.

                                                           Page 31
 7)   The City should amend the Zoning Ordinance to
      establish an Erosion/Flood Hazard Combining Zone.
      This Combining Zone would provide for the uniform
      regulation of land use and development activity,
      including the construction of buildings and stream
      channel improvement structures, within a 50 foot
      wide cooridor along the Francis Creek stream channel.
 8)   The City should adopt a Drainage Ordinance, as
      authorized in Section 66483 of the California
      Government Code, to provide a financing mechanism
      for defraying the cost of constructing planned
      drainage facilities for the removal of storm water
       from local and neighborhood drainage areas.
  9)  The City should amend the Zoning Ordinance to provide
       for site plan review of new commercial and multiple
       family residential development.    Site Plan review
       would include evaluation of a development proposal’s
       consistency with Ordinance requirements for access,
       off—street parking, drainage, landscaping and
        screening, retention of public and private open
       space, lighting,    and signing.
10)     The City should amend the Zoning Ordinance to
        establish standards for the design and improvement
        of off—street parking area, accessways, and
        landscaped or screened areas, and minimum area
        requirements for common and private open space, for
        use in Site Plan Review of new commercial and
        multiple—family residential development.
 11)    The City should obtain drainage easements (through
        dedications required as conditions of subdivision or
        development approval, public acquisition, or other
         means) to provide for the long—term maintenance
         and improvement of designated drainageways and
         existing and planned storm drainage facilities.
2720       ECONOMIC WELL BEING IMPLEMENTATION
   1)    The City should designate the boundaries of the
         Central Business District on the Land Use/Zoning Map.

                                                               Page 32
      2)   The City should amend the Zoning Ordinance to restrict
           residential occupancy of the first—story storefront
           of a commercial building in the Central Business
           District.
      3)   The City should work closely with the community in
           the preparation of a parking study to identify and
           quantify downtown parking needs and to examine
           options for further reducing downtown parking
           congestion.
      4)   The City should establish design guidelines to assist
           the Planning Commission with the evaluation of
           plans for new construction, exterior alterations of
            existing structures, and signs for consistency with
           the intent and compatibility provisions of the Design
            Control Combining Zone.
    2730       UNIQUE RESOURCES IMPLEMENTATION
       1)   The City should adopt an ordinance for the
            maintenance of Francis Creek and other designated
           ~drainage courses.   Said Ordir~ance should provide that
            unnecessary removal or disruption of streambank
            riparian vegetation should be minimized during stream
            channel maintenance and bank stabilization activities.
            The City should direct property owners along Francis
11%         Creek to contact the City and the State Department of
            Fish and Game (DF&G) for necessary approval prior to
            beginning any bank stabilization work within the
            stream channel.
       2)   The City should examine alternatives for the
             improvement of storm water flow capacities at street
            crossings along Francis Creek.
       3)   The City should maximize the use of low—cost or
             no-cost manpower programs coordinated through other
            public agencies for maintenance of Francis Creek and
             other designated drainage courses.
        4)   The City should request that the State Regional Water
             Quality Control Board (SRWQCB) staff conduct a study
             to determine whether there should be established a
             prohibition on the waiver of site suitability criteria
              and evaluation methods for the siting of on—site
              individual wastewater treatment systems within the
              Francis Creek watershed.

                                                   k’age 55
5) The City should work closely with the County to ensure
   the adoption oF adequate safeguards for the protection
   of surface and groundwater resources within the
   Francis Creek watershed.
6) The City should conduct a study to evaluate the
   adequacy of the Forest Practice Act (FPA) regulations
   as they apply to sedimentation control within the
   Francis Creek watershed.   Should, on the basis of this
   study and other applicable information, the City
   determine that the existing FPA regulations do not
   adequately address the sedimentation problem, the City
   should petition the Board of Forestry for a Rule
   Change to establish special timber harvest regulations
   Fo:r sediment control protection within the Francis
   Cr’~ek watershed.
7) The City should continue to actively review and
   comment on County land use referrals involving zoning,
   subdivision or other development projects occuring
   within the Area of Special Concern identified in this
   Plan.   The City should forward a copy of the Area of
   Special Concern Map to the County Planning Department.
8) The City should designate th~ Francis Creek watershed
   as a “Critical Watershed” on the maps contained in
   the Conservation Element of the City’s General Plan.
9) The City should request the Park and Recreation
   Commission to do the following:
   (a)   Promulgate and propose a set of rules for the
   use of Russ Park as a forest and wildlife preserve
   by people of at 1 ages.
   (h)   Propose a plan for the development of trails
   within the park.
   (c)   Investigate the action if any, that should be
   taken to preserve the natural lake located in the
   park.
    (d)  Study the ecological aspects of the park and
   make recommendlations for the preservation and
   enhancement of the trees, plant life and wildlife
   habitat of the park.

                                                       Page 34
       (e)  Provide for the maintenance of public access
       from the city streets, county roads, and over
      private lands as the same exist now.
 10)  The City should develop and implement a park and
      recreation master plan for Fireman’s Park.
 11)  The Parks and Recreation Commission should develop
      a priority list for recreation facility improvements
      at Fireman’s Park.
2740     LAND USE/ZONING MAP CHANGES
         Changes to the Land Use/Zoning Map are represented
on the land use revision map provided with this Plan.
Changed areas are identified by number and land use
designation.   The land use and zoning designations for those
areas not included on the land use revision map shall remain
as they existed prior to the Plan revision.

                     TABLE OF CONTENTS
               DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORT
                FERNDALE GENERAL PLAN REVISION
2810  INTRODUCTION                               35
2820  PROJECT DEScRIpTIo]s~                      36
2821  B~tckground                                36
2822  Objectives                                 36
2830  PROJECTSETTTNG                             37
2831  Environmenta1se~ting                       37
2840  PROJECT IMPACTS                            38
2841  Beneficial Impacts                         39
2842  Adverse Impacts                            40
2850  MITIGATION ME~S1JRES                       41
2860  ALTERNATIVES                               41
2861  No Project                                 42
2862  No—Growth Plan                             42
2863  Stimulated—Growth Plan                     43
2870  SUMM~RY OF PROJECT CONSEQUENCES            44
2871  Growth Implications                        44
2872  Cumulative and Long—Term Effects           45
2873  Overview                                   46
2880  REFERENCES                                 46
288.1 Author of the Report                       46
2882  Reference Materials                        47
2883  Organizations and Persons Contacted        48

                                                          Page 35
  2800      ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORT
  2810      INTRODUCTION
           This Draft Environmental Impact Report (DEIR) has
  been prepared to evaluate the probable environmental effects
  of the City of Ferndale’s General Plan Revision.    The DEIR
  has been prepared in compliance with the State mandate
  requiring the preparation of an EIR for projects which may
  have a significant effect on the environment, and in
  conformance with both State and local environmental
  guidelines.
           The State environmental guidelines recognize that
  impacts which may be associated with the adoption of an
  amendment to a general plan cannot he predicted with the
  same accuracy as those associated with a site—specific
  construction project.    For this reason, the discussion which
  follows is necessarily presented at a generalized level.
  ~lso, in preparation of this report it is assumed that all
  policies and recommendations contained in the plan revision
  text and depicted on the land use map will in fact be
  implemented.
           Finally, if the Draft EIR is to he a useful
  informational document, it should present the analysis in as
  concise, yet through, a form as possible, and it should
  serve as a framework against which the impacts of future,
  more detailed projects can be compared.    For these reasons,
  the Draft EIR for the FerncJale General Plan Revision:
  1.   integrates the discussion of the various points required
       in an EIR, where possible, to minimize repetition;
  2.   incorporates information by reference, where possible,
       since many of the points required to be addressed in an
       EIR are discussed in the plan revision, expanded initial
       study, consolidated general plan elements, and the
       background reports and technical appendicies; arid
  3.   addresses in detail only those impacts found in the
       initial study to have a potential significant effect on
       the environment (impacts found not to have a significant
       impact on the environment are shown on the Initial Study
       Checklist, Reference Material item #8).
C

                                                          Page 36
   2820     PROJECT DESCRIPTION
   2821     Background
            The project Consists of the Ferndale General Plan
   Revision text and maps, as well as all the background
  documents utilized in its preparation (refer to Sections
  2882 and 2900 for listing).    The project has been prepared
  to revise and update the Land Use Element (adopted in 1967),
  and the Conservation and Open Space Elements (adopted in
  1973) of the Ferndale General Plan, and to amend the Land
  Use/zoning Map to conform to the land use changes proposed
  under the plan revision, including the creation of the
  Qualified Combining or -Q Zone designation.    The plan
  revision recommends policies to guide the development of the
  City of Ferndale over the next 10 to 20 years.    The plan
  revision also provides for the recognition of certain land
  use and resource protection issues within the described
  “Area of Special Concern”, which includes the Francis Creek
  watershed and other unicorporated territory on the periphery
 of the City.
  2822
           The overall objective of the Ferndale General Plan
 Revision is to preserve the natural environment to the
 greatc~st exten~ possible and to promote positive economic,
 fiscal, social and environmental values in the City while
 accomodating the forcast population growth and changing
 needs of community residents.    The plan’s land use and
 development policies are designed to accomodate the
projectec3 populatior~ increase of 150—175 persons anticipated
 by l995~l Because the population forcast projections could
be acheive~~ earlier or later than this date, plan policies
directly related to accomo-1atior~ of future growth (e.g.,
land use map designations and density standards) should be
viewed in terms of the forcast population, rather than in
terms of a specific, predetermined time frame.
          The Ferndale Plan Revison can thus be characterized
as a “growth accomodatjon” plan, by which the City neither
discourages growth nor stimulates excessive growth, but
rather controls and guides it according to the developmental
principles expressed by the community.     it is inevitable
that this objective implies inherent tension as efforts to
1.    See Humboldt Co. Housing Needs
     Projection, HCAOG, Ref. Material, item #7

                                                          Page 37
accommodate forcast population growth may necessitate the
conversion or premption of certain resources.      The plan
revision seeks to minimize such trade—offs through policies
which encourage development phasing, residential infill, and
protection of agriculturally zoned lands.      Plan policies
which mitigate conflicts between competing development and
resource values are examined in more detail in Section 2850
of this report.
2830       PROJECT SE’I’TING
2831       Environmental Setting
           The project boundaries consist of the City of
Ferndale and the surrounding unincorporated area, which is
more particularly described as the “Area of Special
Concern”.      (Refer to Map 2—1 on page 12 of the text). A
number of highly valued resources are found in the planning
area, including:
      •    prime agricultural soils;
           other natural resources, such as Francis Creek, the
           Francis Creek watershed, the Salt River and the Eel
           River flood plain, Russ Park and associated upland
           forest lands;
      •    a diversity of wildlife; and
       •   a built environment characterized by many structures
           of outstanding architectural, aesthetic and
           historic significance.
           In terms of accomoclating urban development,
Fernclaie’s physical environment also imposes a number of
constraints, such as flood and geologic hazards, as well as
problems for building construction in several poorly
drained, low—lying areas.      Ferndale’s existing pattern of
development is characterized by a centralized core area of
concentrated development surrounding the business district,
and areas of less concentrated development, primarily single
family residential uses, which are sited (usually one—lot
deep) along principal through streets (e.g., ~rlington,
Fifth, Rose, ect.), with the interior of these areas
resnaini-rig largely undeveloped.

                   (I~
               0   H
               C-) >
      ~jI~
                   m
      CD~
      I.1~
               0
      Q.~ L’~)     >
                   z
     CD            D
     C)
               >   C-)
     l-~.
               -o  0
b    0
     II            c
     I.-,.         z
                   H
  C
  03
  0            /fl
  C,
  0
  C
  z
  H
                 r~

                                                        Page 38
         For a further discussion of existing environmental
conditions, see:
Climate and Air Quality:   Technical Appendicies, item #5.
Topography and Drainage:   Reference Materials,  items #1, 3b,
and 4.
Soils and Geology:   Reference Materials, items #3h, 3c and
4, and Technical Appendicies, items #10 and 17.
Archaeology and Paleontology:   No known archaeological sites
have been identified in the City limits.    Consideration
should be given in the review of future development
proposals to the potential discovery of Native American
burial and village sites.
Water Resources:   Reference Materials, items #2, 3a, 3b, and
3c, and Technical Appendicies, items #4, 8, li~ 12, 13, 14,
and 17.
Vegetation and Wildlife:   Reference Materials,  items #3a,
3h, and 3c.
Public Services and Utilities:   Reference Materials, items
#11 3b, 3d, and Technical Appendicies, items #3 and 4.
Traffic and Noise:   Reference Materials, items #1 and 4.
Hazards and Public Safety:   Reference Materials, items #3b
and 4, and Technical Appendicies, items #11, 12, 13 and 16.
2840     PROJECT IMPACTS
        This section examines the beneficial and adverse
impacts associated with the plan revision.    The beneficial
impacts discussed are intended to provide a general
understanding of some of the types of policies anci
implementation recomendations contained in the plan;
necessarily, these impacts describe cumulative, long—term~
effects.   The adverse impacts discussed are largely
concomitants of che plan’s implementation, and, unless
 indicated by the preface “possible”, are impacts which
cannot entirely be eliminated.

                                                          Page 39
            A prediction of the plan revision’s impacts is
  difficult for several reasons:
            a particular recommendation such as the Francis
            Creek stream channel maintenance program, may
           produce both beneficial (e.g., less flooding) and
            adverse effects (removal of streamsjde vegetation).
           Until the program’s full consequences are evaluated
            (measures to mitigate soil erosion due to channel
           clearing activities, for example), only the
            “possible” outcomes can be described;
           two recommendations may tend to cancel out each
           other’s impacts, such as the overall effects on
           traffic congestion resulting from efforts to
           accolnociate population growth (hence, more
          automobiles)    hut also efforts to encourage
           alternative transportation modes and carpooling
           (hence, lower automobile usage); and
           finally, in several cases (e.g., archaeology),
          insufficient information exists on which to base
          an Opinion as to the potential effect, an~1
          continuing assessment and monitoring of the actual
          effects of plan implementation will be required.
          In this and subsequent sections, such difficulties
will be pointed out in order to outline major issues which
 should be considered in the environmental review of the
project.
 2841    Beneficial Impacts
         Z\inong the preceived beneficial effects of the plan
revision are the following:
•   the preservatiomi of highly valued natural resources,

                                                       Page 40
including the protection of groundwater resources in the
Francis Creek watershed;
• a compact, contiguous and orderly pattern of urban
development, with the emphasis on the development of areas
within (infilling) or adjacent to existing developed areas,
and in clo~e proximity to essential public services and
facilities;
• the restriction of, and strict control over, development
in areas of natural hazard (e.g., Eel River flood plain);
• the preservation of Ferndale’s older structures, many of
which are significant examples of Victorian and period
architecture, and which satisfy existing housing and
commercial space demands;
•  the protection of pre—existing residential uses in areas
designated for commercial expansion, through the
establishment of a permlt review process for new commercial
uses under ihe Qualified Combining or —Q designation; and
•   an improvement in the appearance and design of proposed
residential, commercial and light manufacturing uses,
through the establishment of site plan review standards for
new development.
2842     Adverse Impacts
         Potential adverse effects associated with the
implementation of the plan revision are described in the
Initial Study Checklist (refer to Reference Materials, item
#8).   Among lhe potential adverse effects are the following:
• the removal of a limited amount of land from its natural
setting for development purposes (the plan revlsion
designates approximately 60 acres of land underlain by prime
or near—prime agricultural soils for new development);
• the impacts associated with the construction of public
and private works, such as noise, dust, fumes, vibration,
the alteration of the landscape, and the expenditure of
energy and resources;
•  incremental increases in air, water and noise pollution,

                                                         Page 41
associated with new development;
• possible increase in traffic congestion on arterial and
collector streets; and
• possible discharge of untreated effluent into Francis
Creek from sewer manholes, due to addition of new
development and failure to effectively address inflow and
infiltration (I/I) problem in wastewater collection system.
2850     MITIGATION MEASURES
         As stated, the Ferndale Plan Re.vision provides for
orderly growth of the City with minimum adverse economic,
social and environmental impact on the community.      The plan
itself, then, can be regarded as a mitigation measure
designed to reduce the adverse impact associated with
existing and proposed development.      Again, it is assumed
that the plan itself will in fact be implemented.
         For examples of the plan’s mitigation effects, the
reader is referred to the policy proposals and specific
i ~nplementai: ion recommendations contained in the plan text.
Likewise, the reader is referred to the Land Use/zoning Map
and the illustrative, Land Use Constraints Map (Technical
Appendjcjes, item #17), where the land use pattern has been
formulated to respect natural resource hazard areas and
other areas of positive natural value, yet allow sufficient
acreage for development to accornodate the forcast population
and to allow for flexibility in future residential and
commercial development demand.
         For a detailed description of plan mitigation
measures, the reader is referred to the Initial Study
Checklist and discussion, Reference Materials1 item #8.
2860     ALTERNATIVES
         It is very difficult to isolate alternative courses
of action to the Ferndale Plan Revision, since the plan
revision expresses not only the commitment of the community
to revise the existing general plan elements, but also
defines the guidelines for ~:Yie community’s development, as
expressed by local residents, against which future
development proposals should be evaluated

                                                           Page 42
             Three hypothetica’ “alternatives” are dCscribed
    below:
         •  retention of the existing General Plan elements (the
             “no—project” alternatj ye);
         •  adoption of a Plan to discourage population growth
             (the “no—growth” alternative);
            adoption of a Plan which provides fora rate of
             growth in excess of re~sonab1e forcasts (the
            Stimulated_growth H alternative).
            The “no—project” alternative is included to indicate
   the possible consequences of not revising the Fernclale
   General Plan.    The latter two alternatives represent end
  points on a “growth” continuum, and indicate some of the
   concerns which have shaped the Plan Revision’s preparation.
  The Plan Revision can be regarded as a balance between these
   two extremes, in that it is intended to accojnodate the
   forcast population, while neither discouragi~~ nor
)  stimulating this growth.
  2861      No Project
            The “no—project” alternative would consist of the
  rentention of the existing General Plan (Land Use Element)
  and the adopted Open Space and Conservation Elements.
            The data, assumptions and community values reflected
  in the development of the existing 1967 COunty—City General
  Plan are outdated, and so the adequacy of the existing land
  use element is open to question.     The adverse impacts
  associated with the “no—project” alternative would consist
  of a piecemeal and incremental application of policy, and
  the lack of colnprehen.sjvp policies for long—term development
  of the City and surrounding area.
  2862     No-Growth Plan
           A “no-growth” G~neral Plan can be characterized as
  an attempt to restrict future in—migration, either directly

                                                          Page 43
  by a numerical limit on components of population or housing,
   or indirectly, by restrictive controls over land use, public
   services and utilities, and other similar devices.
            Generally, it appears that a no—growth plan in the
  Ferndale planning area would generate fewer environmental
  impacts locally.    That is, fewer areas which are currently
  in a natural state (e.g., in agricultural or timber use)
  would need to be designated for future development.
  Similarly, the negative impacts associated with new
  development, such as air, water, and noise pollution, would
  be minimized since little new development would occur.
           However, the people who would be restricted from
  living in Ferndale but who could find employment in the City
  !aight potentially induce development pressure in the
  undeveloped portion of the County adjacent to the City,
  which might result in greater adverse impacts associated
  with scattered development in rural areas.
           The economic/fiscal and social impacts of a
  no—growth plan would similarly appear to be favorable.    The
  competition for local service employment opportunities would
 be reduced, no expenditures would be required for expanding
  existing public services and facilities, and the “small
 town” character of Ferndale would be preserved.
           More likely, though, a no—growth plan would generate
 adverse consequences.    Such a plan would reduce employment
 opportunj~jes. Also, improvements to certain public
 facilities, such as drainage, will be required in Ferndale
 irrespective of local growth policies; with a “no—growth”
 philosophy, the per capita cost of these services would be
 increased.
           Finally, in the absence of any regional development
policies, ano-growt1~ plan is likely to generate adverse
 social impacts, especially on low—income families.    If
Ferndale were to impose a ceiling on its population, the
 result would likely he the creation of a housing shortage,
and the cost of housing would increase dramatically.
 Implicitly or explicitly, Ferndale’s lower income residen~s
would effectively be excluded form the community.
2863      Stimulated_Growth Plan
          A General Plan designed to permit growth of any kind
in any location can be characterized by three factors:

                                                           Page 44
        •   an extravagant allocation of land for development in
            all land use categories;
         • laxity in development control requirements;
        •   the programming of municipal services and facili~ies
           at a level beyond demonstrated or projected need,
            in order to facilitate new development or to
           accoraodate development which occurs in a less than
           optimal pattern from the standpoint of
            cost—effectiveness and rational capital investment
           policies.
           A “stimulated—growth” plan would generally increase
employment and housing opportunities in the Ferndale
planning area (market forces permitting) but would generate
serious environmental and fiscal consequences, such as:
      •    patterns of haphazard and piecemeal residential
           development, resulting in the pre—mature conversion
           and despolation of valued natural resources;
           costly urban service extensions and unnecessary
           oversizing of facilities;
       •   increased air and noise pollution, due to increased
           levels of development and automobile useage;
      •    possible decline iii wa~cer quality, as surface runoff
           is increased, and as the potential is increased for
           urban levels of development in rural and resource
           productive areas in the unincorporated territory
           surrounding the City, and which are dependent on
           individual, on—site sewage disposal systems.
2870       SUMM1~RY OF PROJECT CONSEQUENCES
2871       Growth Implications
           As stated, the essential aim of the Ferndale Plan
Revision is neither to stimulate or to discourage future
population growth, but rather to control and guide such
growth as appears likely to occur, in accordance with the
development princ~pies expressed by local residents.       These
principles are based on the preservation of the natural

                                                        Page 45
 environment to the greatest extent possible, bu~ aLso on the
 promotion of economic, fiscal and. social equity and balance.
 2872     Cumulative and Long-Term Effects
          The intent of the Ferndale Plan Revision is to lay
 the groundwork for the plans, programs, services and
 facilities which will broaden the beneficial uses of the
environment for both present and future Ferndale residents.
In order to assure this long—term productivity, compromises
have been reached between desirable environmental, economic,
fiscal and social goals.    While the plan revision allows for
 the accomodation of future development, it also guides this
development to areas appropriate for urban development,
 areas which are in proximity to the existing water and sewer
infrastructure, which are not flood—prone, and which
preserve and protect agricultural, forest and other unique
resource areas within the planning area.    The plan revision
expands the amount of land designated for commercial
development on the existing Land Use/zoning Map, but
provides safeguards for existing residential uses in these
areas.    The plan revision also recommends the adoption of a
new combining zone classification for flood hazard areas,
and calls for the establishment of geologic report
requirements for development in areas of low or moderate
slope stability.
          Certain resources would be committed in the course
of the Plan’s implementation, such as the irreversible
commitment of energy, and. some of the land which may
currently lie vacant or be used agriculturally will be
converted to urban uses.    (Note: no agriculturally “zoned”
land is proposed for conversion under the plan revision).
Other impacts, such as the increase in noise, air and. water
pollution, and the increase in runoff which attend
development, could be significantly mitigated if the Plan’s
recommendations are adopted.
          The plan revision is also designed to mitigate
secondary adverse impacts, that is, those consequences which
impact the environment outside of the planning area or which
may extend beyond the life of the Plan.    As discussed in
Section 2860, the effects of any growth management policies
must be viewed in a regional perspective.    The policies and
recommendations of the plan revision ensure that Ferndale

                                                           Page 46
  will fulfill its fair share of regional responsibilities,
  including the provision of decent, affordable housing for
  community residents.
           Likewise, mitigation measures are contained in the
  plan revision to ensure that Ferndale’s future generations
  are not needlessly committed to a “no-growth” or
  “stimulated—growth” future.     The plan policies requiring
 development to occur only where adequate public facilities
  exist or are provided, and requirements that new development
  share in the cost of providing storm drainage, facilities,
  are intended to discourage both pre—mature development and
  over—development in the absence of necessary improvements.
 2873      Overvie~~
           The Ferndale Plan Revision is directed towards
 achieving a balance between the protection of natural
 resources and the accomoda~jon of human needs, such as
 housing, jobs, and public services, which all contribute to
 an attractive environmen•~ and improve the “quality of life”.
 These environmental, economic/fiscal and social benefits
 ensure that any adverse impacts associated with the
 implementation of the plan revision are not generated merely
 in the interest of short—~erju gain.
          Finally, the Ferndale Plan Revision, while
establishing the framework for the long—term development of
the community, also keeps options open •for the future.      In
many cases, the plan revision calls for more detailed
 investigation and more specific plan proposals in order to
ensure that the subsequent program, ordinance, or standard
best fits the particular local need being addressed.
Likewise, the continuous monitoring of the Plan’s
implementation is encouraged, so that if assumptions
underlying the Plan’s preparation shift dramatically (e.g.,
changes in the forcast population), then the Plan’s policies
and provisions can be appropriately modified.
2880      REFERENCES
2881         th or of the Rep ort
          The Draft Environmental Impact Report (DEIR) on the
Ferndale General Plan Revision has been prepared by:
          Ferndale Planning Department
          P.O. Box 236
          Ferndale, California 95536

                                                           Page 47
2882     Reference J’laterjals
         I~’1aterials developed in the course of the Ferndale
General Plan Revision preparation include the following:
       RM-1    Public Works Capacities Assessment (including
               Addenduin), Oscar Lari~ and ~sso~iates,
               December, 1978.
      RM—2     Francis Creek_Advisory Committee, Report_to
               ~ity Co~ncjl, Fer~        ~ June~T982.
       RM—3   Backgroua materials from the Ferndale Local
               Coastal Program:
               a.   Riparian Habitat in Ferndale, Five Cities
                    Planning Program, September, 1979.
              b.    Inventory of Environmental Constraints for
                    Development -FerndaleLcp, Ff~e ~Ttfes
                    Planning Program; September, 1979.
               c.   Agricultural Feasibility, Five Cities
                    Planning Program, Septemeber, 1979.
               ci.  Draft Land Use Element -  Revision for Local
                    Coastal Program, Five Cities Planning
                    Program, September, 1979 (not adopted).
         Other pertinent reference materials used in the
preparation of this report include:
      RM-4    Ferndale_Public Safety, Seismic Safety, Noise,
              r3fld Scenic Highways_Elements, Oscar Larson and
              Associates, 1975.
      RM—5   Ferndale Housing Element, Five Cities Planning
              Program, 1980.
      RM—6   Ferndale Planning Area_General Plan Report,
              County—Cf~ ~enera1 Plai~Project, 1967~
      RM—7   Humboldt County Housing Needs Plan (Draft),
              Humboldt County Association of Governments.
              (FICAOG), June, 1984.

                                                   Page 48
       RM—8   Initial Study Checklist and responses, Ferndale
              Planning Department, August, 1984.
       RM-9   Technical Appendicies, text and maps, as are
  V           enumerated in Section 2900.
 28~3     Organizations and Persons Consulted
          The data utilized in t’~e preparation of the Draft
Environmental Impact Report has been obtained from the
Ferndale Plan Revision, the background reports, and other
sources citec~.   In the course of the Plan’s preparation, a
number of persons and organizations were consulted, at
local, regional, State and federal levels, and in the public
and private sectors.     (See Attachment “A” for listing of
these contacts).
2900     TECHNICAL APPENDICIES
         A listing of tJ~ technical information used in the
preparation of the Ferndaje Plan Revision and the DE!R is
provided below.    Copies of the specific reports, tables,
maps and other materials cited may be reviewed at Ferndale
City Hall.
Reports and Memoranda
TA—l Population projections and Census data, City of
Fernciale, various sources.
TA—2 Ratio—Share Population Forcast Method, Humboldt County
Population Background Study, Humboldt County Planning
Department, Page 2—32 (with tables).
TA—3 Estimate of Available Sewage Treatment Capacity,
Memorandum from Winzler and Kelly Engineers, February, 1983.
TA—4 Hydraulic Branch Report on the Management of Water
Resources by Citizens Utilities Company of California and
its Affiliated Companies, California Public Utilties
Commission, November, 1933.
TA—5 Telephone interview with Robert Clark, Inspector,
Humboldt County Air Pollution Control District, November,
1983.

                                                       Page 49
TA—6 Streambank Protection Guidelines, U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, October, 1983.
TA—7 Requirements for Streambank Alteration Agreement,
Section 1600 seq, California Fish and Game Code.
TA—S National Flood Insurance Program, Questions and
Answers, Federal Emergency Management Agency, June, 1980.
TA—9   AD 3250, The Solar Rights Act of 1978.
TA—lO    SCS Soil Capability Classification Ratings for Use
with the Soils of Western Humboldt County, California, U.S.
Department of Arjricultural Soil dónservation Service (SCS),
not dated.
Maps
TA—li   December 1964 Flood Plain and High Water Marks, Eel
River Basin California, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
December, 1965.
TA-l2 Flood Insurance Rate Map Work Map, Flood Boundary and
Floodway Workmap, Eel River Delta (including Ferndale City
limits, Anderson—Nichols & Co., Inc., not dated (early
1980 ‘s).
TA-13 FIA Flood Hazard Boundary Map, City of Ferndale, CA,
prepared by Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD), March, 1976.
TA-14 Francis Creek Watershed   — Spring and Dam Sites,
attachment to November 4, 1983 City Council letter to
Humboldt County Board of Supervisors.
TA—lS Property ownership Francis, Reas and Williams Creek
watersheds, Humboldt County Planning Department, September,
1 983.
TA-l6 Flood Insurance Rate Map, Humboldt County,
California, Panel 1085 of 1900, July, 1982.
TA-l7   Development Constraints Map, Ferndale Planning
Department, 1985.

                                                         Page 50
                   CONTENTS OF DRAFT EIR WITH
               RESPECT TO STATE CEQA GUIDELINES
Draft EIR Section                      State CEQA Guidelines
Contents    (Not Numbered)             Section 15122
Introductionì   2810                           15123(a) (b) (c)
                                               15124(d)
                                               15128
Project Description      2820                  15124 (a)(b)
Project Setting     2830                       15125
Project Impacts     2840                       15126 (a)(b)
Mitigation Measures      2050                  15126(c)
Alternatives    2860                           15126(d)
Summary of Project                             15126(e)(f)(g)
  Consequences 2870                            15130
References    2880                             15129

ATTACHMENT “A”
PERSONS AND ORGANIZATIONS CONTACTED
•   Steven L. DeCainp, Humboldt County LAFCo re: Population
projections and Sphere of Influence
•   Dee Stockbenson, Eureka Public Library re: l9~O Census
data
•   Neal Carnom, Winzler and Kelly Engineers re: Sewage
treatment capacity
•   Robert Clark, Humboldt County Air Pollution Control
District re: Air quality
•   Gene Serr, State Department of Water Resources re: Flood
hazards and National Flood Insurance Program
•   Gary Monroe and Dave McLeod, State Department of Fish and
Game re: Riparian habitat (PBS)
•   Dr. Rudolph Becking, Biology Department, Humhold~ State
University re: Riparian habitat (PBS)
•   Allan Mecharn, State Resources Agency re: Agricultural
resources (PBS)
•   Sam Winston, Humboldt County Planning Department re:
Agricultural resources (PBS)
•   Ray Corliss, Humboldt County Assessor’s Office re:
Agricultural resources (PBS)
•   Larry Ford, Farm Bureau re: Agricultural resources   (PBS)
•   Spencer Clifton, Humboldt County Assocation of
Governments (HACOG) re: Humboldt County Housing Needs Plan
 •  Tom Conlon and Bob London, Humboldt County Planning
Department re: Coordination with Humboldt County Framework
Plan
*  Note: PBS means Policy Background Study

ATTACHMENT B
Ferndale General Plan Revision
Final EIR
Explanation of applicability of Section 15132
  of the Public Resources Code (CEQA Guidelines)
The Final EIR for the above project is the draft EIR with
the addition of this attachment.   No persons, organizations,
or public agencies commented on the draft EIR during the
public conunent period.  Because no written or oral comments
were received by the City on the draft EIR, no responrnes were
required from the Lead Agency.
A Notice of Determination will be filed with the Humboldt
County Clerk pursuant to Section 15094 of the Public Resources
Code.
        GENERAL            PLAN         REPORT
      HUMBOLDT COUNT~1   -  FERNDALE PLANNING AREA
               FERNDAI.IE PLANNING f~REA
                  CIT~ OF F~NDALE
                          1967
           GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS:
                   _-~€~.    pk~e~L(~iq ~
              TRANSPORTATION
C             PUBLIC FACILITIES
  •    The preparation of this General Plan
       study was financed in part t~hr~ugh an
      Urban P1anñing~ grant from the Housing
       and Home Finanbe Agency under the
      provisions of Section 701 of the Housing
      Act of 1954, as amended.            -
  Humboldt County —  Ferndale General Plan Project

         GENERAL            PLAN       R~P0RT
        HUMBOLDT COUNTY   - F~NDALE ~PL~NNING AREA
    Persons and agencies involved in the preparation
    and official processing of this 9ity-County
    cooperative planning project are listed below.
    FERNDALE CITY COUNCIL              BbARD OF SUPERVI~ORS
  Jack Tipole, Sr.     Mayor       Sam S. Mitchell, Chairrrian
      Wiifl~ Cra~                      r.~l’i±n Bar~ijios
      Arthur Guggenbickler             Wiilj~~p. F. Landis
      Henry Hir,dlev                   El~•vn L. Lindl~v
      Lee Lentz                        Norr~an Robertson
 Donald R. Slocum, City Clerk
 James K. Morrison, Cit~.- Attorney
 Carl Beed, City Engine~r
            COUNTY ?LAN~:lcG Cc~::ss:oN
            William W. Hover, C~-~airma~
     N. J. Lund                  James N. Primrose
     John F. Paulev              Jose’Dh Russ, IV
                   James ~7. Rogers
     Ex officio:   ~illjara F. Landis, Suoervjsor
     Thomas M. ~cnt~cme~,, County Cour~sel
     Guy F. Kuistad, Public Works Director
           coz.~Ty P~fl~G D::~~T
           Harvey H. Higgins, Director
     Samuel M. Wj~sto~, Jr.      Lawrence RJ Larson
    £~aro±d D. Mason             Reejene C. ~Jestbrook
Project Planning Consultant    — James M. CamDbelI

  ~Ecop.DQF APPRoVAL AND I\DOPTIC,N
  GENERZ~L PLAN ELEMENTS
       Land Use
       Transoortatio
       Public BUi1djflq~, Failjtie3
 Approved by:
       City Planning Co~rjnjssjon (CouncIl) ..Dec. 7, 1966
       County Planning Cornmis~jo~            Dec. 7, 1966
 Adopted by:
      City Council                            Jan. 24, 1967
      Board of Suoervisors                    ~     ~   1967
SPECIFIC PLAN ELE~E~TS
      Zonjnq Ordinance                -
Approved by Planning Cornrnissjo~
Adopted by City CQU~~j1                      July 5, 1966
  CONTENTS
  TRANSMITTAL
 INTRODUCTION
 OBJECTIVES AND STANDARDS         . .  .      .       .     .
         1.    Objectives of the Plan                                                .
         2.    Standards for the Plan                                                         2
               a.  Land Use Element                                                           2
                   Classifications    Population Standards 3
              b.   Streets and Highways                                                      5
              C.   Park and Recreation Areas                      -   .       .              5
              d.   Schools and Public Buildings                       .      -              6
  THE GENERAL PLAN                       -      .       .                                   S
       1.    The Planning Area                                                             8
      2.     Land Use Element                                                              8
  MAPS GENERAL PLAN,
            Humboldt County    - Ferndale Planning Area                                    9
 MAP, GENERkL PLAN, Ferndale Planning Area                                 •       .     10
      3.    Streets and Highway Element                                                  12
     4.     Public Facj1jtjL~s Element                                                  12
 PRECISE PLAN ELEMENTS       I                        .     .   .   .    -      ~       13
     1.     Zoning Ordinance and zoning Plan                                    .~      13
     2.     Proposed Planning Area                                  .~I.                13
     3.     Central Business District, Parking                          .              14
MAP, Sketch Plan, Central Area               .      I                                  16
RECOMLM~ATIONS
    1.     City Su~divj310~ Ordinance                                                  17
    2.     Capital improver~edts                                                       17
    3.    General Reco~endatjong           -      -       -   -

JAMES     M.    CAMPBELL,      A. I. P. PLANNING        CONSULTANT
LANDPLANNINGANDRESEARCH                      BOIELCAMINOREAI.,MENLOPARK
ECONOMIC,  IN DUSTRIAL SURVEYS                    TELEPHONE; DAvenport 5.1629
TRANSPORTATION     RECREATION                                 EM.r~on 8.0080
      TRANSMITTAL                                     March    31D1  1967
      The Honorable Board of Supervisors
      County of Humboldt            V
      The Honorable City Council
      City of Ferndale
     Gentlemen:
                  We are pleased to S~b~~jt herewith the
     General Plan report for th~ Humboldt County—~erndale
     Planning Area and the planning area of the City of
     Ferndale.                  I
                  This project, completed as an,other in the
     series of County—City cooperative planning ~irograrns,
    confirms the value of the partnershj~ approach to
    area planning in Humboldt County.           V
                 It has been a real pleasure to work with the
    many officials and agencies involved in the project,
    and we are convinced that the results of the team
   efforts will prove their value in guiding in an
   orderly manner the fu~Lre growth ~nd development of
   the project area.              -
                                    Respectfully submi tted,
                                      James M.t Campbell

    INTRODUCTI ON
                Humboldt County has established a pattern of
    planning areas which divide the Couiity~ into logical
    geographical areas fo~ planning purposes.    Each of the
   planning areas contains one or more incorporated Cities
   which participate with the County in the planning process
               This General Plan Report describes the project
   completed for the Humboldt County-Ferndale Planning...
   Area which was uñderta ken as a cooperative project under
   a joint exercise of powers agreement between the County
   and the City of Ferndale.
               This approach to area planning ensures that a
 common    language, uniform standards and complete co~
 ordination of plans of the two jurisdictions will result.
 V            In addition to the coordination of General
 Plans, the precise plan items developsd for the City,
 such as its new Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Plan are
based, upon and are adaptations of comparable County
ordinances.
              Relationships established in the olanning
process1 discu~sjo~5 during joint City—County ~ubIic
hearings on the proposed Plan and offers of continui~-.g
assistant by County Planning sta~f to the City are
prooz of the ezfect~veness of one process and promlse
of beneficial results.

     ~ECTIVES and. STAND.;RDS
            1.   Ob~ ectjves of the Plan                  //
                 The City of Ferndale is located on the southern
     edge of the fertile Eel River Valley about fop~ miles
     from the Redwood Highway and railroad to they east and the
    Pacific Ocean to the west.      The City exte~ds up the
    timbered mountainside to the south, an~4prea~& onto
    the flat valley floor to the north.     /
                Pooulatjon has increased/at a slow and steady
   rate, from 901 persons in l94O;/L 032 in 1950; 1,116 in
  1960 to an estimated 1,371 in/965.        The somewhat isolated.
   location of the City and t7” agricu1t~~~i use of surround
  inq lands have contribut,d to the slbw growth wiüch has
  protected the City fro,~/the detrjmen.~ai effects of rapid
  expansion and has a~h preserved its peaceful character
  and architectural       harm.
               Objec>~ve5 or tne plan are, to provide growIng
 room for expa~d commercial and tourist services, light
 industrial o/eration~ related to local resources a~.d
 additiona/residential development ~reas, all keyed to
 a sound/ciance of such Uses to Dromote econc~.ic St~bj1jtv
 and to retain the basic character of the community and
the      igh standard of ~ubii~ facilities and services~    A
pr      ~ry objective is to preserve, and Promote in the
  ‘.ture, tne charm and strong aDDeal or the vlctsrIan and
similar early Calirornia architecture exIsting in and
near the City.

                    The total•plan~jng area is. almost entire~y/~
         either fertile agricultural valley kand or rnou~ta
        grazing and timber lands, and must be ~reserved far
        continuing agricu1tur~~ use.      Recreation wil   become an
        important secondary use.                    -
                                                     7
              2.  Standards   ~   the Plan
                  A General Plan is designed/to constitute a long-
       term general guide for physical gr~th and development of
       a particular land area.     it is d~eloped from studies of
      physical features, existing d       elopments upon the land,
      and. other such lnforrnatlon    s will provide a basis zor
      projecting future uses of/and and facilities which will
      be necessary to acco~Q$te and properly serve such uses.
                 a.    LAi~D     ELEMENT.
                       This/1em~at of ~he General Plan assigns
     a primary use clas/ification       in genera~ terms,~ to all
     parts of the Pla/ün~ Area.       It is, there~o~, the key
     element of the/plan1 and sets the pattern for other
     elements of ~e plan.
                 /     ~erever possible, the residential land
    use areas/are divided into neighborh00~ units, each
    ideallY/being an area whic~ will contain abou!t five
   hundr/~ families, wnic:-~ will contain a school and park
   or/aY~rouna        which i~ adjacent to ~but riot   djV±dCd  by~
          or more main traffic ways, and which contains or is
 /onvenientlY Close to local shopping facilj+es a:~d other
/  services

                          (1) .Cassifjcatjons, Population
                               Standards.
      R—H, Residential) High Density ~reas, 16 plus
              f~~i11ies per acre. In urb~n areas with
              domestic water, sewer systems, etc.
     R-M, Residential, Medium Density Areas
              per acre. In urban areas with &
              sewer systems, etc.
     R—L, Resjdentjaj, Low—Density A~eas4~—5 families
              per acre.
     Rz.a, Suburban Residential Areas, 0/3 families per
              acre. In suburban areas wh~e larger sites
             are desirable, and where e≠her domestic
             water or sewer may not be/vailable.
     R-R, Rural Residential Areas/minimum site 1 acre.
             In’rural areas where l~rge sites are’desjreble,
             or necessar& due to tq~bgraohy, and where live
             stock may r~asonab1y,~el permitted.
    A,      General Agricuitura/Areav minimum site 2½
            acres. In rural a~eas which are sujt~bje for
            light agricuitur~/o~~ gr:a~zing, where tOcograohv
  •         may make large sy~es ne~cessary, and w~zere small
            parcel divj~jo~~ would not be compatible with
•           the primary a~y~cu1tura1 ~ises.
            It is in~end4 that agricultural preserves may
            be designat~/a and established Within portions
            of “At’ cla~jfjcatjon areas.
    E—A, ~ Areas,. minimum ~arce1
           20 acre~ In areas where soils are of good
           quality’ for agricultural production p~rDoses,
           ~ is the logical and desirable
           prim~y use, and where the protection and
           pre~rvatjon of such use is desirable and in
           th7/pubiic interest.
                is intended that agricultural preserves may
         ,~e designated and established within portions
       /of “E—A” classification areas.
~i~i4~    Cons ervatjon~T4~er Areas, minimum Parcel 2~-
    /     acres. In forested foothill and mountain
          areas where èonservation of the watersh~ and
  /      measures to control damage from erosion, wild—
          lize ana scarrar~g by excessive grading are in
         the public interest, and where limited forestry,
         grazing and recreational uses are oermis~ab1e.

             It is intended that agricultu~~~ pres         may
             be designated and establjs~ed Within        .ons
             of “E—A” classification art~as.
  ~O~—?, Conservation~Fioodway Leas, rninirnurn~~r ccl
             variable. In the charj~nels of river~7and
             streams, including thEc areas which/carry normal
             flood waters or t1~e aI~eas between/existing or
             planned levees, dykes br ~ther SACh flood
             control features, and in which,.~grjcu1turai
             and recreational uses may bey~rmissab1e.
CON—Rec. iConservatjon_Recreatjon Are~, minimum p~rcel
            variable. In areas of su~%t~fltja1 acreage
            where natural scenic, his,~orjca1, ~eological,
            vegetation or other such/features of a recrëa—
            tional nature occur and/where tne public
            interest recrujres thej1 oreservatjo~-. for recrea
            tional pur~oses or fo/ ~assjve private use.
     P—F, Public Facility Are~, ~ variable.
           In areas where maj~ public or guasi—r~ub~jc
            sites and/or imor/veme~ts are located.
    IND, Industrial AreaV minimum parcel varjab1e          In
           areas where thW land is served by necessary
           transportation/and utility facilities, where
           industrial o~-ratio~~ may reasonably be located,
           and where su,éh uses will be compatible with
           adjacent us,~s.
   G—C, General C~~ercial Areas, mi~imurn parcel
           variabie/ In areas suitable for varied corn—
           mercial~ses including retail and wholesale
           operati,&is, warehousing and distribution,
           maintyiance1 repair and servicing activities.
   C—C, Cent~1 Conir~~ercial Areas, minimum parcel
          var~’abie    In central business district locations
          wh~ch are the ~rimary retail trade, service,
          fi,thancjal and brofessionaj centers for the
              anning area.~      i
L—S—c, Local Service Commercial Areas, rninir~urn parcel
       ‘ variabie~     In satellite commercial canter
          locations where convenience typ~ ~hopping
         facilities are necessary to ser~ieI surrounding
         residential neigiibor~~0~5      One adre of building
         coverage plus three acres pf parking per L000
         families in the service ar~a is a general
         recommended standard.

               b.     STREETS ai~d HIGHWAYS.
                      Ferndale and a large part of the planning
   ≥r~a ar~  ~omewha~ isolated from primary traffic routes,
   andt~ area Land Use!plan proposes low density land
  uses which will not gen~rate large traffic volumes.           For
  these reasons no four-lane highways are antic~Jpated in
  the project plan period
                     (1)   Major Local Streets.
                           Right_of_way:     64 to 84 feet.
                           Improvements:    ftwo  12 foot moving lanes,
                                            two 8 foot parking lanes
                                            si~d~alk_uti1jty. strips.
                    (2)             Local Streets.
                          Right_of_way:    60 to 64 feet.
                          Improvements.    two 12 foot moving lanes,
                                           ~wo 6-8 foot parking
                                                 lanes,
                                           sidewaJ.k-.utiljty strips.
                   (3)    Minor Local Streets.
                          Right_of_Way:   ~56.to 60 ~et.
                         Improvements:    two 10 ~-~‘t ~-‘oving lanes,
                                          two 6-s’ :~Dc~t parkjnc
                                          sidewa1~uti1ity strips.
            c.    PARK and RECREATION AREAS~
                  Three ~ypes of park and recreation
facilities are propos~d in the pl~n to serve the planning
area:
                  (1)    Regional Parks:

                               Thes~ are proposed to be State or
     County sites on ocean beaches, along the Eel Ri~irer and
     in timbered mountain locations, developed for regional
     use for boating1 fishing, Picnicking, swimming frna hiking.
                       (2)    Area Parks;
                              These are proposed to be large local
    parks in or near the center of population, developed for
    area use with facilities such as a softball diamond,
    ~wimrning pool, playgrouna equipment,1 picnIcking, etc.
  on sites of 5 acres or~ more.
  •                  (3)     Neighbor~o0~ Par3cs:
                             These are P~ooosed to be small park
  or playground areas in residential neighbor~o0~3 and
  designed primarily for children, on sites of from 2 to
 4 acres.
              d.    SCHOOLS and PUBLIC BUILDINGS
                    (1)     Schools.
                            Standards proposed for elementary
 schools are those recommended by the State Djvj~j~~ of
Architecture and subject to local School Board Variations.
                            Elementary Schools = site, ~     acres
                               PIUS 1 acre for each 100 students;
                                capacity, 500 students mazimu~-L.
                           High School     site 30 acres OIUS 1 acre
                               for each 100 students; ca~acjtv,
                               1,000 students maximum.
                   (2)     Other public buildings.
                           A Civic center site for a new City
Hall and related uses is or000sed in Ferndale.

                    FIre statjo~ in th~ planning area
are Proposed as the need develops in accordance with
Pacific Fire Rating Bureau standards  and libraries,
etc. per C0~~ty Standards.         I
                            •1              I.
                                      •11

                                                             U~ll’1Y ~ll ll~~]ll~XL)1~ 4~fl~J1~4~
                                     ~Il~ll~i~\L llDJLA~
GC        RAL PLAN ELEMENTS
       LAND USE
E1     R-H      I~StENTLf~L,HIGH
                                           4_• —         p. N4
E1     R-M      I~SW1flAL;I~D
                                           5.~     ~p.N44~•
       R-L      ~~$c~MTIAL,LI~N E€NS          I...  •.,~ N4
       R-S      sIaJ~8AN ~St€NThL          4  4..   — — ‘.n
       R-R      RU1AL I~SOENTIAL
[]     A        G&€RAL ~JJL.E~             , ,.., ,
[]     E-A      EXC1US~ A~OLTU~E                   p.
EJ     COR-T CasER\ATIct~
                                             —P
~ COR-F              ~R’ATYY’l , FLcCO~r
                                                                                                  (
       P-F       PU1LIC FLCIJTY
                                                                       ci
       W~D       INc*JSTI~AL
                                                                     0
       6-C       GE~RAL. CERCiA4I_
       C-C       CENTRAJ_ C*.€RC1.~L
~ LS-C           LOCAL SERVCE CC*~cJ~OAi.
ED     CON-REC          SEF?,fAT)OU
                                                        ci
                                                       S
        STREETS E~ HIGHWA’rS;                        k
(X~ST. P~QP,                                       S
— ——              STArE FREEWAY                  ci
                                               Pc
                  STATE H)G(We~Y
                 MAJOR LOCAL R040
       ~J~LlC FACI~ES
 (        _EMENTARY SCHOOL
       HIGH SCHOOL
 Ls,   PARK, RECREATION
       C~R~TY FAIR GROUHOS
        CEMETERY
 ~     U.S.N. FAC1LITY
        ELE~ENTARY sc~cc
        PARK • ~CREATON
        I) ~Afl~
        C C4I44~
        P
        S
                                      c~      .a~ wI..       a4    ..~ —4
                                     —       — — n_            — 4~. ‘.4 —
                                     • tp aT~ P4W “4            .4! ~ -4.fl ~*Q

        THE §~RAL PLAN
        1.     The Plannjnq Area:
                     About one half of the Humboldt County-Ferpdale.
C              Planning Area, which contains a total area of 77 squar
    •          miles, is in the flat, low—lying Eel Riverdelta which
               was inundated during the December, 1964 flood, and
      •       which has historically floc’ded in lesser degree with
              a minimum of damage and with agricultural benefits
              from periodic deposits of fertile river silt.
                    The southerly portion of the planning area
              consists of higher river valley lands rising into
              steep forested mountains.
                   Tne City or Pernaale and its p1ann~ng area lie
             in the center of the tota1~area, and include both
             flood plain and mountain lands.
                   Population density in the total area is about
             20 persons per square mile.   However, the greater
            part of this populatjo~ is in the 9 square mile
            Ferndale Planning Area.
  2~        Land Use Element.
                  Agricu1t~~~ is the prima~y land use in the total
            planning area, with dairy and pasture lands spread
            across the delta, and light grazing in the hIII and
           mountain lands      The General Plan cla~sjfjes about
           one half of the total planning area as E—A Exclusivs
           Agricu1tu~~~, anticipating early zoning to effectuat2
           the plan and to Preserve such areas for agricultur~~
           production purPoses.

          The Eel River floodway is classified as a CON—F
   Conservation-Floodway area within the proposed levees
   as designated by the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers.
   It is proposed that this area be zoned to ensure
   State arid Federal assistance in necessary levee cori—
   struction.
         Higher valley and coastal lands are classified
  A General Agricultural, in~icating light agricultural
  primary use and rural residential and recreational as
   secondary uses, and the higher mountain areas are
   classified CON—T Conservatjon~-Tjmbsr to indicate the
  need to conserve such areas for tirr~er production,
  grazing and limited.resid~tia1 and recreational uses.
         Sand spit and ocean peaches are aesignatea CON—
  REC Conservation-Recreation a~eas to indicate the
  importance of protecting them for acquisition for
  public recreation purposes.
         Within the Ferndale Pla ning Area land use• ciassi
• f~cations reflect tne existing pattern of development
  of a small urban community and its area1.Qz planned
  future expansion.
         A zoning ordinance and zoning plan for t~e Fern—
  dale City area, based on the General Plan, have been
  adopted and have made effective that portion of the
  plan.
         it is anticipated that the proposed zoning ~ian
  for the Ferndale Planning Area will provide the guide
  f or like zoning of the unincorporated portion of the
  planning area.

  3.    Streets and Highways   (Tran~portatjon)E1n~nt.
              Because of it~ isolation, low population density
•      and limited physical .development pattern, the Hurnboldt,.
       County-Ferndale Planning Area       now, and will in the
       future be adequately served by a system of two—land
       highways if the L~nd Use Plan is valid    ma  effective.
             Improvements of pre~ent routes, and future
       construction, as required, of future Pl~n routes will
       provide safe and adequate transport aihion facilities.
            In the Ferndale Planning Area future routes are
      planned to the east and west of the City. to provide
      for relieving congestion and removing hea1vy trucking
      on Main Street, and1to pro~ide access to-future urban
      development and to the mountain areas to the south.
4.    Public Facilities Element.
            The Land .Use Element indicates a light fleed for
     public facilities for local publIc s~rvice because of
      low population density.     Future need~ and general site
     locations are sho~ on the Pl~n map for schools,       loc~1
     parks, etc.
            Recreation in the planning area .is of primary
     importance and the plan proposes, in addition to ocean
     beaches, several sites along the Eel River to su~ple
     ment existing ~mall County park sites, and to:~e
     developed for ~ishing, swi~ing, camo{ng and picnic
     use in conjunctioi~ with levee projects.
                         —12--

 PRECISE PLAN ELEMENTS
 1.    Zoning Ordinance and Zoninq Plan.
             Ferndale has grown and developed in the past
      without the guidance and regulation of zoning.     The
      slow rate of growth and the absence of land specula
      tion and extensive subdividing have permitted an
      orderly development in the past in w’nicThi different
      land uses were located in ~ surprisingly orderly
     pattern.
            This permitted the preparation of a sound zoning
     plan in which very few non—conforming uses were created
     and in which expansion of all u~es is possible without
     use conflicts.
            The new Zoning Ordinance is based upon the County
     ordinance, using common terminology and matching types
     of zones.
           Under the ‘ED” design review combining zone feature
     many of the old victorian and similar design structures
     may be preserved for both esthetic and economic
     purposes.
           The ordinance and zoning map have been adopted
     and are in effect.
2.   Pro~oged. Planninq Area Zoriirxq.
           A pro~osed zoning plan for the Ferndale Planning
    Area has been preocred and submitted to the County
    Piann~ng Department, to be used as a genera.!. zoning
    guide in the area.     The plan ~.ncludes prooosed
    exclusive agricultural zon~ng~f or extensive areas
    which were inundated in t1~e 1964 flood, which zoning
                        —13—         I

     should be recognized as an acceptable substitute for
     flood plain zoning until such~ time as a levee system
     along the Eel River is constructed.    Such zoning is
     desirable to preserve the~ rich agricultural lands,
     now and after levee cons~ructjon.    Transition zoning
    is shown on the zoning plan, Lased on the General
    Plan, to permit residential development in 3~.nundation
    areas after levee constructj~bn and in hill ‘ands to
    the south as future demands ~evelop.
3.  Central Business District, Parkinq.
          Ferndale is an old city in. which many of the old
    commercial and residential ..bui~dinas have been ore
    served because ex~ensjve new construction has not
   been economically feasible and because of a recent
    strong desire to preserve the attractive older
   structures and the charm and character they contribute
   to the city.
         Few structures are non—conforming Under zoning,
   but some do not meet building and other Oode standards.
   Improvements ir~ attractive old Ltructures to meet code
   standards are to ~.e encouraged in lieu of demolition.
         The central business district is c~mpact,inciudes
   basic retail and service establishments and is not yet
   suffering from a lack of vehicle pE~rking spaces.
         The central area plan includes a new city nail
   and park site, and an off—str~et parking plan ~or
   progressive development to meet future needs.     The
   present city parking lot is proposed to b~ enlarged
   and to expose Franc~is Creek as a futur~ landscaped
   scenic feature.    _,~

      Other future parking lots between r4ain Street
and Berding Streed will utilize existi’i~~ alleys and
portions of adjoining lots.   Arcades, through blocks
from parking lots to business ~treets are possible
means of adding commercial frontage and display areas.
                —15—

 (
      TC~ P~
C~Ni1~AL A~A          ~S H AW
IMP~OV~ME~T PRoGR/~M:
                                   P11
                                  .~  ~,‘
                      WA~ ~ ITMST.
                                               -7
                                   28
                                               u)
                         13 ~OW N         1_~
                                          ‘71.
                          OcE~         ~

  RECOMMENDATIONS
• 1.   City Subdivision Ordinance.
             It is recorm~ended that the Planning Commission
       and Council consider the p~eparation and adoption of
       a new subdivision ordinance based on the new draft
       prepared by the County Planning Department1 which
       draft incorporates recently adopted revisions of the
       State Nap Act and other laws pertaining to land
       division.
            Adoption of County subdivision improve~ent
       standards in conjunction ~iith~ the new o~dinance will
       ensure coordination of improvements in and adjacent
      to the city.
  2.   Capital Improvements.
            It is recommended that the Planning Commission
       and Council initiate preparation oz a Capital zmprove—
      ment program, to be revised annually, and to ce a
      program for land acquisition and major public ~mprove
      rnent proJect construction based on a priority, tLma
      and cost schedule.
            General Plan items to be included in such a
      program are as follows:
            a.    City hall—park project, land accuisition.
            b.    C~ty nail—park project, staged con3tructlon,
                  city offices building, and park develo~mants.
            c.    Presei~t parking lot e~pansion, land acquisi
                  tion.                           I
            d.    Present ~arking lot expansion, const:uction.
            e.    Present oarkin~ lot e~ansion~ landscaping.
                          —17—

         f.   Future parking lots, land acquisi~cion
         g.   Future parking lot~, construction~
         h.   Major Street improvements (coàrdinatd with
              County roads projects when possible.
         i.   Central area street tree planting, parking
              lot landscaping.
3. General Recommendations.
   1.    It is recommended that the General Plan be
   reviewed annually, and that it be revised as necessary
   to ensure that it will continue to serve as an
   effective guide for sound and orderly development.
   2.   It is further recommended that the,Generai Plan
   be the basic guide for consideration of all zoning,
   subdivision and major improvemE~nts matters, and that
   tecnnicai a~vice ~e requestea zrom cne ~ounty ~1ann~ng
   Department when needed in order that th~ plan ana
   related ordinances may s~rve the city to their full
   potential.
                     —18—

