2 LAND USE ELEMENT
  The purpose of the Land Use Element is to plan for and shape the future physical
  development of Hillsborough and to preserve and enhance the current quality of
  life, so that the Town can remain a low density residential community with a
  unique character. The Land Use Element is the central chapter of the General
  Plan.
  As required by State law, this Land Use Element contains text and maps that
  designate the future use and reuse of land within the Town limits. The Land
  Use Element also includes standards of density and building intensity for the
  Town, which are also required by law.
  The Land Use Element sets forth specific goals, policies and actions to guide
  land uses for Hillsborough. The General Plan Land Use Map, contained in
  this Element, graphically represents the Town’s vision for the future devel-
  opment of the Town.
  The Element is divided into five sections:
     ♦ Background Land Use Information. Provides background information
        on existing development and community character.
     ♦ Land Use Designations. Describes the characteristics and intensity of
        each land use designation, along with the Land Use Map depicting the lo-
        cation of each land use type.
     ♦ Future Development Potential. Discusses the extent and location of
        anticipated future growth in Hillsborough.
     ♦ Background Community Services Information. Describes the various
        community services and facilities that are necessary to maintain the
        community’s high quality of life.
     ♦ Goals, Policies and Actions. Provides policy guidance for change as it
        occurs in the Town.
                                                                            LU-1

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
A. Background Land Use Information
The incorporated Town of Hillsborough has a long history extending for
almost 100 years. One of the reasons that the founders of the Town origi-
nally decided to incorporate was to preserve the character of the community.
This desire to preserve the character continues today.
The Town is unique in that it consists mainly of low density residential de-
velopment, with a minimum lot size of ½ acre, with no commercial or indus-
trial uses. The majority of the residents have shown interest over the years in
maintaining a lower density residential community and preserving the low
density residential character through preservation of large lots, open space
and mature trees.
The only non-residential uses within the Town are public facilities, parks and
open space land, private and public schools, the Burlingame Country Club
and the Hillsborough Racquet Club.
While there is limited land available for additional housing and the possibility
of slight change on the non-residential parcels, Hillsborough is mainly built-
out. Therefore, an important issue related to community character is how
new development fits into the existing fabric of the community and how es-
tablished neighborhoods should evolve over time. The Town has an Archi-
tectural Design Review Board to review development proposals and ensure
that they are appropriate for the Town. To provide stronger guidance and
address community concerns regarding appropriate development for Hills-
borough, the Town updated its Residential Design Guidelines in 2004 for use
in the review of development proposals.
B. Land Use Designations
The following outlines the allowable land uses for each land use designation.
Maximum density and intensity measures are also identified for each land use
LU-2

                                            T O W N    O F   H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                              G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                         L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
type. Table LU-1 summarizes the acreage for each land use designation and
Figure LU-1 maps the locations of the General Plan land use designations.
The major non-residential uses in Hillsborough are also shown on Figure
LU-1.
1. Residential (R)
The Residential designation allows for the development of single-family
dwellings in a manner that is consistent with the existing character of the
community. Additional uses that may be allowed include home businesses,
second units, family day care homes and other compatible uses identified in
the Hillsborough Municipal Code. The maximum allowed density is one
single-family dwelling per ½ acre. For subdivisions resulting in five or more
units, a conceptual plan shall be prepared.
2. Public Facilities and Services (PFS)
The Public Facilities and Services designation allows for the development and
operation of services and facilities that are necessary to meet the community’s
needs, while maintaining the character of the community. Allowable uses
include public schools, Town Hall, fire and police facilities, other govern-
mental facilities, parks and other recreational facilities.
The maximum allowed intensity for the existing land currently designated
Public Facilities and Services designation is 15 percent above the floor area
ratio intensity in existence as of adoption of this General Plan. This allowed
increase acknowledges that there may be the need for changes to existing pub-
lic facilities in the future in order to maintain the high level of public service
that Hillsborough residents expect. However, prior to approving an increase
in the intensity of development, a study will be completed by the Town to
ensure that the increase is kept to the minimum necessary to allow for the
continued provision of service. The public will be involved in the planning
process to ensure that expansion and change occurs in a manner that is com-
patible with the character of the Town, while allowing for the continued op-
eration and provision of public services.
                                                                                LU-3

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
Figure LU-1: General Plan Land Use
LU-4
                                              T O W N  O F   H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                              G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                         L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
TABLE LU-1 SUMMARY OF DESIGNATED LAND USES
Land Use Designation                                Acreage in Town Limits
Residential                                                    2,961
Public Facilities and Services                                   55
Private Schools                                                  43
Open Space and Conservation                                     264
Private Recreational                                            113
Roadways and Other Right of Way                                 492
For non-public facility properties that are acquired or donated to the Town
or other public service provider, such as residential homes or vacant land for
parks, a special study will be prepared with public input to determine the
appropriate intensity of development.
Smaller, Town-owned parcels of land designated for Public Facilities and Ser-
vices that contain water and sewer delivery and collection system uses or in-
frastructure, such as streets and power lines, are not subject to the maximum
intensity of use limitations. This is to allow for adequate equipment and fa-
cilities to be installed on small, infill sites where needed to provide service to
the immediate vicinity.
The Town has not identified a maximum intensity for public schools since
the Town does not have direct control over the planning and development of
public school property. The Town will continue to coordinate with the
Hillsborough City School District.
3. Private Schools (PS)
The Private Schools designation includes private school facilities within Hills-
borough. Allowable development and uses associated with private school
                                                                                LU-5
T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
operation are determined by City Council review and approval. In addition
to activities directly related to the operation of a private school, residential
dwellings for school employees may be allowed.
Each private school is required to receive a permit from the Town. The per-
mit will specify the allowable intensity and density of activity for each facil-
ity, not to exceed the following maximum intensities and densities. The
maximum intensity for private schools is based on the number of students per
acre, as shown in Table LU-2. Residential dwellings for school employees
may be allowed to up to a maximum density of one unit per five acres of
school property and may be clustered. The Town will require study of any
proposal from a private school for expansion or change of its permit to allow
the City Council to review and modify, if necessary, the proposal. The
Town will not necessarily allow a private school to develop to the maximum
allowed intensity or density; instead, the Town will review applications for
private school development on a case-by-case basis.
4. Open Space and Conservation (OSC)
The Open Space and Conservation designation is used to preserve environ-
mentally sensitive areas and maintain a high quality of light, air and scenic
beauty in the community. Allowable uses include unimproved open space
and public facilities. Since the Town does not want to encourage large
amounts of new development within these areas, any increases in intensity of
use, either resulting from the construction of facilities or allowing increased
public use, will need to be approved on a case-by-case basis, with adequate
public review. New construction should be limited to that necessary for con-
tinued maintenance and low intensity public enjoyment of the designated
areas.
LU-6
                                               T O W N    O F   H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                                 G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                           L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
TABLE LU-2 MAXIMUM ALLOWED INTENSITY FOR PRIVATE SCHOOLS
                                                  Maximum Number of
Minimum Acreage*
                                                   Students Enrolled**
Under 7.0 acres                                               ***
7.0 to 7.99 acres                                        200 students
8.0 to 8.99 acres                                        250 students
9.0 to 9.99 acres                                        300 students
10.0 to 10.99 acres                                      350 students
11.0 or more acres                                       400 students
* The Town’s Municipal Code provides more detail on how to calculate the acreage of
a school site.
** Private schools are not automatically entitled to the maximum enrollment stated in
this table. The use permit process will be used to determine the appropriate limit for a
specific school on a case-by-case basis.
*** Private schools will only be allowed on parcels smaller than 7 acres if they occupy
land and/or buildings owned and used by the HCSD. The maximum number of stu-
dents will be determined through the use permit process.
5. Private Recreational (PR)
The Private Recreational designation includes recreational facilities within
Hillsborough that are operated for private use. The two existing facilities, the
Burlingame Country Club and the Hillsborough Racquet Club, were both
formed before the Residential District Ordinance was adopted. Allowed uses
include the country club, with associated social and commercial uses, and the
racquet club. In addition to activities directly related to the operation of the
country club, residential dwellings for club employees may be allowed.
Since the Burlingame Country Club contains a large amount of open land
that can serve to provide buffers between country club activities and
neighboring residential uses, the maximum floor area ratio intensity of devel-
opment for the country club is 15 percent above the intensity in existence as
of adoption of this General Plan. Residential dwellings for country club em-
                                                                                   LU-7

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
ployees are also allowed up to a maximum density of one unit per 10 acres of
country club property, and may be clustered. The Town will require study
of any proposal from the Burlingame Country Club for expansion to allow
the City Council to review and modify, if necessary, the proposal. Develop-
ment to the maximum allowed intensity or density may not necessarily be
allowed; instead, the Town will review any proposed expansion on its merits.
Since the Hillsborough Racquet Club is located on a smaller lot, with little
buffer between neighboring residences, the Town has determined that the
Racquet Club is already developed at the maximum allowed intensity and no
expansion of the facility is allowed.
C. Future Development Potential
This section discusses the future development potential in Hillsborough as
allowed under this General Plan.
1. Residential
Future development in Hillsborough is limited since the Town is for the
most part built out. Based on past development trends and an analysis of
available sites for new development and policies contained in the 2002 Hous-
ing Element, it appears that there is the potential for about 164 new homes to
be constructed in Hillsborough. The major development opportunities are
the two remaining large estate properties, consisting of the 49-acre Regan
Property and the 47-acre De Guigne Property. The Town recognizes that
neither of the property owners is planning to subdivide either estate in the
near future; however, in the event that they do decide to subdivide, the Town
estimates that the two estates would accommodate about 20 new lots total,
plus any additional units resulting from a density bonus for the provision of
affordable units as allowed by the policies contained in the Housing Element.
The low number of anticipated units is due to the environmental constraints
found on each property, such as creeks, steep slopes and limited access.
LU-8
                                           T O W N  O F   H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                           G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                      L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
The other residential development possibilities in the Town include smaller
subdividable areas; several properties that have been subdivided and are under
construction or waiting for individuals to purchase lots, such as the Stone-
bridge Subdivision; and a few remaining vacant parcels within developed ar-
eas. The Housing Element estimated that there was a potential for about 98
residential units on these lots.
Implementation of the General Plan policies may also result in the construc-
tion of homes on non-residential properties, additional second units and in-
creases in density due to density bonuses. If the maximum number of antici-
pated employee housing units are constructed on the non-residential private
school and country club properties, there will be an additional 15 units.
Based on past development trends and the number of new homes that may be
developed, there is the potential for 25 additional second units. Finally, the
Housing Element assumes that there is the potential for six additional units
resulting from density bonuses. Table LU-3 summarizes the potential for
total future residential growth in the community if the Town is ever com-
pletely built-out.
The last major source of new residential development is tear-down and re-
building on lots with existing homes. This type of development does not net
any new units for the Town.
To ensure that larger subdivisions occur in a manner that enhances commu-
nity character, a conceptual plan is required as a condition for any develop-
ment project resulting in five or more units. The information that the con-
ceptual plans should address is outlined in more detail in the Goals, Policies
and Actions section below.
                                                                             LU-9
T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
TABLE LU-3 POTENTIAL FOR FUTURE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
Source of Development                             Maximum # of Units
Scattered Vacant Sites and Smaller
                                                             98
Subdividable Parcels
Subdividable Estates                                         20
Residential Units on
                                                             15
Non-residential Land
Second Units                                                 25
Density Bonus Increases                                       6
Total                                                       164
2. Non-residential
The Town does not anticipate a large increase in non-residential development.
However, as discussed under the Section B of this Element, land designated
for public facilities and services may expand by a maximum of 15 percent in
floor area ratio from the levels that existed when this General Plan was
adopted. A similar maximum potential increase is allowed for the Burlin-
game Country Club within the Private Recreational land use designation. As
also discussed under Section B of this Element, the maximum expansion of
facilities in areas designated as Private School will be based solely on a student
count per acreage formula.
D. Background Community Services Information
Hillsborough is dependent on a range of public facilities and services to create
a high quality of life. The following provides information about the various
service providers working within the Town.
LU-10
                                           T O W N  O F  H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                          G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                     L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
1. Schools
The Town offers both high quality public and private educational opportuni-
ties for students.
a. Public Schools
The Hillsborough City School District provides the public elementary and
middle school education for the community. There are three elementary
schools within the district, North School, South School and West School, as
well as Crocker Middle School. The capacity and enrollment records for
Spring 2004 are shown in Table LU-4. The District maintains a lower num-
ber of students per classroom ratio than required by State law.
Hillsborough’s public schools are recognized for the excellent education they
provide, with all schools having been cited as California Distinguished
Schools and South School, West School and Crocker Middle School having
received recognition as National Blue Ribbon Schools.
The School District is in the process of creating a Master Plan for facility im-
provements. It has bond money for improvements and is planning a 12-year
improvement process, beginning in 2004, to address safety and ADA issues, as
well as adding additional classrooms and other new buildings on the existing
sites to enhance the educational program, improve facilities and improve traf-
fic circulation.
Students continuing on to public high school transfer to the San Mateo Un-
ion High School District and attend one of the local public high schools,
which include San Mateo, Aragon, Mills and Burlingame High Schools. The
Hillsborough City School District estimates that about half of the students
graduating from Crocker Middle School in 2004 will attend a public high
school, with the rest attending private schools.
b. Private Schools
There are three private schools in Hillsborough: the Bridge School, Crystal
Springs Uplands School and The Nueva School.
                                                                           LU-11

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
TABLE LU-4 HCSD CAPACITY AND ENROLLMENT
School                      Capacity                   Enrollment
North School                360 students               303 students
South School                270 students               253 students
West School                 380 students               341 students
Crocker Middle School       535 students               468 students
Note: Enrollment was provided by HCSD in April 2004, but can vary slightly.
The Bridge School is located on the North School property and provides a
supportive environment for students with severe speech and physical disabili-
ties, with the goal of eventually returning the students to their home school
districts. The School serves 14 kindergarten through 8th grade students.
Crystal Springs Uplands School is located on 10 acres in the southern portion
of Hillsborough off of Uplands Drive. The school provides college prepara-
tory education for sixth through 12th grades and as of 2004 has a student body
of 350.
The third private school, The Nueva School, is located on 34 acres along Sky-
line Boulevard. It provides pre-kindergarten through 8th grade education for
gifted and talented students. A Master Plan was approved for the School in
1997, allowing for a gradual increase in students to a maximum of 400 and for
improvements to the school grounds.
In the past there have been concerns in the community about proposed ex-
pansions of private school facilities. The Town’s Zoning Ordinance includes
requirements to allow for review of proposed changes to private school prop-
erty and operation. The Town will ensure that the Hillsborough City School
District, as well as Hillsborough residents, has the opportunity to comment
on proposed private school changes.
LU-12

                                             T O W N O F  H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                           G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                      L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
2. Fire
The Hillsborough Fire Department merged with the City of Burlingame Fire
Department to form the Central County Fire Department. The final joint
powers agreement was signed on April 20, 2004 after a six month trial period.
During this period, one of the Hillsborough fire stations, Station #31 at Town
Hall, was closed to enhance emergency services and reduce overlap of service
areas. The stations that provide primary fire protection to Hillsborough are
identified in Table LU-5. In addition, Station #35 in Burlingame and #25 in
San Mateo provide additional coverage for northern Hillsborough and the
Tobin Clark area, respectively.
To ensure that there is adequate fire protection throughout San Mateo
County, fire departments in the County cooperate on a county-level planning
approach. The county fire protection system, which includes Hillsborough,
is designed to provide an adequate level of service for urban areas with a mini-
mum of 39 stations. There are currently 56 staffed stations in the County.
Hillsborough is a participant in a County automatic aid agreement, which
uses the County’s mapping program to identify the closest station to a call for
primary response. If the closest station is unable to respond, the system
passes the call to the next closest station.
A County Joint Powers Authority oversees the Advanced Life Support (ALS)
program (paramedic program) and sets response standards for both the fire
service agencies, which provide a highly trained paramedic as the first re-
sponder to a call, and American Medical Response (AMR) which provides the
ambulance transportation. The County’s identified goal is for the fire service
to respond to all calls within 6 minutes and 59 seconds; the response time
limit varies for AMR from 8 minutes and 59 seconds to 12 minutes and 59
seconds, depending on the call location within the County. The Central
County Fire Department’s goal is to respond to all calls in less than five min-
utes, and has been averaging a response time between 4 minutes and 30 sec-
onds and 4 minutes and 40 seconds. The fire service agencies and AMR must
meet their response time in 90 percent of all medical calls to be in compliance
                                                                            LU-13

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
TABLE LU-5 PRIMARY FIRE STATIONS
Station Number                     Minimum Staffing          Equipment
                                   1 captain
Hillsborough Station #32                                     Engine
                                   1 fire fighter
(330 Ascot Road.)                                            Reserve Engine
                                   1 paramedic
                                   1 captain
Hillsborough Station #33
                                   1 fire fighter            Engine
(835 Chateau Drive)
                                   1 paramedic
Burlingame Station #34 - covers
                                   Per Vehicle:
area previously served by
                                   1 captain                 Engine
Station #31
                                   1-2 fire fighters         Truck
(on California Drive)
                                   1 paramedic
with the County Agreement. The County has met this goal between 97 per-
cent and 98 percent of the time for the past five years. Both Central County
Fire Department and AMR are fined if they do not respond to a call within
the specified goal time, even if those cases where, due to distance or access, it
is physically impossible to arrive within the allotted time.
3. Police
Police service in Hillsborough is provided by the Hillsborough Police De-
partment, which employs 37 officers. The 2004 ratio of officers per thousand
residents in Hillsborough is 3.4.
The Police Department maintains a close relationship with neighboring po-
lice departments, the FBI, Secret Service, other governmental law enforce-
ment agencies and corporate security officers. The Department has a Memo-
randum of Understanding with the Hillsborough Police Officer's Association
to maintain a minimum of three officers on the streets at all times. The De-
partment also has a SWAT team that is a part of a larger regional team with
Burlingame, San Mateo and South San Francisco.
LU-14
                                          T O W N   O F  H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                          G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                     L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
The Department prides itself on its proactive approach to community safety.
It continues to allocate budget and grant funds to acquire new technology.
The Department believes crime prevention is the best way to reduce crime,
and Hillsborough currently has the lowest crime rate in the Bay Area. The
police staff offers in-home Crime Prevention and Community Awareness
Programs free of charge to groups of residents. When requested, the police
will also inspect private homes for proper locks, alarms and lighting and lend
residents an engraving pen to mark valuables.
Primary police-related concerns in the Town include traffic accidents, some
criminal activity and noise. The Department has an aggressive traffic en-
forcement program with officers on motorcycles and responds to about seven
to eight motor vehicle accidents per month. Residents are typically respon-
sive to helping alleviate congestion on the narrow streets and around the
schools during the school year. Criminal activity in Hillsborough consists
mainly of domestic disagreements, petty theft and vandalism, and a recent rise
in identity theft. Noise complaints generally involve construction, teenage
parties or toy ordinance violations involving skateboarding or rollerblading.
4. Government Facilities
Hillsborough’s main facilities include Town Hall, located on Floribunda
Avenue; the Corporation Yard, located on La Honda Road; the fire stations;
the Gate House; open space areas; and water distribution and storage facili-
ties. The Gate House and open space areas are addressed in the Open Space
and Conservation Element.
Town Hall contains the main governmental offices, including the Council
Chambers, Police Station and Fire Administration. Fire Station #31 operated
out of the Town Hall complex, but was closed as part of the fire department
merger. Adjacent to Town Hall is a small Town-owned parcel with an un-
improved parking lot. The Town also owns a single-family home located to
the west of Town Hall. The Town has rented the house as a source of in-
vestment income.
                                                                           LU-15

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
The Corporation Yard is the operations center for the Town’s Public Works
Department. The Yard is located at the end of a small residential street in the
middle of the Town. While it has been in existence for 60 years, there have
been recent complaints from neighbors with regard to noise and visual im-
pacts generated by the Corporation Yard. The Town has attempted to ad-
dress the neighbors’ concerns, but there is still a desire by some community
members to relocate the Yard outside the Town. Additional analysis will be
completed to determine whether relocating the Corporation Yard is feasible
and appropriate and if not, what additional steps can be taken to minimize
impacts to residents.
5. Library
While there are no library branches in Hillsborough, the Town pays the Cit-
ies of San Mateo and Burlingame monthly for library services. Burlingame
and San Mateo are members of the Peninsula Library System. Therefore,
residents are able to borrow materials from the any of the System’s member
library branches. Hillsborough residents mainly use the neighboring libraries
in San Mateo and Burlingame. The Town will continue to explore additional
alternative options for providing library service to its residents to ensure high
quality service in a cost effective manner.
6. Water and Sewer
The Town provides water and sewer service to its residents. The Town re-
ceives its water supply from the San Francisco Public Utilities Commission,
as discussed in more detail in the Open Space and Conservation Element.
The Hillsborough water system includes a system of piping, 17 pumping fa-
cilities and 19 water storage tanks, with a total storage capacity of 8.7 million
gallons. The Town also collects wastewater and transports the Town’s sew-
age for treatment at the Cities of Burlingame and San Mateo sewer treatment
facilities.
The Town is in the process of improving both the water and sewer systems.
The water improvement projects include replacing water storage tanks, pump
stations, fire hydrants and main distribution lines, while most of the sewer
LU-16

                                           T O W N  O F  H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                          G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                     L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
improvement projects will be main line replacements or rehabilitation. The
Town is also going to be starting the first phase of an inflow and infiltration
study to identify cross connections in the system and defects in the system
that allow rainwater or groundwater into the sewer pipes. This study phase
will result in more main line replacement or rehabilitation in an attempt to
minimize the Town’s flow to the treatment plant.
7. Stormwater
The Town uses a stormwater collection system, in conjunction with the natu-
ral creek drainage system, to manage run-off. As discussed in more detail in
the Conservation and Open Space Element, the Town has policies to reduce
potential pollution associated with run-off and preserve the water quality of
the creeks and the watershed as a whole.
8. Solid Waste/Recycling
Hillsborough contracts for waste and recycling collection and handling. Cali-
fornia law requires cities to divert a minimum of 50 percent of their waste to
recycling instead of landfills. Hillsborough has received recycling awards and
is one of the few communities to exceed the State requirement, in part due to
the inclusion of construction debris recycling. All project applicants for
demolition and building permits in Hillsborough are required to submit a
Waste Reduction Plan that indicates how much demolition and construction
debris will be involved and where it will be transported, as well as a final
summary showing that the debris was taken to appropriate facilities. The
Town also encourages significant salvage efforts to be made before complete
demolition takes place.
9. Other Service Providers
Cable TV and broadband services are available to residents through Comcast.
Local landline phone service and DSL connections are provided by SBC
Communications, while gas and electricity is provided to Hillsborough by
Pacific Gas and Electric. Several companies have also installed mobile phone
signal towers throughout the Town to provide reception to local customers.
                                                                           LU-17

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
E. Goals, Policies and Actions
Goal LU-1         Provide for the preservation and enhancement of
                  the Town’s unique residential character.
Policy LU-1.1:    Maintain the character of the Town’s neighborhoods.
Policy LU-1.2:    Promote property and landscape improvements and main-
                  tenance.
Policy LU-1.3:    Support the work of organizations to preserve and enhance
                  the visual character of Hillsborough.
Policy LU-1.4:    Ensure that lighting on private and public property is de-
                  signed to avoid illuminating adjacent properties and public
                  right-of-ways and does not contribute to an overall increase
                  in the ambient lighting level of the community.
Policy LU-1.5:    Review Town regulations, including the Municipal Code
                  and Residential Design Guidelines, on a regular basis to en-
                  sure that development within the Town occurs in a manner
                  compatible with the Town’s character.
Action LU-1.1: The Architecture and Design Review Board will apply the
                  Hillsborough Residential Design Guidelines when reviewing
                  new construction and significant remodeling. The goals of
                  the Guidelines include:
                  ♦ Reinforcing Hillsborough’s image
                  ♦ Facilitating contemporary life
                  ♦ Encouraging town-wide diversity
                  ♦ Fostering creativity
LU-18

                                         T O W N   O F   H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                          G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                     L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
Action LU-1.2: The Town will enforce its Residential Landscaping require-
               ments to maintain the attractive visual character of Hills-
               borough, as well as to promote water conservation.
Action LU-1.3: The Town will enforce its Nuisance Ordinance, which al-
               lows for the clean-up of overgrown properties that pose a
               safety hazard or create a visual nuisance inconsistent with
               the character of Hillsborough.
Goal LU-2      Provide for orderly development in a manner com-
               patible with the existing character of Hillsborough.
Policy LU-2.1: Ensure that regulations, requirements and processing proce-
               dures are clear, precise and reflect Town policy.
Policy LU-2.2: Continue to review new development proposals to ensure
               that they do not overwhelm their sites or their neighbor-
               hood.
Policy LU-2.3: Continue to minimize land use conflicts within the Town
               where possible.
Policy LU-2.4: Ensure that construction projects are completed in a timely
               manner with minimal impact on surrounding residences, in-
               cluding minimizing the visual impacts related to the on-site
               location of sanitary facilities, construction materials and de-
               bris, and recycling materials.
                                                                           LU-19
T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
Policy LU-2.5:    Continue to require conceptual plans before applications for
                  subdivisions of five lots or greater are submitted to the City
                  Council. The Town’s requirements for conceptual plans
                  will be updated to require that during the preparation of a
                  conceptual plan, special attention will be given to opportu-
                  nities for:
                  ♦ New recreational facilities, such as parks and trails
                  ♦ Preservation of sensitive habitat areas in open space
                  ♦ Multiple access points to the project to minimize the
                        impacts
Policy LU-2.6:    Provide information about, and work with residents, private
                  organizations, architects, builders and contractors, to en-
                  courage public and private development within the Town to
                  use green building methods and practices as outlined in the
                  San Mateo Countywide Sustainable Buildings Guide, or an-
                  other similar green building program.
Action LU-2.1: The Town will enforce the Qualified Superintendent on
                  Construction Site and Construction Completion Ordi-
                  nances to ensure the timely completion of construction pro-
                  jects. The Qualified Superintendent on Construction Site
                  Ordinance requires that a qualified superintendent be pre-
                  sent at all times on construction sites to serve as a contact
                  for residents and Town staff. The Construction Comple-
                  tion Ordinance sets reasonable time limits for project com-
                  pletion and penalties for projects that exceed the allowed
                  time limits. The Town will monitor construction projects
                  to ensure compliance with the requirements of the ordi-
                  nances.
Action LU-2.2: The Town will explore methods to clarify for the public the
                  Town’s various development review and construction
                  processes. Methods may include:
LU-20

                                         T O W N   O F   H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                          G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                     L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
               ♦ Assigning a single staff point of contact for individual pro-
                  jects who will be responsible for researching and answer-
                  ing all public questions regarding an individual project.
               ♦ Creating a brochure that outlines the process for common
                  planning processes and provides contact names and num-
                  bers for the various stages of review.
               ♦ Adding information on the Town’s website with contact
                  information for larger projects.
Goal LU-3      Allow for the operation of facilities and schools,
               while minimizing potential conflicts with residen-
               tial uses.
Policy LU-3.1: Ensure that Town-owned public facilities are designed and
               operated in a manner that allows for the provision of high
               quality, cost effective public service, but also take into con-
               sideration surrounding residential land uses.
Policy LU-3.2: Review private school development and use proposals tak-
               ing into account impacts of proposed school activities on ad-
               jacent residents, while recognizing the importance of the
               private schools to the community.
Policy LU-3.3: Continue to work with the Hillsborough City School Dis-
               trict to ensure that District continues to offer high quality
               educational services to the community while minimizing
               school-related impacts on the community.
Action LU-3.1: The Town will provide for public review and involvement
               prior to approval of any proposed change to the conditions
               of a private school permit.
                                                                           LU-21

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
Action LU-3.2: The Town will provide notice to the Hillsborough City
                  School District when a private school proposes new devel-
                  opment or a change to operations so that the District may
                  comment on the proposal.
Goal LU-4         Continue to provide high quality public services
                  and recreational opportunities to maintain the
                  character and quality of life in the Town.
Policy LU-4.1:    Continue to provide a high level of police service to meet
                  the specialized needs of Hillsborough.
Policy LU-4.2:    Coordinate with the Central County Fire Department or
                  successor entity to provide excellent fire protection for the
                  Town.
Policy LU-4.3:    Continue to support the work of the public school boards
                  to provide high quality educational opportunities to Hills-
                  borough residents.
Policy LU-4.4:    Continue to provide library service to meet community
                  needs in a cost effective manner.
Policy LU-4.5:    Work with the San Francisco Public Utilities Commission
                  and the cities of Burlingame and San Mateo to provide qual-
                  ity water and sewer service to Hillsborough.
Policy LU-4.6:    Continue to maximize the efficiency of water use through-
                  out the Town.
Policy LU-4.7:    Provide quality parks and open spaces that will consider the
                  community’s need for play areas, trails and pathways, and
                  recreational facilities.
LU-22

                                        T O W N   O F   H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                         G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                    L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
Policy LU-4.8: Work closely with providers of energy, communications
               and solid waste disposal in determining and meeting the
               needs of the community for energy, communications and
               solid waste disposal.
Policy LU-4.9: Continue to promote energy conservation and recycling by
               the public and private sectors to reduce overall energy use
               and maintain at least a 50 percent diversion of solid waste
               from the landfill.
Action LU-4.1: The Town will continue to utilize its budget planning proc-
               ess to ensure that Town-provided services are maintained at
               a level that meets the community’s needs.
Action LU-4.2: The Town, in cooperation with the Hillsborough City
               School District and San Mateo Union High School District,
               will continue to collect in-lieu fees, as allowed by State law,
               from new development for the construction of school facili-
               ties.
Action LU-4.3: The Town will support the Hillsborough City School Dis-
               trict in the preparation and implementation of its Facilities
               Master Plan.
Action LU-4.4: The Public Works Department will continue to monitor
               water and sewer distribution and collection lines to deter-
               mine those needing repair and provide needed repair, as fea-
               sible. Sewer lines affecting natural drainage and creeks
               should receive first priority for maintenance.
                                                                          LU-23

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
Action LU-4.5: The Town will continue to implement the Recycling of
                  Construction and Demolition Ordinance to minimize the
                  amount of construction debris disposed of in the landfill.
Action LU-4.6: The Town will continue to contract for the collection of
                  household recycling from each home on a regular basis.
                  When renewing or amending the contract, consideration
                  will be given to the need to meet the State’s 50 percent di-
                  version requirements for solid waste, the ease of pick-up,
                  hours of collection, visual design of recycling containers, lo-
                  cation where containers are collected for pick-up and overall
                  cost for recycling collection.
Action LU-4.7: For Town contracted services, the Town will utilize the
                  contract negotiation process to ensure that the specific needs
                  of the community for various services, such as telecommu-
                  nications, library and refuse collection, will be met by the
                  selected service provided.
Goal LU-5         Ensure that adequate review is completed prior to
                  selling Town-owned property or purchasing or ac-
                  cepting dedications of land or facilities for residents’
                  benefit or use.
Policy LU-5.1:    Review any proposed dedication to the Town of new recrea-
                  tional or other facilities to ensure that the dedication will
                  provide benefits to the community and not create substan-
                  tial burdens for Hillsborough.
Policy LU-5.2:    Include public involvement as part of the analysis of and
                  planning for proposed dedication of land or facilities to the
                  Town, and the purchase or sale of Town-owned property.
LU-24

                                       T O W N     O F   H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                          G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                     L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
Policy LU-5.3: Ensure adequate review is completed as to the future need
               for Town-owned property prior to selling for private use.
Policy LU-5.4: Balance the potential for immediate income resulting from
               the sale of Town-owned property with the need to retain
               property for future public facilities and services.
                                                                           LU-25
T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E E L E M E N T
This page left intentionally blank.
LU-26
3 CIRCULATION ELEMENT
  The purpose of the Circulation Element is to provide the policy framework for
  regulation and development of the circulation system in Hillsborough. This Ele-
  ment balances the need to provide safe ways to move people from one place to an-
  other with the goal of preserving the character of the community.
  The Circulation Element must be correlated with the Land Use Element. As
  required by Government Code Section 65302(b), this Element contains in-
  formation on the general location and extent of existing and proposed major
  thoroughfares, transportation routes and terminals. State law also requires
  that a Circulation Element include data and policies related to the provision
  of public infrastructure. These components have been moved to the Land
  Use Element.
  The Element is divided into two sections:
    ♦ Background Information. Provides background information on the ex-
        isting circulation system, as well as identifies improvements that will be
        made to address existing problem areas.
    ♦ Goals, Policies and Actions. Provides policy guidance for maintaining
        and improving all aspects of the circulation system.
  A. Background Information
  The Town of Hillsborough is a unique community in that its founders made
  the decision to preserve the low density character of the community by
  adopting regulations that banned sidewalks and grid pattern streets. As a re-
  sult, Hillsborough is mainly comprised of small, curvilinear residential
  streets, with few direct cross-town connections or connections to the external
  regional roadway system. The following provides some general information
  about the regional system that serves Hillsborough and surrounding communi-
  ties, as well as the local system, which was designed primarily for local residents.
                                                                                   C-1

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
1. Regional Roadway System
Regional access to Hillsborough is provided by three major freeways: State
Route 92 (SR 92), U.S. Highway 101 (US 101) and Interstate 280 (I-280). El
Camino Real (SR 82) also serves regional traffic and links Hillsborough to the
cities of Burlingame and San Mateo. Brief descriptions of these key regional
roadways within the Town are presented below.
The portion of SR 92 adjacent to Hillsborough is a freeway that runs in an
east-west direction from Half Moon Bay, near the coast, to Hayward on the
east side of the San Francisco Bay via the San Mateo Bridge. SR 92 has two
lanes in each direction between I-280 and US 101. Access to Hillsborough via
SR 92 is provided via interchanges at Ralston Avenue/Polhemus Road, De
Anza, Alameda De Las Pulgas and El Camino Real.
US 101 is an eight-lane freeway located east of the Town of Hillsborough.
US 101 extends northwards to San Francisco and southwards to San Jose and
the Central California Coast. Access to US 101 is provided via several routes
along local roadways in Hillsborough, San Mateo and Burlingame.
I-280 is a north-south freeway located to the west of Town. I-280 runs be-
tween San Jose and San Francisco and contains four lanes in each direction
near Hillsborough. The portion of I-280 adjacent to Hillsborough is an offi-
cially designated State Scenic Highway. Direct access to the Town of Hills-
borough is provided via the Black Mountain Road/Hayne Road/Skyline
Boulevard interchange. Indirect access to the Town is provided at the Trous-
dale Drive interchange (via Skyline Boulevard) and at the Bunker Hill Drive
interchange (via Polhemus Road).
El Camino Real (SR 82) is an arterial extending between San Francisco to the
north and San Jose to the south. The number of lanes on El Camino Real
varies from one community to another. In the vicinity of Floribunda Ave-
nue, four lanes are provided on El Camino Real.
C-2
                                            T O W N     O F  H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                              G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                   C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
2. Local Street Classification System
The local roadway system serving Hillsborough is mainly comprised of
smaller, curved residential streets. The following provides a description of
the functional classifications of the local roadways serving Hillsborough, and
also identifies which streets in Hillsborough are within each classification.
These roadways work together to form the Town’s major circulation system.
  ♦ Freeways. Freeways are limited-access, high-speed travelways included in
     the State and federal highway systems. Their purpose is to carry long-
     distance regional traffic. Access is provided by interchanges with typical
     spacings of one-mile or greater. No direct access is provided to adjacent
     land uses. There are no freeways within the Town’s limits. Interstate
     280 is located to the west of the Town, State Route 92 is located to the
     south and US 101 is located to the east of Hillsborough.
  ♦ Arterials. Arterial roadways are major streets that primarily serve
     through-traffic and provide access to abutting properties as a secondary
     function. Arterials are generally designed with two to six travel lanes and
     major cross-street intersections are signalized. This roadway type is di-
     vided into two categories: major and minor arterials. Major arterials are
     typically four- or more lane roadways and serve both local and through
     traffic. El Camino Real is Hillsborough’s only major arterial. Minor ar-
     terials are typically two- to four-lane streets and serve local and commute
     traffic. Minor arterials within Hillsborough include Crystal Springs
     Road and Skyline Boulevard.
  ♦ Collectors. Collectors are streets that provide land access and traffic cir-
     culation within residential areas. They connect local streets to arterials
     and are typically designed with two travel lanes. Examples of collectors
     in Hillsborough include El Cerrito Avenue, Hayne Road, Black Moun-
     tain Road, Chateau Drive, Ralston Avenue and Hillsborough Boulevard.
  ♦ Local Streets. Local streets provide direct access to abutting residential
     properties as their primary function. In Hillsborough, the majority of
     streets are local streets.
                                                                                   C-3

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
3. Level of Service Definitions
The operations of roadway facilities are described with a “level of service” or
“LOS”, which is a qualitative description of traffic flow based on such factors
as speed, travel time, delay and freedom to maneuver. Six levels are defined
from LOS A, the best operating conditions, to LOS F, or the worst operating
conditions. LOS E represents “at-capacity” operations. When volumes ex-
ceed capacity, stop-and-go conditions result and operations are designated as
LOS F.
Table C-1 depicts the threshold volumes, based on the roadway facility type
and number of lanes, for the various types of roadways found in the Town.
These threshold volumes are approximate in nature and serve primarily as a
general guide as to whether the roadway is over or under capacity. Where
intersections become the constraint points along roadway segments, the inter-
section’s level of service can be used to determine the roadway’s level of ser-
vice. Signalized and unsignalized intersections level of service are based on
the delay that drivers experience when passing through an intersection. Ta-
bles C-2 and C-3 depict the level of service levels for signalized and unsignal-
ized intersections.
4. Circulation Problem Areas and Solutions
Overall, Hillsborough’s roadway system operates at a LOS A or B the major-
ity of the time. As local and regional growth continue to occur during the
next 20 years, the roadways volumes may increase to a LOS C operation on
Ralston Avenue, but the majority of the roadways will still maintain LOS A
or B operations, assuming a growth rate of approximately one percent per
year.
While the existing and future roadway operations will be generally at good
levels of service, limited problems will occur in the Town. The following
actions outline the issues and concerns raised in the community with regards
to traffic circulation in the Town, as well as describe how the Town will ad-
dress each issue.
C-4

                                                T O W N      O F  H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                                   G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                        C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
TABLE C-1 ROADWAY LEVEL OF SERVICE THRESHOLD VOLUMES
                                     Maximum Daily Volume (both directions)1
Roadway Type                         LOS A       LOS B       LOS C        LOS D     LOS E
2-lane Minor Arterial                 6,600       7,700       8,800        9,900    11,000
2-lane Collector                      5,700       6,650       7,600        8,550     9,500
2-lane Local Street2                  1,200       1,400       1,600        1,800     2,000
1
  All volumes are approximate and assume ideal roadway characteristics.
2
  The capacity limitation is related to neighborhood quality of life rather than the
physical carrying capacity of the road. This assumes a standard suburban neighbor-
hood, 40-foot roadway width and 25 mile per hour speed limit with normal speed
violation rates.
TABLE C-2 SIGNALIZED INTERSECTION LEVEL OF SERVICE CRITERIA
                                                                     Average Control
LOS                          Description                             Delay (in seconds)
          Operations with very low delay occurring with
   A                                                                         < 10.0
          favorable progression and/or short cycle lengths.
          Operations with low delay occurring with good
   B                                                                    >10.0 to 20.0
          progression and/or short cycle lengths.
          Operations with average delays resulting from
   C      fair progression and/or longer cycle lengths.                  > 20.0 to 35.0
          Individual cycle failures begin to appear.
          Operations with longer delays due to a combina-
          tion of unfavorable progression, long cycle
   D                                                                     > 35.0 to 55.0
          lengths or high V/C ratios. Many vehicles stop
          and individual cycle failures are noticeable.
          Operations with high delay values indicating
          poor progression, long cycle lengths and high
   E      V/C ratios. Individual cycle failures are frequent             > 55.0 to 80.0
          occurrences. This is considered to be the limit of
          acceptable delay.
          Operation with delays unacceptable to most
   F      drivers occurring due to over saturation, poor                     > 80.0
          progression or very long cycle lengths.
Note: V/C = volume-to-capacity
Source: Highway Capacity Manual, Transportation Research Board, 2000.
                                                                                        C-5
T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
TABLE C-3 UNSIGNALIZED INTERSECTION LEVEL OF SERVICE CRITERIA
                                                            Average Control
                                                            Delay per Vehicle
 Level of Service                    Description                (Seconds)
          A                        Little or no delay              ≤ 10.0
           B                      Short traffic delay           10.1 to 15.0
          C                     Average traffic delays          15.1 to 25.0
          D                       Long traffic delays           25.1 to 35.0
           E                   Very long traffic delays         35.1 to 50.0
                              Extreme traffic delays with
           F                                                      > 50.0
                            intersection capacity exceeded
Source: Highway Capacity Manual, Transportation Research Board, 2000.
a. School Congestion
There are existing problems with congestion occurring around the public
schools during the morning when students are dropped-off and in the after-
noon when they are picked-up. High levels of congestion only occur for a
period of less than one hour twice a day. For example, the intersections near
Crocker Middle and North Elementary Schools operate at a LOS D occurring
during the morning drop-off period and LOS C in the afternoon. This will
continue to decline in the future, with mornings worsening to LOS F and
afternoon falling to LOS D. Installing major physical traffic control im-
provements, such as traffic signals or additional waiting areas for cars, to im-
prove the traffic flow during these short periods of time would be very costly
and affect the visual character of the area. As a result, the Town is willing to
accept a higher level of congestion around the public schools during the pick-
up and drop-off hours then it would otherwise accept on other residential
roadways.
However, the Town will continue to work with the School District to ex-
plore less intrusive and less costly ways to control congestion and traffic flow
C-6

                                            T O W N    O F  H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                             G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                  C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
around the public schools. For example, the Hillsborough City School Dis-
trict is in the process of creating a Master Plan of improvements for all of the
public schools. The School District has hired traffic consultants to help redes-
ign school access as part of the Master Plan process. Since many of these im-
provements will not occur for several years, the Town will consider short-
term measures, such as additional police presence, to help manage school traf-
fic.
b. Floribunda Avenue/El Camino Real Intersection Safety
There are approximately seven to eight traffic accidents per month within
Hillsborough and the highest number occur at the intersection of Floribunda
Avenue and El Camino Real. A study of the intersection was completed and
potential improvements identified that address the intersection’s various
safety concerns. The Town will work with Caltrans to implement the
study’s recommendations.
c. Black Mountain Road/Hayne Road/Skyline Boulevard Intersection
Another area that experiences high levels of congestion is the Black Mountain
Road/Hayne Road/Skyline Boulevard intersection, with a morning LOS E.
While much of this traffic is comprised of local Hillsborough residents, con-
tractors and students traveling to The Nueva School, people traveling to and
from San Mateo and other adjacent communities also use Hayne Road to ac-
cess I-280. A portion of the intersection is outside of the Town’s limits and
under the jurisdiction of San Mateo County and Caltrans.
Future regional growth projections from the City/County Association of
Governments (C/CAG) regional travel demand forecasting model anticipate
that the number of non-Hillsborough residents impacting the intersection
will increase dramatically in the future, reaching a LOS F both in the morn-
ing and afternoon. The Town has decided that, while some improvements
are necessary to ensure the comfort of its residents traveling through the
Black Mountain Road/Hayne Road/Skyline Boulevard intersection and to
The Nueva School, the Town cannot afford to make costly circulation im-
provements simply to facilitate regional traffic, especially since the Hillsbor-
                                                                                  C-7

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
ough circulation system was never designed to safety transport large numbers
of through vehicles. As a result, the acceptable level of service for this inter-
section is higher than the rest of the community.
While accepting a higher level of congestion, the Town will work with San
Mateo County and Caltrans to implement feasible improvements at this loca-
tion, such as adding a separate eastbound left-turn lane and a separate shared
through/right-turn lane to improve traffic flow. This improvement is antici-
pated to improve the intersection’s operation to LOS D in the morning and
LOS C in the afternoon.
d. On-street Parking Obstructions
Many of Hillsborough’s streets are narrow and vehicles are often not parked
properly. Fire engines sometimes have difficulty navigating around parked
vehicles on streets. Residents are usually responsive when asked to fix the
situation. The Town will update its parking strip requirements to ensure that
there is adequate on-street parking and provide safer pedestrian routes, while
addressing concerns about the impact of parking strips on the visual character
of the community.
e. Emergency Response Access
The existing circulation system increases the difficulty for the Fire Depart-
ment to serve the Town due to the limited number of north-south connec-
tions. This lack of connectivity limits the options for responding vehicles.
There are few physical improvements that can made to the circulation system
to address this since the roadway system is mainly built-out. However, to
address this issue, the Fire Department ensures that its drivers are well trained
and know the Town well.
5. Parking Requirements
Parking generally is not a problem in Hillsborough, since most homes pro-
vide adequate off-street parking for residents and a limited number of guests.
When parking may become an issue is during large events, such as parties,
when there is a high demand for on-street parking. This can become a prob-
C-8

                                            T O W N    O F  H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                             G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                  C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
lem since the Town’s streets are generally narrow, and poorly parked cars can
make through traffic and emergency access difficult. The police are available
to assist in organizing parking during events, and they report that generally
people are very responsive when asked to park correctly.
To address the need for on-street parking that allows cars to be parked par-
tially out of the roadway, the Town requires development that involves work
within a public right-of-way, or when a building permit is issued involving
more than 50 percent of the living area of a dwelling, to provide a 5-foot-wide
parking strip along the street frontage of the property. Some members of the
community find the parking strips unattractive. Another complaint is that
some property owners install parking strips, but then put vegetation or hard-
scape within the parking strips, making them unusable for parking. Another
parking issue raised is that some visitors are not aware that the strips are to be
used for parking. To address these issues and ensure that the parking strip
ordinance meets the needs of the community, the Town will update the ordi-
nance, as described in the Goals, Policies and Actions section of this Element.
6. Pedestrian Routes
The Town of Hillsborough has a history of not allowing sidewalks in an ef-
fort to maintain the rural character of the community. While the lack of
sidewalks does add to the character of the community, it sometimes results in
people having to walk in the travel lanes of the roadway, potentially creating
safety hazards, especially for children walking to school. The parking strips
do provide an alternative to walking on the street, when not used by cars.
The revision to the parking strip ordinance, as discussed in the Goals, Policies
and Actions section, will take into consideration the benefits to pedestrian
safety when determining the appropriate location for parking strips. The
Town will also encourage the provision of bicycle and pedestrian routes
around school areas to encourage students to walk and bike to school and
help reduce automobile congestion.
                                                                                  C-9

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
The San Mateo County 2001 Trails Plan identifies two trails that are routed
through Hillsborough or adjacent to the Town limits.
  ♦ First, the multi-use San Mateo Creek Trail is proposed along Crystal
      Springs Road, with a proposed on-street bicycle route and off-street path
      for hikers. The Town supports exploring the possibility of completing
      the San Mateo Creek Trail, with an emphasis on providing an off-street
      trail for both pedestrian and bicyclists due to the narrow roadway which
      makes on-street bicycle travel dangerous.
  ♦ Second, El Camino Real is identified as the hiking/equestrian Juan
      Bautista de Anza National Historic Trail due to the fact that the road
      generally follows the route taken by Juan Bautista de Anza in 1775-6.
      However, the Trails Plan states that El Camino Real is not the best loca-
      tion for recreational use due to the high volume of traffic and recom-
      mends using other trails. Alternatives to this route, using other trails
      outside Hillsborough, are identified in the Trails Plan.
7. Bicycle Facilities
Bike facilities are limited in Hillsborough due to the existing narrow roadway
system and hilly terrain. Consistent with the proposed San Mateo Creek
Trail identified in the County’s Trail Plan, as described above, portions of
Crystal Springs Road contain existing bicycle lanes. Bicycle lanes are striped
along the south side of Crystal Springs Road from Stonebridge to El Cerrito
and then for a short portion further to the west on both sides of Crystal
Springs. However, the bike lane is not complete and is very narrow in areas,
thereby making it difficult to access and use. There is also an existing bike
lane along both sides of Skyline Boulevard from Hayne Road to Summit
Drive. The 2000 San Mateo County Comprehensive Bicycle Route Plan also
shows bikeways for both Skyline Boulevard and Crystal Springs Road. The
proposed Crystal Springs bikeway, called Crystal Springs—3rd/4th Avenue
Bikeway, would connect the multi-use Sawyer Camp Trail, located in San
Mateo County west of the Town of Hillsborough, to the San Francisco Bay
Trail multi-use path that traverses the shorelines of the cities to the east of
Hillsborough. The Town will continue to explore opportunities to provide
C-10

                                            T O W N     O F  H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                              G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                   C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
additional bicycle facilities, where appropriate. Figure C-1 depicts the loca-
tion of the existing Skyline Boulevard and proposed Crystal Springs Road
bikeways.
Even though there are few official bicycle facilities in Hillsborough, the Bicy-
cle and Pedestrian Advisory Committee of C/CAG has identified main bicy-
cle routes for Hillsborough. These maps are available to the public for use in
planning their bicycle trip through Hillsborough.
8. Public Transit
There is not currently any public transportation running through the Town
of Hillsborough. Due to Hillsborough’s low density housing, low ridership
potential, and roadway system, it is unlikely that any fixed bus route would
be routed through the Town.
Express bus route #MX, operated by the San Mateo County Transit District
(SamTrans), runs along El Camino Real, providing service to downtown San
Francisco. Riders of the #MX route can transfer to Routes 295, 390 and 391,
which run to the Caltrain station, South San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Tran-
sit (BART) station and Colma BART station, respectively. Residents of Hills-
borough have access to the BART system at the Millbrae BART station,
which is the closest station and is located in the neighboring City of Millbrae.
SamTrans also offers Redi-Wheels, a Paratransit service for the disabled per-
sons of Bayside San Mateo County who are unable to use regular bus services.
This service is available for disabled residents of Hillsborough. The Redi-
Wheels territory includes San Mateo County and also transports riders to
North Palo Alto and portions of San Francisco.
Regional rail service is provided in the adjacent communities of Millbrae, Bur-
lingame and San Mateo. Caltrain provides frequent train service between San
Jose and San Francisco seven days a week, with the “Baby Bullet” train stop-
ping at the Millbrae station. During commute hours, Caltrain provides
                                                                                 C-11

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
Figure C-1: Bikeways
C-12
                                            T O W N    O F  H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                             G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                  C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
extended service to Gilroy. The closest Caltrain stations to the Town of
Hillsborough are the Millbrae, Broadway, Burlingame and San Mateo sta-
tions.
9. San Francisco International and San Carlos Airports
The closest airport to Hillsborough is the San Francisco International Airport
(SFO). SFO is located approximately three miles northeast of Hillsborough
on the northeast side of US 101, between the freeway and the San Francisco
Bay. The facility is the largest commercial service airport in the Bay Area and
in Northern California. The airport is served by 38 airlines and served ap-
proximately 29 million annual passengers in 2003. The airport is owned and
operated by the City and County of San Francisco, but is located entirely
within San Mateo County.
San Carlos Airport is located approximately 10 miles southeast of SFO adja-
cent to US 101, on the northeast side of the freeway. San Carlos Airport is a
small but busy general aviation airport. The facility is located within the city
limits of the City of San Carlos, but is owned and operated by the County of
San Mateo. The facility includes a single runway (Runway 12/30) that is
2,600 feet in length. Aircraft operating at the airport are limited by the
County of San Mateo to 12,500 pounds or less in weight. This limitation
allows most single piston engine aircraft and some light twin piston engine
aircraft. Approximately 500 general aviation aircraft are based at the airport.
The facility is designed for general aviation aircraft operations (take-offs, land-
ings and transitions) only, with the airport handling approximately 170,000
operations per year. There is no current or planned commercial airline ser-
vice at San Carlos Airport.
                                                                                C-13
T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
B. Goals, Policies and Actions
Goal C-1             Provide for well-maintained, safe roads and encour-
                     age safe driving, bicycling and walking practices
                     throughout the Town.
Policy C-1.1:        Maintain public roadways in good condition to minimize
                     the potential for automobile accidents and reduce wear and
                     tear on vehicles.
Policy C-1.2:        Install additional street safety improvements, where feasible,
                     within areas where traffic creates public safety problems.
Policy C-1.3:        Provide for adequate sight distance at all intersections and
                     driveways where feasible, including areas experiencing high
                     parking rates due to construction projects and events.
Policy C-1.4:        Promote safe motor vehicle, pedestrian and bicycle activities
                     to avoid situations that may result in accidents.
Policy C-1.5:        Maintain adequate emergency access for all land uses.
Action C-1.1:        The Public Works Department will continue to utilize the
                     Pavement Management System to plan for the on-going
                     maintenance of the Town’s roadways.
Action C-1.2:        The Police Department will monitor accident reports and
                     complaints to identify locations that are at high risk for ac-
                     cidents, including the El Camino Real/Floribunda Avenue
                     intersection. They will work with the Public Works De-
                     partment to identify and implement appropriate improve-
                     ments to reduce the incident of accidents.
C-14

                                       T O W N    O F  H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                        G E N E R A L P L A N
                                             C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
Goal C-2      Wherever possible, reduce traffic congestion in
              Hillsborough, especially around schools and at
              main entrances to Hillsborough.
Policy C-2.1: Maintain a minimum Level of Service “C” operating stan-
              dard for intersections and roadway segments in the Town of
              Hillsborough, except for the Black Mountain Road/Hayne
              Road/Skyline Boulevard intersection and the intersections
              and roadway segments adjacent to public or private schools.
Policy C-2.2: Accept Level of Service “F” at the intersection of Black
              Mountain Road/Hayne Road/Skyline Boulevard, which is
              affected by regional traffic traveling to and from I-280
              through Hillsborough.
Policy C-2.3: Accept Level of Service “F” during the morning and after-
              noon pick-up and drop-off hours at intersections and road-
              way segments adjacent to the public schools due to the in-
              termittent character of the congestion.
Policy C-2.4: Work with the public and private schools to encourage site
              design and operation that reduce, wherever possible, traffic
              impacts to adjacent roadways.
Policy C-2.5: Encourage the public and private schools to expand ride-
              sharing activities to help reduce school-generated vehicle
              traffic around the schools.
Policy C-2.6: Coordinate with adjacent jurisdictions and regional planning
              agencies to promote safe and efficient roadway design at
              Town entrances, as well as to support the management of
              overall traffic congestion.
                                                                           C-15

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
Action C-2.1:        The Town will work with San Mateo County, the SFPUC
                     and Caltrans to implement feasible improvements at the in-
                     tersection of Black Mountain Road/Hayne Road/Skyline
                     Boulevard to improve traffic flow or limit the amount of re-
                     gional cut-through traffic traveling into the Town. Such
                     improvements might include adding a separate eastbound
                     left-turn lane and a separate shared through/right-turn lane.
                     The Town may consider adoption of traffic impact fees to
                     fund the Town’s share of improvements.
Action C-2.2:        The Town will work with Hillsborough City School Dis-
                     trict through the District’s Facility Master Plan process to
                     identify roadway improvements for site access and on-site
                     circulation at the schools, as well as explore and implement
                     traffic control programs to reduce congestion in the area
                     around the public schools. The Town will also work with
                     the District to identify and implement short-term measures,
                     such as providing additional police presence, to address traf-
                     fic congestion until long-term improvements are made.
Action C-2.3:        The Town will work with the School District and local pri-
                     vate schools to develop a network for parents to facilitate
                     organizing carpools as well as encouraging safe walking and
                     biking.
Action C-2.4:        The Town will identify minimum Levels of Service for in-
                     tersections and roadways shared with adjacent communities
                     (i.e. the intersection of El Camino Real/Floribunda Avenue
                     and the roadway segments of Summit Drive east of Bella
                     Vista Drive and of Crystal Springs Road west of Alameda de
                     las Pulgas) and pursue agreements with adjacent communi-
                     ties to maintain those intersections at the agreed upon Level
                     of Service.
C-16

                                       T O W N     O F  H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                         G E N E R A L P L A N
                                              C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
Action C-2.5: While accepting a lower Level of Service where appropriate,
              the Town will monitor every five years via traffic counts
              roadway segments or intersections that are operating at
              Level of Service D or lower. The Town will explore feasible
              mitigation measures to reduce congestion at these locations.
Goal C-3      Ensure that there is adequate, safe parking to main-
              tain good traffic flow and emergency access.
Policy C-3.1: Encourage property owners to provide adequate parking to
              meet demand.
Policy C-3.2: Continue to require property owners who are building a
              new house or remodeling/adding more than 50 percent to
              the living area of an existing house, to install parking strips,
              as a means to provide safer on-street parking. Once up-
              dated, parking strip requirements will reflect the need to
              continue to require parking strips in areas where the strips
              provide needed parking and safety, such as:
              ♦ Narrow streets where on-street parking without a parking
                 strip may obstruct the flow of traffic.
              ♦ Areas near to major pedestrian destinations, such as
                 schools and parks, where parking strips provide off-street
                 pedestrian routes.
              In addition to affirming areas where parking strips should
              continue to be required, the updated parking strip require-
              ment will incorporate additional opportunities for flexibil-
              ity, such as reducing or waiving the parking strip require-
              ments. Opportunities where flexibility may be appropriate
              include:
                                                                            C-17

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
                     ♦ Non-residential properties where adequate off-street park-
                        ing is available for visitors and where there are little or no
                        adjacent residential uses that will generate the need for
                        parking.
                     ♦ Properties located on streets with little demand for park-
                        ing and where parking strips on only a portion of the
                        street frontage will provide adequate opportunities for
                        safe, on-street parking.
Action C-3.1:        The Town will review all construction plans for confor-
                     mance with Municipal Code parking requirements.
Action C-3.2:        The Town will update the parking strip requirement.
Goal C-4             Provide for safe pedestrian routes in appropriate
                     locations.
Policy C-4.1:        Work with the public and private schools to promote safe
                     driving and pedestrian circulation around or near the
                     schools.
Policy C-4.2:        Work with residents to identify appropriate locations for
                     the provision of off-street pedestrian routes, such as on
                     Town-owned open space areas, large properties when subdi-
                     vided, and as a feature of parking strips.
Action C-4.1:        The Town will coordinate with the school district and other
                     entities to develop “Suggested Routes to School Plans” for
                     all public and private schools in the Town. Plans shall iden-
                     tify all pedestrian and bicycle facilities, and traffic control
                     devices for residents to determine the most appropriate
                     travel routes. The plans shall also identify existing ease-
                     ments for potential use for off-street pedestrian pathways.
C-18

                                      T O W N     O F  H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                        G E N E R A L P L A N
                                             C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
Goal C-5      Support the provision of safe bicycle routes that
              will reduce conflict with automobile traffic.
Policy C-5.1: Continue to cooperate with San Mateo County, C/CAG
              and bicycle organizations in the planning and implementa-
              tion of a countywide bicycle system which will traverse and
              connect with Hillsborough.
Policy C-5.2: Encourage the provision of bicycle facilities in areas that
              provide adequate space and separation from automobiles
              without negatively impacting biologically sensitive areas.
Action C-5.1: The Town will pursue the creation of an off-street bicycle
              trail along Crystal Springs Road, consistent with the
              County’s Trails Plan and Bicycle Route Plan. In this effort,
              the Town will work with current property owners, includ-
              ing the SFPUC, to incorporate the trail into future devel-
              opment along the route. The Town will recommend that
              the County of San Mateo research, identify and compete for
              available funding to assist with the completion of the trail.
              Hillsborough will also request the County of San Mateo and
              C/CAG to study feasible alignments that would avoid nega-
              tively impacting sensitive biological resources located along
              San Mateo Creek.
Action C-5.2: The Town will develop a community awareness program to
              encourage local use of safer bicycle routes, including refer-
              ring residents to the C/CAG Bicycle and Pedestrian Advi-
              sory Committee’s bicycle route map. The Town will in-
              clude bicycle and pedestrian safety and enforcement when
              developing community awareness programs.
                                                                           C-19

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
This page left intentionally blank.
C-20
4 OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION ELEMENT
  The purpose of the Open Space and Conservation Element is to ensure the compre-
  hensive and long-range preservation and management of open space land in and
  around Hillsborough. The Open Space and Conservation Element seeks to main-
  tain the low density, residential character of the community and its high quality of
  life by preserving open space lands, protecting natural habitats for endangered and
  threatened species and providing recreational opportunities for Town residents.
  To avoid repetition, this element combines two State-mandated elements, the
  Open Space Element and the Conservation Element. The State-mandated
  Open Space Element is concerned with the management of open space re-
  sources, including cultural resources. Open space is defined as any parcel or
  area of public or private land or water that is essentially unimproved and un-
  developed. State law identifies several types of open space, including: open
  space that preserves natural and cultural resources, manages production of
  resources, provides outdoor recreation and protects public health and safety.
  The State-mandated Conservation Element is concerned with the protection
  of natural resources, including plants and animal wildlife, water bodies and
  watersheds, forests, soils, minerals and energy conservation. Since many of
  these natural resources are associated with open space lands, Hillsborough
  combines these two elements into one.
  The Element is divided into two sections:
     ♦ Background Information. Provides information on the existing condi-
        tions of recreational, open space and cultural resources.
     ♦ Goals, Policies and Actions. Provides policy guidance for protecting
        and preserving important recreational, open space and cultural resources.
                                                                               OSC-1

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
A. Background Information
1. Public Parkland
The Town of Hillsborough has a limited amount of public parkland, consist-
ing of two parks and a water conservation garden. Figure LU-1 in the Land
Use Element depicts the location of the Town’s public parkland. Vista Park,
a 1.5-acre neighborhood park located off of Vista Road, between Chiltern and
Culebra Roads, is the largest and oldest of the two. Improvements to Vista
Park have been initiated by the Hillsborough Beautification Foundation, and
include rehabilitation of the facility to address issues such as poor drainage
and old equipment, as well as rehabilitation of the basketball court and soccer
field. The Hillsborough Beautification Foundation completed Crossroads
Park, a quarter-acre pocket park located at the corner of Hayne and Black
Mountain Roads on a former water tank site.
The Town also built the Hillsborough Water Conservation Park in 1989 at
the Town Hall to demonstrate water conservation techniques for the benefit
of homeowners in Hillsborough and surrounding communities. Native, low-
water use and drought tolerant plants create an attractive garden utilizing
mulch and an automatic drip irrigation system. It is open for the public’s
enjoyment to illustrate what can be created in this area of California, where
the need for long-range water conservation is critical. The park was funded
by grants from the State of California and contributions from private citizens
and local garden clubs.
The Hillsborough City School District and Town have created a Joint Pow-
ers Agreement to form the Hillsborough Recreation Department. By creat-
ing a Recreation Department, the School District is able to charge for the use
of its facilities after normal school hours, thereby off-setting the additional
maintenance costs related to heavier use of the fields. As well as providing
playing fields, a gym and tennis courts to youth sports programs and inter-
ested adults, the Recreation Department also offers children alternative after-
school activities.
OSC-2

                                             T O W N   O F    H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                               G E N E R A L P L A N
                        O P E N S P A C E A N D  C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
Besides the school facilities used for sports and after school programs, the
Town has approximately two acres of developed public parkland, which
translates into about 0.2 acres of parkland per 1,000 residents. This amount
of parkland is lower than is typically recommended for communities; how-
ever, many homes are situated on large lots and contain private recreational
facilities such as yards, tennis courts and pools. The Burlingame Country
Club also provides an additional private recreational opportunity for its
members. In addition, Town residents have access to the many nearby
County recreational facilities including the extensive County open space areas
that surround the Crystal Springs Reservoirs, to the west of I-280, and the
recreational facilities along the San Francisco Bay, including Coyote Point
County Recreation Area.
Based on the Town’s goal of providing an additional three acres of parkland
for every new 1,000 residents, there will be a need for approximately 1.44
acres of additional parkland to meet future demand. With the high cost of
land, there may be limited opportunities for additional parkland within Hills-
borough, so future parks may be smaller and consist of five acre or less
neighborhood parks, such as Vista Park, and less than one acre pocket parks,
such as Crossroads Park. The following provides a description of neighbor-
hood and pocket parks:
  ♦ Neighborhood Park. These parks provide a wide range of recreational
     facilities, such as playing fields, playgrounds and picnic areas, as well as
     opportunities for more relaxed recreation, such as grassy areas and walk-
     ing trails. Due to the variety of recreational opportunities, neighborhood
     parks generally attract people from outside the immediate vicinity of the
     facility and are used by the community as a whole.
  ♦ Pocket Park. Generally located on smaller in-fill sites, these parks usu-
     ally offer limited recreational opportunities, such as a small playground
     or a landscaped area with a park bench. Since these parks do not offer
     the same range of recreational opportunities as neighborhood parks, they
     primarily attract and serve local residents from the immediate neighbor-
     hood.
                                                                               OSC-3

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
One potential opportunity for additional parkland would be the reuse of
Town property in the event that there is no other use for the property, or it
is not sold to generate revenue for the Town. Another potential opportunity
for additional parkland will occur in the event that any remaining large par-
cels are subdivided. As discussed in the Land Use Element, parcels proposed
for subdivision into five or more lots will be required to prepare a detailed
conceptual plan, which includes among other requirements, an evaluation of
the potential for inclusion of open space and parkland opportunities. A needs
assessment should be completed prior to designing parks to ensure that the
community’s specific needs for various recreational features are met in new
and rehabilitated recreational facilities.
2. Natural Space Resources
Hillsborough has been fortunate to have preserved almost 250 acres of open
space within the Town. The majority of this land is located in the Skyfarm
Subdivision area in the northwestern portion of Hillsborough, with three
other large open space areas located near Southdown Court, Crystal Springs
Road and in the Tobin Clark area. Figure LU-1 in the Land Use Element
depicts the location of the Town’s natural open space areas. In addition,
there is another large area of open space adjacent to the Town, on the western
side of I-280 that adds continuum to the low density character of the commu-
nity.
Interest has been expressed in the possibility of granting public access to some
of the currently restricted open space areas. If pursued, issues needing to be
addressed include: appropriate uses; how additional uses would affect existing
reversion constraints1 on the property; and safety and liability concerns. The
Town has already started working with the Hillsborough Beautification
Foundation and the owners of the reversion rights for Crocker Lake to ex-
plore ways to provide limited public access to the area for recreational uses
          1
             Some of the Town’s open space was donated with the condition that it be
preserved as open space. If the Town does not maintain the properties per the original
agreement the property would revert in ownership to the persons holding the rever-
sion rights.
OSC-4

                                             T O W N   O F    H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                               G E N E R A L P L A N
                       O P E N  S P A C E A N D  C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
that allow people to enjoy the natural beauty of the area, such as walking and
picnicking.
3. Private Recreation
Two private facilities, the Burlingame Country Club and the Hillsborough
Racquet Club, offer recreational opportunities for their members. The Bur-
lingame Country Club, with approximately 110 acres, also adds to the charac-
ter of the community by preserving large areas in a more open setting.
4. Biological Resources
The California Department of Fish and Game maintains the California Natu-
ral Diversity Database (CNDDB), which tracks the location and condition of
California’s rare animals, plants and natural habitats. A search of the database
was completed for Hillsborough and a one-mile radius around the Town to
identify rare and sensitive species and habitats with the potential to occur
within Hillsborough. Table OSC-1 lists the rare and sensitive species and
communities that may occur within the Town. The Town monitors new
development to ensure that it does not negatively impact sensitive species,
especially those listed in the table.
While deer are not considered a sensitive species, they are common in Hills-
borough and warrant mention since they pose a threat to safety, as they cross
streets in front of moving vehicles, and damage personal property, such as
gardens. Unfortunately, the Town has limited options to control the deer
population. According to the California Department of Fish and Game, re-
moval of the existing deer would simply result in the immigration of re-
placement deer. As a result, individual property owners are responsible for
protecting their own property from deer damage, in part by reducing poten-
tial food sources and taking extra care when driving through Hillsborough.
                                                                               OSC-5

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N  E L E M E N T
TABLE OSC-1 BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES             WITH THE      POTENTIAL      TO OCCUR
              IN HILLSBOROUGH
Common Name                   Type             Status
Bay Checkered Butterfly       Invertebrate     Federal – Threatened
Bent-Flowered Fiddleneck      Plant            Federal – Species of Concern
California Clapper Rail       Bird             State/Federal - Endangered
California Red-Legged                          State – Species of Special Concern
                              Amphibian
Frog                                           Federal - Threatened
Crystal Springs Lessignia     Plant            Federal – Species of Concern
Edgewood Blind
                              Invertebrate     Federal – Species of Concern
Harvestman
Fountain Thistle              Plant            State/Federal - Endangered
Fragrant Fritillary           Plant            Federal – Species of Concern
Franciscan Onion              Plant            Federal – Species of Concern
Hillsborough
                              Plant            Federal – Species of Concern
Chocolate Lilly
Marin Western Flax            Plant            State/Federal - Threatened
Mission Blue Butterfly        Invertebrate     Federal - Endangered
Myrtle’s Silverspot
                              Invertebrate     Federal - Endangered
Butterfly
San Francisco Bay
                              Plant            Federal – Species of Concern
Spineflower
San Francisco
                              Plant            Federal – Species of Concern
Owl’s Clover
San Mateo Thorn-mint          Plant            State/Federal - Endangered
San Mateo Woolly
                              Plant            State/Federal - Endangered
Sunflower
                              Terrestrial
Serpentine Bunchgrass
                              Community
Western Leatherwood           Plant
Source: California Department of Fish and Game, California Natural Diversity Database,
May 2004.
OSC-6

                                            T O W N   O F    H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                              G E N E R A L P L A N
                       O P E N S P A C E A N D  C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
The creeks in Hillsborough provide important riparian habitat. In addition
to providing natural habitat for plant and animal species, well established
vegetation along these waterways plays an important role in controlling ero-
sion. The Town’s approach to watershed protection is described in detail
later in this Element.
Another important habitat type in Hillsborough is oak woodland, which is
found along drainage areas and in undeveloped areas of the community. The
new Stonebridge subdivision is an example of the Town’s attempts to pre-
serve existing oak woodland habitat, while allowing for new development.
While they may not qualify as protected species under State or federal law,
established trees are important features of Hillsborough’s existing character
and are enjoyed by the public as a whole, not just property owners with lar-
ger trees. As a result, the Town has adopted a Tree Removal Ordinance to
protect and regulate tree removal throughout the community, even on pri-
vate property, and address the community’s desire to maintain its forested
character. The Ordinance is generally limited to larger, established trees, al-
though trees on vacant lots where no development is proposed are given more
protection. Since they present a fire hazard and are not a native species, the
Town encourages removal of Blue Gum Eucalyptus and Baileyanna Acacia.
Hillsborough will be updating the Tree Removal Ordinance to ensure that it
allows for the continued health of the community’s tree resources and main-
tains the community’s character.
While trees contribute to the visual appearance of the community, they occa-
sionally block individual views from neighboring properties if not properly
maintained. This can create disagreements between neighbors, especially
when there were existing views at the time of purchase of a home which later
become obscured by neighboring trees. The Town encourages neighbors to
work out their differences and find a way to allow for the co-existence of lar-
ger trees as well as views through the Voluntary Resolution of Disputes Re-
garding Trees and Views Ordinance.
                                                                              OSC-7

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
5. Water Quality
The Town of Hillsborough purchases its water from the San Francisco Public
Utilities Commission (SFPUC). According to the SFPUC’s 2003 Water
Quality Report, approximately 76 percent of the SFPUC’s water supply
comes from the Hetch-Hetchy Reservoir, located in Yosemite National Park.
Because the Hetch-Hetchy water supply meets all federal and State criteria for
watershed protection, disinfection treatment, bacteriological quality and op-
eration standards, the Hetch-Hetchy water source has been granted a filtra-
tion exemption so that the water does not require additional filtration in
Hillsborough to ensure its safety.
The remaining 24 percent of the SFPUC water supply is collected in the Ala-
meda and Peninsula watersheds. Rainfall and runoff water is collected in res-
ervoirs and limited groundwater is pumped from the Sunol Filter Galleries
near the Town of Sunol. Both surface and groundwater sources are treated
and filtered by the SFPUC before delivery.
Beginning in February 2004, the SFPUC implemented a system-wide change
to use chloramine as the residual disinfectant to meet current and future water
quality regulations. Chloramine, a combination of chlorine and ammonia, is
a more stable, longer-lasting disinfectant that produces lower levels of harmful
disinfection byproducts such as trihalomethane, a possible carcinogen.
The Town of Hillsborough does not have much direct control over protect-
ing the quality of its drinking water before it is received from the SFPUC.
The Town will continue to support the SFPUC in its efforts to protect the
Hetch-Hetchy water source and the Alameda and Peninsula watersheds. The
SFPUC conducts detailed monitoring of the Hetch-Hetchy watershed
weather conditions, water turbidity levels, microbial contaminants and aque-
duct disinfectant levels. As described in its 2003 Water Quality Report, the
SFPUC also completed a detailed drinking water source assessment for all
SFPUC watersheds in 2000, which showed very low levels of contaminants.
OSC-8

                                             T O W N   O F    H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                               G E N E R A L P L A N
                       O P E N  S P A C E A N D  C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
Hillsborough does have direct influence over the maintenance of its water
supply infrastructure system, which can affect the quality of water. The
Town will continue to monitor the water it distributes to residents in Hills-
borough and maintain the distribution system to ensure a high quality sup-
ply.
The Town also has influence over the quality of water in the four watersheds
within which it is located, which also contain several small creeks and two
lakes, Crocker and Spencer. The watersheds, from north to south, include
Mills Watershed, Sanchez Watershed, San Mateo Watershed and Pulgas Wa-
tershed. Figure OSC-1 depicts the general boundaries of these watersheds.
6. Cultural Resources
Incorporated in 1910, the Town of Hillsborough’s long history is exemplified
in its existing architecture and historic features. There is also evidence of pre-
European activities within the Town limits, and environmental studies have
identified prehistoric sites, such as shell middens.
During 1989 and 1990, the Town of Hillsborough was comprehensively sur-
veyed for historic buildings. The goal of the survey was to identify buildings
that have historical significance and/or are architecturally unique, versus
those buildings that, while old, provide little historical or local significance.
As a result of the survey, many historically-important homes were identified,
representing various periods of the community’s history, including the Early
Subdivisions (1885-1915), the Great Estates (1900-1930) and the Later Subdivi-
sions (1916-1940).
                                                                               OSC-9

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
Figure OSC-1: Watersheds
OSC-10
                                            T O W N   O F    H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                              G E N E R A L P L A N
                      O P E N  S P A C E A N D  C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
In response to past threats of demolition of important privately-owned his-
toric structures, the Town adopted a Historic Preservation Ordinance that
allows it to have some control over the demolition of all or part of identified
historic structures. Currently, the structures that are subject to this Ordi-
nance are:
  ♦ The Carolands (565 Remillard Drive)
  ♦ La Dophine (1761 Manor Drive)
  ♦ Skyfarm – The Nueva School (6565 Skyline Boulevard)
  ♦ Uplands II – Crystal Springs Uplands School (400 Uplands Drive)
  ♦ The White House (401 El Cerrito Road)
In addition to the private historic homes within Hillsborough, there are also
publicly owned historic structures scattered throughout the community. The
most prevalent are the historic gates that remain from the former entrances to
now subdivided estates, or in the case of the Carolands Gates at Ralston and
Eucalyptus Avenues, gates that were installed at the time of subdivision to
limit access to newly subdivided areas. The Town owns the Gate House, also
located at the intersection of Ralston and Eucalyptus Avenues, which, accord-
ing to the historic building survey, is thought to have served as the sales office
for the subdivision.
The Town will continue to enforce its adopted Historic Preservation Ordi-
nance, as well as require development proposals subject to environmental
review to survey for important historic and prehistoric resources.
7. Other Important Resources
The Town of Hillsborough does not contain any designated important min-
eral resources that need to be protected per State law. In addition, due to the
mainly developed nature of the community, there is no on-going agricultural
or lumber production within the Town and the State has not identified any
important farmlands within Hillsborough in need of conservation.
                                                                             OSC-11

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
B. Goals, Policies and Actions
Goal OSC-1        Continue to identify new opportunities for recrea-
                  tional facilities, and maintain existing facilities.
Policy OSC-1.1: Evaluate underutilized publicly-owned property for recrea-
                   tional reuse, working with other public agencies and pri-
                   vate organizations when necessary.
Policy OSC-1.2: Continue to support local community efforts to expand
                   and improve recreational facilities and identify funding for
                   the on-going maintenance of facilities.
Policy OSC-1.3: Review future subdivision proposals for the opportunity to
                   incorporate new recreational opportunities into the site de-
                   sign and/or require parkland in-lieu fees.
Action OSC-1.1: The Town will continue to cooperate with the Hillsbor-
                   ough City School District through their Joint Powers
                   Agreement to maintain the Hillsborough Recreation De-
                   partment.
Action OSC-1.2: The Town will adopt an ordinance in compliance with the
                   Quimby Act to require new development to provide land
                   dedication and/or in-lieu fees in the amount equal to three
                   acres of parkland per 1,000 new residents. Due to the lim-
                   ited availability of land within Hillsborough for new parks,
                   future additional parks will mainly consist of neighbor-
                   hood parks of five acres or less and pocket parks of less
                   than one acre. Larger parks will also be allowed.
OSC-12
                                          T O W N    O F   H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                            G E N E R A L P L A N
                     O P E N S P A C E A N D  C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
Goal OSC-2      Preserve open space for existing and future residents.
Policy OSC-2.1: Continue to maintain Town-owned open space in a man-
                 ner that balances the need to protect natural habitat with
                 controlling vegetation to reduce fuel loads, arrangements
                 and potential wildfire hazards.
Policy OSC-2.2: Consider the limited public use of Town-owned public
                 open space, where appropriate, in a manner that considers
                 mitigation of impacts on adjacent neighbors and natural re-
                 sources and does not conflict with existing reversion re-
                 strictions or increase the risk of fire hazards.
Goal OSC-3      Ensure the continued preservation, protection and
                restoration of the natural features and resources of
                the Town that are essential to maintaining the quality
                of life for residents and wildlife, including creek cor-
                ridors, trees, slopes and woodlands, while minimizing
                potential conflicts, such as deer overpopulation.
Policy OSC-3.1: Continue to encourage the preservation of drainage water-
                 courses and riparian habitat in a natural state by not allow-
                 ing the culverting of existing creeks and requiring appro-
                 priate set backs and buffers from creekbeds.
Policy OSC-3.2: Preserve and enhance valued riparian habitat and other
                 important areas that provide important water quality bene-
                 fits, such as watersheds.
Policy OSC-3.3: Continue to preserve and protect valuable native tree life,
                 such as redwoods, oaks and bays, while recognizing the
                 need to allow for the gradual replacement of trees to pro-
                 vide for on-going natural renewal.
                                                                           OSC-13
T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
Policy OSC-3.4: Enforce the Tree Removal Ordinance and require devel-
                   opment proposals to provide adequate information to all
                   Town staff to assess the project’s impact on tree removal.
Policy OSC-3.5: Require property owners to replace removed native trees in
                   a manner that maintains the visual character of the prop-
                   erty and takes neighboring properties into consideration.
                   The replacement trees may be located on other parts of the
                   lot, as approved by the Town.
Policy OSC-3.6: Continue to encourage property owners to find amicable
                   solutions that address the need to balance the preservation
                   of trees and private views.
Policy OSC-3.7: Encourage the removal of non-native tree species, such as
                   eucalyptus and acacia trees, that increase hazards for the
                   community. Removed non-native trees should be replaced
                   with native trees.
Policy OSC-3.8: Continue to preserve the quality of trees in open space ar-
                   eas and in public landscaped areas.
Policy OSC-3.9: Preserve dedicated open space areas and evaluate recrea-
                   tional potential of open space.
Policy OSC-3.10: Continue to maintain fire trails in open space areas for
                   public safety.
Policy OSC-3.11: Preserve and protect rare and endangered species, and their
                   habitats.
Policy OSC-3.12: When appropriate, require proponents of projects to com-
                   plete biological surveys necessary to ensure compliance
OSC-14

                                          T O W N   O F    H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                            G E N E R A L P L A N
                    O P E N  S P A C E A N D  C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
                 with all local, regional, State and federal regulations in re-
                 gards to biological resources. When negative impacts to
                 biological resources are unavoidable, mitigation measures,
                 such as conservation easements, will be required to reduce
                 them.
Policy OSC-3.13: Provide information to citizens about the management of
                 deer populations within the Town of Hillsborough. The
                 Town will encourage citizens not to feed deer and thereby
                 alter the natural carrying capacity of the land for deer.
Action OSC-3.1: The Town will update the Tree Removal Ordinance to
                 recognize the need to allow for a system of gradual re-
                 placement of important trees as they age to ensure that
                 there is a mixture of healthy trees in the community and
                 that there is not a period during which all of the trees die
                 of old age at the same time. The Ordinance will also be
                 updated to ensure that replacement of trees permitted for
                 removal occurs in a manner that maintains the existing
                 character, such as requiring either large-sized replacement
                 trees or a greater number of smaller-sized trees. The loca-
                 tion of replacement trees will also be considered as part of
                 the Ordinance update to ensure that as the trees grow, their
                 impact on existing private views is minimized. The Ordi-
                 nance update will include language that addresses potential
                 damage associated with changes in drainage patterns or im-
                 pacts on root system of existing trees to remain on site re-
                 sulting from new development. Finally, consideration to
                 the need to balance the protection of trees with the need to
                 manage vegetated areas in a manner that reduces the risk of
                 fire to structures will be given during the Ordinance up-
                 date.
                                                                           OSC-15
T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
Action OSC-3.2: The Public Works Department will be responsible for
                   maintaining the health of trees on public property as neces-
                   sary. When necessary, the Department will employ the
                   services of a registered forester or arborist. Trees on pri-
                   vate properties should be maintained by property owners
                   so that the long-term health and welfare of all the trees in
                   the Town can be assured.
Action OSC-3.3: The Town will continue to direct residents to the proce-
                   dures in the Voluntary Resolution of Disputes Regarding
                   Trees and Views Ordinance to allow neighbors to come to
                   agreement on a balance between the desire for larger trees
                   and preservation of views. Where people are unable to
                   communicate with their neighbors, the Ordinance recom-
                   mends voluntary mediation and arbitration.
Action OSC-3.4: The Town will provide information to residents on how to
                   reduce the impact of deer on private property, such as
                   planting vegetation that deer generally dislike and fencing
                   vegetation that they will eat. Residents will also be re-
                   minded that it is illegal to feed deer and that it poses a risk
                   to both humans and deer.
Goal OSC-4        Minimize the impact of urban development on
                  creeks and maintain a high level of water quality.
Policy OSC-4.1: Control and monitor development and activities along the
                   creeks to avoid negative impacts from urban uses on water
                   quality and habitat preservation and enhancement, as well
                   as to protect the public health and safety of public and pri-
                   vate property.
OSC-16
                                          T O W N   O F    H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                            G E N E R A L P L A N
                   O P E N   S P A C E A N D  C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
Policy OSC-4.2: Encourage development to follow watershed-based plan-
                ning and zoning by examining proposed development in
                the context of the entire watershed and subwatershed.
Policy OSC-4.3: Protect drainage facilities, including ensuring creekbank sta-
                bility, to avoid negative impacts to downstream hydrology.
Policy OSC-4.4: Require projects to reduce, to the extent feasible, potential
                sediment discharge, erosion, run-off flow and volume, and
                stormwater pollution, both during construction, as well as
                post-construction. Require projects to incorporate mitiga-
                tion measures, such as Best Management Practices (BMPs),
                to address these water quality impacts, especially if propos-
                ing construction during the wet season.
Policy OSC-4.5: Reduce the amount of hazardous wastes entering into the
                local and regional waterways by:
                ♦ Prohibiting the illicit dumping of wastes into storm
                    drains, creeks and other waterways.
                ♦ Prohibiting the discharge of pollutants to the maximum
                    extent practicable.
                ♦ Encouraging the use of naturally pest-resistant landscap-
                    ing and design features that reduce the need for chemi-
                    cal treatments, and incorporate stormwater detention
                    and retention into their design, when appropriate.
Policy OSC-4.6: Reduce surface run-off by minimizing impervious surfaces
                associated with motorized vehicles, as well as requiring pro-
                jects to include site designs that minimize impervious sur-
                faces and maximize on-site filtration.
Policy OSC-4.7: Require property owners to work with the natural topog-
                raphy and drainages to the extent feasible when designing
                development projects to reduce the amount of grading nec-
                                                                           OSC-17

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
                   essary and limit the disturbances to natural water bodies
                   and drainage systems.
Action OSC-4.1: The Town will adopt and implement a Creek Protection
                   Ordinance to ensure that new development does not have a
                   negative impact upon the hydrology and riparian habitat of
                   existing creeks and streams as well as to protect the health
                   of the watersheds, consistent with the goals and policies
                   contained in this Element.
Action OSC-4.2: As co-permittee, the Town will continue to participate in
                   the San Mateo Stormwater Pollution Prevention Program
                   (STOPPP) or equal program. New development and
                   Town activities will be reviewed for compliance with
                   STOPPP as part of project approval. The Town will also
                   monitor construction to ensure compliance with any re-
                   quired mitigation.
Action OSC-4.3: The Town will encourage property owners to incorporate
                   water conservation techniques into their landscaping to re-
                   duce water usage.
Goal OSC-5        Support the preservation of important cultural re-
                  sources found within the community.
Policy OSC-5.1: Preserve Town-owned historical resources when practical
                   and involve the public in the determination of which re-
                   sources should be preserved.
Policy OSC-5.2: Support property owners in their efforts to preserve im-
                   portant private historic structures and apply the Town’s
                   adopted Residential Design Guidelines when reviewing de-
                   velopment proposals for historic personal residences.
OSC-18

                                        T O W N   O F    H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                          G E N E R A L P L A N
                   O P E N S P A C E A N D  C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
Action OSC-5.1: The Town will continue to enforce the Historic Preserva-
                tion Ordinance.
Action OSC-5.2: The Town will require projects subject to the California
                Environmental Quality Act to analyze impacts to cultural
                resources per State law. When necessary, the Town will
                require the projects to incorporate mitigation measures to
                reduce adverse impacts to identified cultural resources.
Action OSC-5.3: The Town will require construction projects to stop if ar-
                chaeological or paleontological resources are uncovered
                during grading or other on-site excavation activities. Once
                the resources are assessed for importance, appropriate miti-
                gation compliant with State law will be determined.
                                                                         OSC-19
T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
O P E N S P A C E A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N E L E M E N T
This page left intentionally blank.
OSC-20
5 PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
  The Public Safety Element provides information about risks in Hillsborough due
  to natural and man-made hazards and contains policies designed to protect the
  community as much as possible from seismic, flood, geologic and wildfire hazards.
  As required by State law, the Public Safety Element addresses the protection of
  the community from any unreasonable risks associated with the impacts of:
    ♦ Wildland and urban fires.
    ♦ Geologic hazards, including earthquakes, ground failure and subsidence
       and slope instability.
    ♦ Flooding, dam failure, tsunami and seiche.
    ♦ Hazardous materials, criminal activity and air pollution.
    ♦ General emergency preparedness.
  The Element is divided into two sections:
    ♦ Background Information. Contains information on current risks due
       to natural and man-made hazards.
    ♦ Goals, Policies and Actions. Provides policy guidance for addressing
       change as it occurs in the Town, and action items to be pursued during
       the lifetime of the General Plan.
  A. Background Information
  The following sections outline the existing conditions in Hillsborough as they
  relate to natural and man-made hazards.
  1. Fire Hazards
  The Town of Hillsborough is faced with risk associated with wildfires and
  urban fires, as described in detail below. Both types of fire risks are magnified
  by the design of the Town’s street system. While the street layout meets the
  original goals of minimizing through traffic and creating a more rural charac-
                                                                               PS-1

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
ter for the community, the often narrow and curvilinear patterns and hilly
topography can make it difficult for emergency vehicles to travel from one
side of the community to the other and access certain areas. The only way to
overcome this issue is to have high-quality equipment and provide continuous
training and accurate maps for the fire fighters and ensure they know the
community well. In this vein, the Fire Department is currently investigating
the installation of global positioning system (GPS) systems on all of the De-
partment’s vehicles.
a. Wildland Fire Hazards
The Town of Hillsborough is fortunate to have undeveloped land within its
limits, such as rural canyons and open space preserves. However, the prox-
imity of housing and other development to these areas carries a high risk of
wildland fires, and is a concern. As shown in Figure PS-1, much of Hillsbor-
ough’s development is subject to the risk of wildland fires. The data in this
map was gathered in 2003 by the California Department of Forestry and Fire
Protection as a way to describe the relative risk to populated areas from the
threat of wildfire; however, the map does not represent the Very High Fire
Severity Zones (VHFSZ) identified through the Bates Bill, as described below.
In response to the Oakland Hills fire in 1991 and the passage of the AB 337
Bates Bill (Government Code Sections 51175 to 51189), the State mapped ar-
eas considered Very High Fire Severity Zones. Hillsborough did not adopt
the State’s identified VHFSZ. Adoption of VHFSZs allows for more strin-
gent enforcement by jurisdictions that have less stringent existing codes, but
adoption can also negatively affect residents’ insurance rates. The Town al-
ready has a stringent fire enforcement program and building standards, so
adoption of the VHFSZ may not provide for more stringent fire protection
regulations, but may affect insurance rates. Even without the VHFSZ desig-
nation, the vegetation management program and the ordinances associated
with a wildland urban interface consistent with a VHFSZ are applied by the
Town and Fire Department.
PS-2

                      T O W N   O F   H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                       G E N E R A L P L A N
                          P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
Figure PS-1
Wildfire Hazard Areas
                                                           PS-3
T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
The Town is proactive in addressing wildland fire risks by clearing vegetation
and maintaining access pathways to areas with the highest fire risks. The
Town maintains at least a 30-foot vegetation fire break between Town-owned
open space areas and private property. In addition, the Town requires new
construction and substantial reconstruction to include design features to re-
duce the risk of fire, such as Class A roofs and siding, and automatic interior
sprinklers. To minimize the threat of fires caused by residential uses, the
Town also requires that spark arrestors are installed.
The Central County Fire Department also distributes information to home
owners regarding appropriate vegetation management for surrounding out-
door areas and ensures compliance with State codes for vegetation manage-
ment on private property. The majority of private property in Hillsborough
is landscaped with irrigated vegetation. In addition, the Department also
maintains active participation in wildland fire fighting training.
The Central County Fire Department cooperates with regional fire protec-
tion activities to reduce the overall risk of wildfires within the County.
While there are no adopted countywide fire plans or standards that apply to
Hillsborough, the Central County Fire Department is participating in the
Fire Safe San Mateo County group, which includes members from various
stakeholders involved in fire protection within the County or responsible for
the management of open space areas. A subcommittee of this group is work-
ing on creating a single county standard for adoption of the International
Code Council Urban Interface Code.
The Urban Interface Code will ensure that new construction will require fire
safe construction standards, defensible space and provide access and water
supplies. The Central County Fire Department is working with the Town
and the Fire Safe San Mateo County to ensure appropriate adoption of this
Code.
PS-4
                                            T O W N    O F   H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                              G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                 P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
b. Urban Fires
In addition to the risk of wildland fires, the Town is subject to fire hazards
related to structural fires. The Town addresses this hazard by supporting and
funding the Central County Fire Department and by requiring the construc-
tion features outlined above.
2. Steep Slopes and Landslides
As reflected in its name, Hillsborough is hilly, with areas of steep slopes, es-
pecially along its creeks and canyons. The steeper slopes have the potential
for erosion and slippage. Figure PS-2 depicts areas within the community
that have a history of landslides. Highlighted on the map are several histori-
cal landslide areas that the Town continually monitors, one to the north in an
open space preserve, and the others in the southern portion of Town.
As shown in Figure PS-3, the majority of the Town is underlain by disturbed
soil, identified as urban land or orthents.1 The rest is comprised of Fagan
Loam, Los Gatos Loam, Maymen Gravelly Loam and Obispo Clay, all of
which are on slopes of 15 percent or more. The Barnabe-Rock Outcrop
Complex, Fagan Loam, Los Gatos Loam and Maymen Gravelly Loam have a
high to very high potential for erosion, however, many of the areas with
these soils types are protected within open space areas. The Obispo Clay has
a lower potential for erosion.
Because of the excess of steep terrain, the Town currently allows limited new
development to occur on some of the steeper slopes. To address the concern
of potential slope failure, the Town requires development to meet current
engineering standards. Also, the Town has an ordinance requiring any new
subdivisions on slopes over 10 percent to provide larger lots, thereby reducing
the concentration of homes on steeper slopes. Figure PS-4 shows the land
         1
           Orthents are soils which have been mechanically modified as a result of
grading and fill associated with development, or other urban activities, such as land-
scaping.
                                                                                  PS-5
T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
Figure PS-2: Landslide Hazards
PS-6
                   T O W N   O F   H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                    G E N E R A L P L A N
                       P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
Figure PS-3: Soils
                                                        PS-7
T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
Figure PS-4: Steep Slopes
PS-8
                                           T O W N   O F   H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                            G E N E R A L P L A N
                                               P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
within Hillsborough that has slopes of 10 percent or greater. As discussed in
more detail under the following section, the Town also requires new devel-
opment to meet current building codes and complete geotechnical studies.
3. Seismic Activity
Hillsborough is located within the seismically active San Francisco Bay re-
gion, one of the most seismically active zones in the United States. The faults
in the region are capable of generating earthquakes of at least 8.0 in magni-
tude on the Richter Scale, producing very strong ground shaking in Hillsbor-
ough. The closest fault line to Hillsborough is the San Andreas Fault, which
runs along the western boundary of the Town. Figure PS-5 depicts the re-
gional fault lines in the Hillsborough area. There are no fault lines identified
within the Town limits and the Town is not within an Alquist-Priolo desig-
nated zone, so the risk of seismically induced ground rupture is low.
Similar to the Alquist-Priolo Act, which identifies Alquist-Priolo zones, the
Seismic Hazards Mapping Act directs the State Geologist to identify and map
areas prone to the earthquake hazards of liquefaction, earthquake-induced
landslides and amplified ground shaking. The Act requires that site-specific
geotechnical reports be conducted identifying the hazards(s) and formulating
mitigation measures prior to permitting most developments designed for hu-
man occupancy within the Zones of Required Investigation. While a Seismic
Hazard Map implementing the Act has not been released for Hillsborough,
the State plans to do so in the future. At that time, the Town will comply
with the Act’s requirement, as appropriate.
Earthquake hazards in Hillsborough also include secondary effects, such as
earthquake induced land sliding, subsidence, liquefaction, tsunami and seiche.
Areas subject to landslides are discussed in the previous section. Soil liquefac-
tion is a phenomenon primarily associated with saturated, cohesionless soil
layers located close to the ground surface. During liquefaction, soils lose
strength and ground failure may occur. Figure PS-6 shows those areas within
                                                                                PS-9

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
Figure PS-5: Regional Faults
PS-10
                                       T O W N   O F   H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                        G E N E R A L P L A N
                                           P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
Figure PS-6: Liquefaction Hazard Areas
                                                                          PS-11
T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
Hillsborough that have the highest potential for liquefaction. Due to the
Town’s inland location, there is a low potential for tsunamis to affect the
community.
Hillsborough could be at risk for seiches, which are waves generated in a bay
or lake that can be compared to the back-and-forth sloshing of water in a tub.
Seiches can be caused by winds, changes in atmospheric pressure, underwater
earthquakes or landslides into the water. Bodies of water including reservoirs,
ponds and swimming pools are likely to experience seiche waves up to several
feet in height during a strong earthquake. Areas in Hillsborough with the
most potential for seiche include Crocker and Spencer Lakes, water towers
and, to a lesser extent, private pools.
The Town requires new construction to be built using the most recent build-
ing codes to minimize potential damage to structures as a result of an earth-
quake. Development or substantial renovations in Hillsborough must com-
ply with the Uniform Building Code (UBC), which outlines standards for
seismic design, foundations and drainage and requires that geotechnical engi-
neering studies be undertaken for all major new buildings or earth works.
4. Flooding
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) maps areas subject to
100-year floods as part of its National Flood Insurance Program. For Hills-
borough, the only area that FEMA has identified as being within the 100-year
flood plain2 is along the San Mateo Creek, in the southern portion of the
Town. Figure PS-7 depicts the area that is within the 100-year flood plain.
           2
             A 100-year floodplain is the area that has a one percent chance of being in-
undated during any particular 12-month period. The risk of this area being flooded in
any century is one percent but statistically the risk is almost 40 percent in any 50-year
period.
PS-12

                                 T O W N   O F   H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                  G E N E R A L P L A N
                                     P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
Figure PS-7: 100-Year Floodplain
                                                                    PS-13
T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
Another source of potential flooding is related to dam inundation from the
Lower Crystal Springs Dam on San Mateo Creek, and to a smaller extent
from the dams that were built to create Crocker and Spencer Lakes. Flooding
would only occur in the unlikely event that the dams failed, and would affect
those areas downstream from the dams as shown in Figure PS-8.
The Lower Crystal Springs dam poses the largest threat to the community
since the reservoir holds a greater amount of water compared to Crocker and
Spencer Lakes. While the dam is located only 400 feet west of the San Andres
fault, the San Francisco Public Utilities Commission has studied the dam and
found that the dam meets all current earthquake standards. In addition, the
San Francisco Public Utilities Commission reported that no damage was
found to the dam after the 1906 and 1989 earthquakes. The Hillsborough
Public Works Department maintains the dams at Crocker and Spencer Lakes.
5. Human Created Hazards
The residents of Hillsborough are also at risk of man-made hazards, such as
criminal activity, improper disposal of and exposure to hazardous materials,
and air pollution.
a. Criminal Activities
Hillsborough currently has the lowest crime rate in the Bay Area. The Hills-
borough Police Department prides itself on its proactive approach, which
includes the latest technology and crime prevention strategies and public out-
reach. Police-related concerns in Hillsborough typically involve traffic acci-
dents and noise violations from construction or teenage parties. Criminal
activity in Hillsborough is a minor concern and consists mainly of domestic
disagreements, petty theft and vandalism, and a recent rise in identity theft.
b. Hazardous Materials
As a primarily residential community, Hillsborough does not contain large
amounts of hazardous materials, nor does it experience higher than normal
transportation of hazardous materials on its circulation system since there are
PS-14
                                 T O W N   O F   H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                  G E N E R A L P L A N
                                     P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
Figure PS-8: Dam Inundation Area
                                                                    PS-15
T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
not good cross-town routes. Personal use of household hazardous materials,
such as pesticides and fertilizer, is the most common occurrence of hazardous
materials within the community. The California Environmental Protection
Agency, Department of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC) is authorized by
the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to enforce and
implement federal hazardous materials laws and regulations, including dis-
posal and transportation of hazardous materials. State laws are equally strin-
gent or more stringent than federal regulations.
There is one identified underground storage tank (UST) within the commu-
nity that is used for fuel storage, as well as several above-ground storage tanks.
All of the storage tanks have been constructed or retrofitted to meet safety
regulations. There is one UST in the Burlingame County Club maintenance
area, one above-ground fuel container at the Corporation Yard and two diesel
above-ground tanks at fire stations. The potential for an additional storage
tank at the Police Department is under study. The County is responsible for
the regulation of USTs.
In addition to the known storage tanks, old, unused heating oil storage tanks
are still occasionally found on residential property. These tanks are typically
found when a property is being renovated and do not pose a health risk to the
community.
c. Air Quality
The following section provides a general discussion of regional air quality
conditions and a description of the pollutants that are of the most concern to
Hillsborough.
i. Air Quality Climatology
Hillsborough is located in northern San Mateo County, which is part of the
nine-county San Francisco Bay Air Basin. The Town is located in the coastal
hills on the west side of San Francisco Bay. This part of the San Francisco
Peninsula experiences persistent ocean breezes off the Pacific Ocean, but
Hillsborough is somewhat sheltered by higher terrain. The major wind gaps
PS-16
                                           T O W N   O F   H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                            G E N E R A L P L A N
                                               P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
in the Peninsula are the San Bruno Gap, located north of Hillsborough and
the Crystal Springs Gap, located south of Hillsborough. Generally, Hillsbor-
ough only experiences moderate air pollution as a result of its regular ocean
breezes, but during stagnant air conditions, the entire Bay Area has degraded
air quality.
The Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD) monitors air
quality at numerous sites within the nine-county District, although not
within Hillsborough. The closest air monitoring stations are in San Francisco
to the north and Redwood City to the south. In general, the federal ambient
air quality standards are met at these sites, but the more stringent State stan-
dards are exceeded for two pollutants: ozone and particulate matter. Toxic
Air Contaminants are another type of air pollutant that is of concern in the
Bay Area.
6. Emergency Response
As required by law, Hillsborough has established emergency preparedness
procedures to respond to a variety of natural and man-made disasters that
could occur within the area. The Town is included in the San Mateo County
Operational Area Emergency Operations Plan (EOC) and the Town has a
representative on the EOC Steering Committee. These procedures are out-
lined in the EOC Guidebook and Section Checklist, adopted in June 2004.
The Emergency Plan establishes the Standardized Emergency Management
System (SEMS) as required by state law, and includes information on mutual
aid agreements, hierarchies of command and different levels of response in
emergency situations.
The Town also has an emergency plan based on SEMS, which provides an
effective flow of information and tracking of resources. The Town has desig-
nated a location for centralized management of coordinated emergency re-
sponse by the Town’s staff. The primary EOC location is Town Hall. The
EOC may be activated upon the direction of the City Manager or, in his ab-
sence, his designee. The magnitude of the emergency or unusual occurrence
                                                                              PS-17

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
will dictate the Town’s response. Town employees participate in an annual
drill to prepare and train for responding to an emergency.
In the event of an emergency, Hillsborough employees, including Fire, Police
and Public Works staff, will assess the situation and the damage and respond
according to the emergency plan, coordinating with other agencies as neces-
sary. In the event they are needed, the schools are designated as emergency
shelters. The centers would be designated and set up by Town staff, which
would coordinate with the American Red Cross, and the centers would pro-
vide housing, medical care and act as distribution sites for food and water.
It is recommended that each Hillsborough family has an emergency plan and
sufficient supplies for 72 hours. There are tips and helpful links on the Fire
Department’s Emergency Preparedness page on the Town’s website,
www.hillsborough.net. In the event of flooding as a result of storms, an
emergency supply of sandbags is available to residents at the Town’s Fire Sta-
tions and at Town Hall.
B. Goals, Policies and Actions
Goal PS-1            Prevent and reduce risks to property and protect
                     residents from urban and wildfire hazards.
Policy PS-1.1:       Maintain safe building practices and require fire-safe build-
                     ing materials in all new development and substantial rede-
                     velopments.
Policy PS-1.2:       Support fire prevention, public education, early detection
                     programs and property inspections to identify and avoid fire
                     hazards.
PS-18

                                        T O W N   O F   H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                         G E N E R A L P L A N
                                            P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
Policy PS-1.3: Encourage the maintenance of ground cover and fire breaks
               on all open space lands.
Policy PS-1.4: Support excellent fire service through the maintenance of
               fire equipment and the training of fire personnel.
Action PS-1.1: The Central County Fire Department will review plans for
               all new buildings and major additions and make recommen-
               dations for modifications to reduce fire hazard.
Action PS-1.2: When property owners are not correctly maintaining their
               property, the Town will implement fire control mainte-
               nance measures as needed on undeveloped private property,
               provide the necessary fire prevention improvements on
               properties that pose a significant public safety threat, and
               pass along incurred costs to property owners.
Action PS-1.3: The Town will work with the Central County Fire De-
               partment to review and update, if necessary, the Town’s and
               Department’s regulations and approach regarding fire pro-
               tection within Hillsborough to ensure adequate fire protec-
               tion. Since the Town is mainly residential, the focus of this
               review will be on reducing the risk of fire to and resulting
               from individual residential properties. This review and up-
               date process will include the following:
               ♦ Review adopted and proposed federal and State regula-
                  tions and ensure that Hillsborough complies as appropri-
                  ate. This will include reviewing the proposed Interna-
                  tional Code Council Urban Interface Code and amend-
                  ments to Government Code 51182 to identify necessary
                  revisions to Town and Department policies and regula-
                  tions.
               ♦ Determine whether the Town will benefit from increased
                  fire protection from adopting the State identified Wildfire
                                                                           PS-19

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
                       Hazard Areas pursuant to Government Code Section
                       51179. Based on this analysis, the Town will either adopt
                       the State identified VHFSZs, adopt locally designated
                       VHFSZs, or make a determination that the Town is ex-
                       empt from adopting VHFSZs since adopted regulation has
                       the same or more stringent controls as would be applied
                       with the designation of a VHFSZ.
                     ♦ Develop wildfire suppression contingency plans for peri-
                       ods when funding or fire fighting resources for wildfire
                       suppression are reduced due to homeland safety events
                       that may redirect federal and State funding away from lo-
                       cal wildfire suppression activities.
Action PS-1.4:       The Town will continue to work with the Central County
                     Fire Department to ensure that regional approaches to fire
                     protection and suppression generated by the County, Cali-
                     fornia Department of Forestry (CDF) and Fire Safe San
                     Mateo County are implemented in Hillsborough.
Goal PS-2            Reduce risk of landslide and slope failure during and
                     after heavy rains and earthquakes, and protect the
                     community from hazards associated with soil ero-
                     sion, weak and expansive soils and slope instability.
Policy PS-2.1:       Minimize development in areas of natural hazards, such as
                     landslides and floodplains, which have the potential to jeop-
                     ardize the public health and safety.
Policy PS-2.2:       Reduce the risk of impacts from geologic and seismic haz-
                     ards by applying proper development engineering, building
                     construction and retrofitting requirements.
PS-20

                                         T O W N   O F   H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                          G E N E R A L P L A N
                                             P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
Policy PS-2.3: Review new building plans for proper foundation and sup-
               ports in areas with slope gradients greater than 10 percent.
               Require property owners to provide minimal slope stabiliza-
               tion in properties high at risk to earthquake-induced slope
               failure.
Policy PS-2.4: Properties in hazardous slope areas where slope improve-
               ments have been made should be inspected periodically.
Policy PS-2.5: Review drainage plans for new development to determine
               areas susceptible to poor drainage and compare with areas
               susceptible to slope failure.
Policy PS-2.6: Reduce risk to drivers from landslides onto public roads.
Action PS-2.1: The Town will continue to implement its Hillside Lot Size
               Ordinance that limits the density of development on slopes
               over 10 percent to reduce the risk of slope failure and to re-
               duce runoff and erosion. Implementation of the Ordinance
               also helps to protect open space features and riparian habitat
               by minimizing development along streambeds.
Action PS-2.2: The Town will continue to require construction plans for
               all new houses be reviewed by a State of California-
               registered professional engineer (PE).
Goal PS-3      Reduce the risk of injury and structure damage
               from exposure to seismic activity.
Policy PS-3.1: Ensure new building plans in high risk areas meet current
               seismic building codes and use methods of construction to
               withstand stress caused by an earthquake.
                                                                            PS-21
T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
Action PS-3.1:       The Town will review all new building plans or substantial
                     renovations for compliance with the UBC and any addi-
                     tional State or federal seismic safety regulations prior to
                     permit approval.
Action PS-3.2:       The Town will continue to inspect all required seismic up-
                     grades or new construction to ensure adequate compliance.
Action PS-3.3:       The Town will distribute information to residents on emer-
                     gency procedures in case of an earthquake.
Goal PS-4            Reduce hazards related to natural flooding and
                     potential inundation from failure of the Lower
                     Crystal Springs Dam and the Crocker and Spencer
                     Lake dams.
Policy PS-4.1:       Limit development within the floodplain to minimize risks
                     to life and property and satisfy the flood insurance and other
                     requirements of the Federal Emergency Management Act.
Policy PS-4.2:       Continue to monitor and maintain the dams at Crocker and
                     Spencer Lakes to minimize the risk of dam failure, and sup-
                     port the San Francisco Public Utilities Commission’s
                     monitoring and maintenance of the Lower Crystal Springs
                     Dam.
Action PS-4.1:       The Town will continue to participate in the National
                     Flood Insurance Program.
Action PS-4.2:       The Town will continue to enforce existing ordinances for
                     floodplain regulations, drainage requirements and develop-
                     ment standards.
PS-22

                                        T O W N   O F   H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                         G E N E R A L P L A N
                                            P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
Goal PS-5      Protect the community from human-caused haz-
               ards, such as criminal activity, air pollution and
               hazardous materials.
Policy PS-5.1: Continue to support the Hillsborough Police Department
               to maintain a low occurrence of criminal activity within the
               community and provide public education programs.
Policy PS-5.2: Cooperate and participate in regional air quality manage-
               ment planning, programs and enforcement measures.
Policy PS-5.3: Cooperate with responsible federal, State and County agen-
               cies to minimize the risk to the community from the use
               and transportation of hazardous materials through and adja-
               cent to Hillsborough.
Policy PS-5.4: Reduce the per capita production of household hazardous
               waste in Hillsborough in concert with the County of San
               Mateo programs for reducing hazardous waste.
Action PS-5.1: The Police Department will continue to provide informa-
               tion on crime prevention and community outreach such as,
               in-home Crime Prevention and Community Awareness Pro-
               grams; private home inspections for proper locks, alarm and
               lighting; home alarm monitoring; and lending engraving
               pens to residents to mark their valuables.
Action PS-5.2: The Town will continue to support the Bay Area Air Qual-
               ity Management District in monitoring air pollutants of
               concern on a continuous basis, as well as the implementa-
               tion of the regional Clean Air Plan.
Action PS-5.3: The Town will continue to promote energy conservation by
               the public and private sectors. New development and re-
                                                                           PS-23
T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
                     modeling will be encouraged to incorporate features that
                     minimize energy use, such as planting trees along the south
                     and west-facing sides of buildings; using solar heating; in-
                     stalling energy efficient lighting and heating/cooling sys-
                     tems, as well as increased insulation; and replacing older ap-
                     pliances with energy efficient models. The Town will also
                     incorporate energy saving design features and devices in
                     Town property, when appropriate.
Action PS-5.4:       The Town will work with the County to offer a periodic
                     drop-off program for household hazardous waste and dis-
                     tribute information on alternative non-toxic landscaping
                     treatments, especially to the County Club and schools.
Goal PS-6            Ensure the Town’s ability to respond effectively to
                     natural and human-caused emergencies.
Policy PS-6.1:       Support the preparation, implementation and regular update
                     of local preparedness and evacuation plans and multi-
                     jurisdictional cooperation and communication for emer-
                     gency situations.
Policy PS-6.2:       Continue to participate in regional emergency planning ef-
                     forts.
Policy PS-6.3:       Educate residents regarding appropriate actions to safeguard
                     life and property during and immediately after various types
                     of emergencies.
Action PS-6.1:       The Town will develop a local emergency preparedness plan
                     that identifies a City chain of command, outlines an action
                     checklist and coordinates with the San Mateo County
                     Emergency Operations Plan.
PS-24

                                       T O W N    O F   H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                         G E N E R A L P L A N
                                            P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
Action PS-6.2: The Town will provide community awareness and educa-
               tion programs for citizens describing procedures and evacua-
               tion routes to be followed in the event of a disaster.
Action PS-6.3: The Town will conduct periodic drills using emergency re-
               sponse systems to test the effectiveness of the Town’s proce-
               dures.
                                                                           PS-25

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
P U B L I C S A F E T Y E L E M E N T
This page left intentionally blank.
PS-26
6 NOISE ELEMENT
  The purpose of the Noise Element is to first identify sources of noise generation in
  the community and then establish goals, policies and actions to minimize prob-
  lems from intrusive sound and ensure that new development does not generate
  unacceptable noise levels.
  For the purposes of the General Plan, noise is defined as a sound or series of
  sounds that are deemed invasive, irritating, objectionable and/or disruptive to
  the quality of daily life. Noise varies in its range, source and volume and can
  derive from individual incidents such as landscaping equipment and construc-
  tion activities, to sporadic disturbances such as car horns or airplane over-
  flights, to more constant irritants such as freeway traffic. Hillsborough is
  unique in that most land uses within the Town are considered to be noise-
  sensitive, mainly because they are residences and schools.
  The Noise Element is required by State law for all General Plans and provides
  a systematic approach to the measurement and modeling of noise, the estab-
  lishment of noise standards, the control of major noise sources and commu-
  nity planning for the regulation of noise. The Noise Element provides base-
  line information on the existing conditions in Hillsborough and includes in-
  formation from the noise study conducted for the General Plan. The Ele-
  ment identifies noise-sensitive uses and includes goals, policies and actions for
  controlling and minimizing adverse noise, especially as it may result from
  existing and future development.
  The Noise Element contains the following two sections:
    ♦ Background Information. Depicts information on the existing condi-
       tions of noise sources and their existing and projected levels within Hills-
       borough.
    ♦ Goals, Policies and Actions. Provides policy guidance to minimize
       noise impacts on residents and action items to be pursued during the life-
       time of the General Plan.
                                                                                  N-1

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
N O I S E E L E M E N T
A. Background Information
The following provides a discussion of existing and future sources of noise
within Hillsborough, as well as how these noise sources affect the various
land use types in the Town.
1. Land Use Compatibility
Land uses deemed noise sensitive by the State of California include schools,
hospitals, rest homes, long-term care and mental care facilities. Many juris-
dictions also consider residential uses noise sensitive since families and indi-
viduals expect to use time in the home for rest and relaxation, and excess
noise can interfere with those activities. Hillsborough considers residential
uses as noise sensitive since the quiet community character is one of attrac-
tions to living in the Town.
Hillsborough is generally a quiet, primarily residential community. How-
ever, there are several noise generators that impact Hillsborough residents,
including vehicular noise from major roadways and aircraft noise from the
San Francisco International Airport (SFO). While a portion of the Town is
within the San Carlos Airport’s Area of Influence Boundary A, as discussed
in the Circulation Element, noise from aircraft operations at this airport does
not affect Hillsborough. To ensure that future development is not adversely
impacted by noise generators, or is itself a negative noise source, the Town
will utilize land use compatibility guidelines as part of planning and develop-
ment decisions. Figure N-1 summarizes which land uses are compatible with
different noise levels.
2. Vehicular Noise
One of the most common noise sources in Hillsborough, as with most com-
munities, is automobiles. Larger roadways, such as Interstate 280, El Camino
Real and State Route 92, generate higher levels of traffic noise that result in
greater noise impacts on residents living close to these roads. Local and re-
gional growth is not anticipated to create a large increase in traffic noise dur-
ing the next 20 years. Figure N-2 depicts projected future noise levels for
N-2

                                     T O W N   O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                    G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                     N O I S E E L E M E N T
Figure N-1: Land Use and Noise Compatibilities
                                                                         N-3
T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
N O I S E E L E M E N T
Figure N-2
Future Noise Contours
N-4
                                            T O W N   O F  H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                            G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                             N O I S E E L E M E N T
sample roadways based on future traffic levels in 2025. These contours are
very similar to existing noise conditions, with a slight increase of noise levels
occurring during the next 20 years along the major regional roadways. The
majority of traffic increases will result from regional growth, over which the
Town has no control. Noise levels are only shown for those roadways that
were studied as part of the General Plan traffic analysis or where traffic
counts were available. Roadways that were not modeled for noise contours
also experience traffic noise, with noise levels along local streets anticipated to
be similar or quieter on than those modeled streets.
Vehicle noise is regulated by the State’s noise emissions standards and cities
are generally prohibited from applying stricter standards to vehicles. The
Police Department will continue to enforce the State’s noise emission stan-
dards for all vehicles, including motorcycles.
3. Aircraft Noise
There are two airports in the vicinity of Hillsborough, the San Francisco In-
ternational Airport (SFO) and the San Carlos Airport. The noise impact of
each is discussed below.
a. San Francisco International Airport
Aircraft noise is an issue in Hillsborough due to the Town’s proximity to
SFO. Although some residents have reported experiencing noise and vibra-
tions from airport operations, airborne aircraft are not normally as significant
of a problem for Hillsborough as for surrounding communities because typi-
cal departure and approach flight tracks do not pass over the Town. The
greatest potential for noise impacts from aircraft operations at SFO is from
the following sources:
  ♦ Single-event, low frequency, backblast noise from aircraft departures on
     Runways 1 Left and Right, which is a typical airport operation.
  ♦ Single-event noise impacts from aircraft departures on Runways 19 Left
     and Right during certain storm conditions, such as southeast winds.
                                                                                 N-5

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
N O I S E E L E M E N T
   ♦ Engine run-up noise in the late night or early morning hours as a result
     of engine maintenance purposes.
Other less intrusive noise impacts from SFO operations occur from aircraft
arrivals on Runways 28 Left and Right, under typical airport operations, and
overflight noise impacts from aircraft that have departed on Runway 1 and
are headed to Southern California.
i. SFO Noise Contours
SFO has been declared a “noise problem” airport by the County of San
Mateo, in accordance with the relevant provisions in the California Code of
Regulations, Title 21, Subchapter 6, “Noise Standards.” Therefore, the air-
port is required to measure and monitor aircraft noise levels in the airport
environs, which includes the Town of Hillsborough. Part of the noise level
data is obtained from the monitoring site located in Hillsborough. The air-
port is also required to publish aircraft noise contours maps that illustrate the
configuration of the 65, 70 and 75 CNEL1 aircraft noise contours for SFO.
The State Noise Standards designate the 65 CNEL aircraft noise contour as
the airport’s noise impact boundary. As shown in Figure N-3, Hillsborough
is not within the most recent SFO noise contour.
ii. SFO Regulatory Environment
While airport noise remains a concern for Hillsborough residents, the Town
is prohibited from regulating it because the Town cannot supersede the Fed-
eral Aviation Administration (FAA) controls. The establishment of noise
standards and the definition of noise-impacted areas for SFO are established
by the California Department of Transportation, in compliance with federal
standards.
          1
            Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL). A descriptor for the 24-
hour A weighted average noise level. The CNEL concept accounts for the increased
acoustical sensitivity of people to noise during the evening and nighttime hours.
Sound levels during the hours from 7 p.m. to 10 p.m. are penalized 5 dB; sound levels
during the hours from 10 p.m. to 7 a.m. are penalized 10 dB. A 10 dB increase in
sound level is perceived by people to be a doubling of loudness.
N-6

                                         T O W N  O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                       G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                        N O I S E E L E M E N T
Figure N-3: San Francisco International Airport 2001 Noise Exposure
                                                                            N-7
T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
N O I S E E L E M E N T
State law requires the County Airport Land Use Commission, which is the
City/County Association of Governments (C/CAG), to prepare and adopt a
comprehensive airport land use plan (CLUP) for each airport located in the
County. The CLUP includes an airport influence area (AIA) boundary for
each airport. The boundary consists of a combination of the configuration of
the following parameters:
  ♦ The outer boundary of Federal Aviation Regulations FAR Part 77 Coni-
     cal Surface, for airspace protection
  ♦ The 65 CNEL or 55 CNEL aircraft noise contour
  ♦ Safety Zones based on runway and aircraft operational parameters
The AIA boundary defines the area within which local agencies may be re-
quired to submit proposed land use policy actions to the Airport Land Use
Commission for a formal CLUP consistency review, as required by State law.
The AIA boundary also defines the area within which real estate disclosure of
potential airport and aircraft impacts must be included in real property trans-
actions.
A small portion of Hillsborough is located within the AIA boundary for
SFO, as shown in Figure N-4. Any proposed land use policy action must be
submitted to the Airport Land Use Commission for a CLUP consistency
evaluation. In addition, any real property transaction within the area must
include a real estate disclose notice of potential airport and aircraft impacts, as
required by State law AB 2776.
iii. SFO Airport Noise Polices and Mitigation
SFO has established an Airport/Community Roundtable as a local forum
consisting of delegates from Peninsula communities affected by the airport’s
operation. The Town will continue its participation in the Roundtable in
order to understand and monitor the airport noise environment, and to en-
sure that the Town is aware of, and fully participates in, any future decision
making that affects aircraft noise exposure from the airport.
N-8

                                     T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                  G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                   N O I S E E L E M E N T
Figure N-4 – Airport Influence Areas
                                                                       N-9

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
N O I S E E L E M E N T
b. San Carlos Airport
The San Carlos Airport is a small, busy general aviation airport located ap-
proximately 10 miles south of Hillsborough. This airport is located further
from the Town than SFO and services smaller airplanes than SFO. As a re-
sult, residents of Hillsborough have not identified noise issues associated with
the San Carlos Airport.
Due to the type of aircraft that operate at San Carlos Airport, their flight pat-
terns and average number of annual aircraft operations, the 55 CNEL noise
contour defines the airport’s noise impact boundary, as adopted by the Air-
port Land Use Commission. However, no portion of Hillsborough is located
within the 55 or higher CNEL aircraft noise contour related to aircraft opera-
tions.
While the residents have not identified San Carlos Airport as a major noise
concern and the Town is outside the 55 CNEL noise contour, the airport’s
CLUP has identified that the southern portion of Hillsborough, south of
Chateau Drive and Barroilhet Drive, does receive some noise impacts from
general aviation aircraft overflight originating from San Carlos Airport. This
area has therefore been included in the San Carlos AIA Boundary A, as
shown in Figure N-4. As a result, any real property transaction within this
area is required to include a real estate disclosure notice regarding potential
airport and aircraft impacts that may affect the property, as required by State
law. However, proposed land use policy actions within the AIA Boundary A
are not required to be referred to the Airport Land Use Commission, unlike
the SFO AIA.
4. Non-Vehicular Noise
Generally, Hillsborough enjoys a peaceful and quiet environment without
many on-going noise issues. The Hillsborough Police Department reports
that the majority of noise complaints they receive are associated with con-
struction activities, such as construction beginning too early in the morning
or continuing too late into the evening, loud radios and idling trucks.
N-10

                                             T O W N  O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                           G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                             N O I S E E L E M E N T
The Town has a Noise Ordinance that limits noise levels from any and all
sources within the Town. Noise exceptions are granted to construction
equipment Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. and Saturday
from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Powered gardening devices are permitted Mon-
day through Friday from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m, Property owners, residents
and their family members are permitted extended hours to operate powered
gardening devices, Monday through Friday from 5:00 p.m. until 8:00 p.m.
and Saturdays from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., however gas-powered leaf blow-
ers are not permitted on Saturdays. These noises are not allowed on Sundays
or Town Hall holidays. Non-excessive noise from domestic animals, vehicle
traffic, forces of nature, and human voices is considered under the Noise Or-
dinance to be normal, inevitable noise.
Another occasional noise complaint identified within Hillsborough is juvenile
parties. To address this issue, the Police Department has put together an in-
formational document to assist parents with planning for teen parties. The
Town also has adopted a Response to Unruly Gatherings Ordinance to help
the Town recuperate costs related to multiple police visits to loud parties.
Additionally, the Town has also adopted an Ordinance to address excess noise
made by skateboards, rollerblades and scooters, and identify appropriate loca-
tions for their use.
B. Goals, Policies and Actions
Goal N-1           Minimize noise levels within neighborhoods so that
                   residents may enjoy the benefits normally associated
                   with residential communities.
Policy N-1.1:      Encourage new development in noise impacted areas to pro-
                   vide effective noise insulation measures.
                                                                               N-11
T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
N O I S E E L E M E N T
Policy N-1.2:       Eliminate excessive noise within the community to the ex-
                    tent feasible. When noise cannot be eliminated completely,
                    regulate noise generation to minimize impacts.
Policy N-1.3:       Continue to enforce local and State noise regulations to
                    minimize noise impacts associated with construction and
                    public and private activities.
Policy N-1.4:       Work with State, regional and local governments and agen-
                    cies to reduce noise from roadways adjacent to Hillsborough.
Action N-1.1:       The Town will continue to advocate that noise abatement
                    measures be taken by the California Department of Trans-
                    portation (Caltrans) for Caltrans roadways affecting the
                    Town, whenever feasible. A representative from Hillsbor-
                    ough should attend any Caltrans meetings or public hearings
                    where improvements or modifications to roadways affecting
                    the Town may be discussed.
Action N-1.2:       The Town will continue to enforce the existing Noise Or-
                    dinance, Response to Unruly Gatherings Ordinance and
                    Toy Ordinance.
Action N-1.3:       The Hillsborough Police Department will continue to en-
                    force the California Vehicle Code pertaining to noise stan-
                    dards for cars, trucks and motorcycles.
Goal N-2            Continue to monitor airport operations and influ-
                    ence airport policy to minimize the impact of air-
                    port-generated noise on Hillsborough.
Policy N-2.1:       Advocate ongoing noise remediation efforts at the San Fran-
                    cisco International Airport.
N-12
                                        T O W N   O F  H I L L S B O R O U G H
                                                        G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                         N O I S E E L E M E N T
Policy N-2.2: Continue to participate in regional airport planning efforts.
Action N-2.1: The Town will continue to participate on the Air-
              port/Community Roundtable and coordinate with the SFO
              Airport Land Use Commission and SFO’s Aircraft Noise
              Abatement Office. All noise issues affecting the Town
              should be monitored and the City Council should be briefed
              on all issues so that required actions can be implemented.
Action N-2.2: The Town will cooperate with the Comprehensive Airport
              Land Use Plans’ requirements for review of proposed land
              use policy actions and real estate notification for property
              located within an influence area for the San Francisco Inter-
              national Airport or the San Carlos Airport.
                                                                           N-13

T O W N O F H I L L S B O R O U G H
G E N E R A L P L A N
N O I S E E L E M E N T
This page left intentionally blank.
N-14
