3. LAND USE ELEMENT
A. Introduction
1. General Plan Requirements
Under California Planning Law, the land use element of a general plan has the
broadest scope of any of the general plan elements. The land use element
indicates the intended future uses of land, and it must be closely correlated with
the other elements of the general plan, especially the circulation element and
the housing element. Concerning the subject of land use elements, California
Government Code Section 65302(a) describes the requirements as follows:
     65302(a) A land use element that designates the proposed general
     distribution and general location and extent of the uses of the land for
     housing, business, industry, open space, including agriculture, natural
     resources, recreation, and enjoyment of scenic beauty, education, public
     buildings and grounds, solid and liquid waste disposal facilities, and other
     categories of public and private uses of land. The land use element shall
     include a statement of the standards of population density and building
     intensity recommended for the various districts and other territory covered by
     the plan. The land use element shall identify areas covered by the plan
     which are subject to flooding and shall be reviewed annually with respect to
     those areas. The land use element shall also do both of the following:
          (1) Designate in a land use category that provides for timber production
               those parcels of real property zoned for timberland production
               pursuant to the California Timberland Productivity Act of 1982,
               Chapter 6.7 (commencing with Section 51100) of Part 1 of Division
               1 of Title 5.
          (2) Consider the impact of new growth on military readiness activities
               carried out on military bases, installations, and operating and
               training areas, when proposing zoning ordinances or designating
               land uses covered by the general plan for land, or other territory
               adjacent to military facilities, or underlying designated military
               aviation routes and airspace.
2. Growth in Mt. Shasta
The impetus for growth in Mt. Shasta first occurred during the California gold
rush, despite the fact that gold was not found in the area until the 1890’s. The
area served as a stopover for gold seekers who passed down the Old Oregon
Trail through Shasta Valley. Early settlers to the area established homesteads
within the lush valleys of the area and provided necessities for the miners.
Mt. Shasta’s second wave of growth occurred with the coming of the Central
Pacific Railroad in 1886. Many of the original buildings associated with this era
Land Use Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan          3-1

were destroyed by fire in 1896. In the late 1800’s and into the 1900’s, the area
experienced rapid growth related to the lumber industry. This growth coincided
with the establishment of the State Fish Hatchery and the Shasta National Forest,
later to become part of the Shasta Trinity National Forest.
In more recent years, largely as a result of the opening of Interstate 5, the area’s
economy has shifted toward retail and service trade. Visitors to the Mt. Shasta
area have increased in number. Also, people have chosen to relocate to, or
build second homes in, the area, largely because of the area’s aesthetic and
recreation amenities.
Today, the City of Mt. Shasta serves as a support center for year-round
recreational visits to local attractions and for recreation activities including golf,
skiing, mountain climbing, fishing and other activities. Mt. Shasta has expanded
its role as a commercial, service and governmental center due to its central
location in south Siskiyou County.
During the process of developing the revised General Plan, many residents
indicated that a major need and interest was to develop a diverse employment
base in the community while still maintaining the values and qualities of a small
town community. While this is a difficult goal to quantify – accommodating both
economic development and maintaining a high quality of life – a major goal of
the General Plan is to nurture this concept. This intent provides the base for the
overall vision of the General Plan during its life.
3. Siskiyou County Land Use Designations
                                  Designations
Because the Mt. Shasta Planning Area includes lands that are outside the city
limits and in the jurisdiction of Siskiyou County, a few words should be said
about the County’s “land use designations” and policies as expressed in its
General Plan Land Use Element.
The Land Use Element of the County’s General Plan (the main body of which
was adopted in 1980) contains policies pertaining to land development. The
Land Use Element, however, does not include specific land use designations
(e.g., rural residential, resource management, etc.). Instead, the general
approach taken by the County for land use planning is that the Element has a
series of “overlay maps” that identify development constraint areas. The
Introduction to the County’s Land Use Element states: “By identifying an absence
of physical constraints, it also indicates where urban development may proceed
without encountering known physical problems.” The Land Use Element also
contains various goals, objectives and policies pertaining to the development of
land uses in the context of the recognized development constraints.
Since the County’s Land Use Element does not have land use designations for
“residential land use”, it is difficult to anticipate where the County may approve
subdivisions for residential purposes. For example, almost all private land in the
Mt. Shasta planning area is indicated as having “Woodland Productivity”
                                                                         Land Use Element
                                          3-2              City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

constraints according to the County’s General Plan Land Use Element Map 11.
Some areas are indicated as having “High Suitability” for woodland productivity
(site classes I and II) and some areas are indicated as “Moderate Suitability” (site
classes III and IV). However, Policy 31 on page 28 concerning Map 11,
Woodland Productivity, states, “The minimum parcel size shall be one acre on
0-15% slope, and 5 acres on 16-29% slope”. Policy 32 describes permitted
uses as, “Single family residential, light commercial, light industrial, open space,
non-profit       and     non-organizational       in    nature   recreational     uses,
commercial/residential uses, and public or quasi public uses only may be
permitted.”
It should be understood, then, that whereas the Mt. Shasta General Plan has
distinctions in its Land Use Element between what should be regarded as
“Resource Lands”, “Low Density Residential”, and other types of land use
designations in the unincorporated portions of the City’s planning area, there
are few such distinctions in the County’s General Plan for particular land use
designations. The County may approve subdivisions with 2 ½ - acre parcels on
land with the same land use designation as land zoned Timber Production Zone.
The Siskiyou County General Plan Land Use Element also includes Policy 41,
which outlines a variety of “Composite Overall Policies”. Two particular selected
policies to recognize in this context are:
     3. The following policies shall determine the location of any proposed use
          of the land:
          e. All proposed uses of the land shall be clearly compatible with the
               surrounding and planned uses of the area.
          f.   All proposed uses of the land may only be allowed if they clearly will
               not be disruptive or destroy the intent of protecting each mapped
               resource.
     4. Policy conflict with city or special district General Plan - in areas within a
          city’s or special district’s sphere of influence, the adopted General Plan
          of the applicable city or special district shall be considered in relation to
          the County’s General Plan Policies, except in cases where the applicable
          city’s General Plan clearly does away with the intent of any applicable
          resource map. (Siskiyou County Land Use Element, Page 32.)
The Siskiyou County General Plan Land Use Element should be consulted for a
more comprehensive examination of policies that may relate to the Mt. Shasta
Planning Area.
Land Use Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan            3-3

B. Growth and Annexation Issues
1. Background
The City of Mt. Shasta has experienced relatively slow residential growth within
the city limits in recent years. The average annual growth rate of the population
within the City since 1995 has been less than one percent.
Residential growth in the planning area has been predominately in the
unincorporated area outside the city limits. The 1993 General Plan projected
that, over the twenty-year period of roughly 1990 to 2010, the population of the
planning area would increase to a population of between 6,500 and 8,500
persons, depending on whether the Plan’s higher growth rate of 2 ¼ percent per
year or the 1 ½ percent per year historic growth pattern took place. The 1993
General Plan intended to provide land area and densities to accommodate a
population of 10,201 persons in the planning area. The 2000 U.S. Census
indicated that the population in the planning area was approximately 7,291 with
3,621 people living within the City and approximately 3,670 residents residing
outside the city limits.
Through strategic annexations, the City can shape itself and prevent sprawl and
facilitate development where it is desired. Annexation also provides the City with
an ability to apply its development regulations and standards to guide
development. Annexation also carries the risk that the costs of providing City
services to, and/or meeting the improvement demands of, new City residents
may exceed revenues. Thus, annexation decisions should take place in an
informed environment.
As noted above, a major issue concerning growth in the Planning Area is the
fact that a substantial amount of development has been allowed by the County
outside the city limits without being required to annex to the City. The large
water bottling facility and residential development east and west of the City has,
in some areas, hemmed in the City to the point where future annexations would
entail annexing areas that have already been substantially developed. Most of
the homes in the surrounding area are on individual septic tanks and private
wells.
2. General Plan Objectives and Programs: Annexations
Goal LU-
       LU-1:      Consider annexation when lands are needed to accommodate
                  the General Plan growth objectives.
Policy LU-
        LU-1.1: Annexation shall occur only when the proposed use of the
                  property furthers the City’s economic development, housing,
                  and/or community planning objectives.
                                                                      Land Use Element
                                        3-4             City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                   Implementation Measures:
                   LU-1.1(a): Prior to endorsing a proposal for annexation, the
                                City Council shall consider the objectives of the
                                added territory and find whether there is a public
                                benefit that aids in achieving General Plan goals.
                   LU-1.1(b): Prior to endorsing a proposal for annexation, the
                                City shall require the petitioner to submit, at a
                                minimum, adequate factual information to determine
                                that the proposed annexation will provide adequate
                                revenues to offset the costs of providing services.
Goal LU-LU-2:      Annexed lands shall be incorporated into the City in
                   conformance with the General Plan.
Policy LU-
         LU-2.1: Require pre-zoning and development plans prior to completing
                   annexation procedures.
                   Implementation Measures:
                   LU-2.1(a): No action shall be taken to finalize an annexation in
                                conformance with Siskiyou County Local Agency
                                Formation Commission procedures until the City has
                                approved a pre-zoning to the appropriate City
                                zoning district.
                   LU-2.1(b): No action shall be taken to finalize an annexation in
                                conformance with Siskiyou County Local Agency
                                Formation Commission procedures until the City has
                                approved a development plan for the petitioner’s
                                territory. (In some cases, the petitioner’s property
                                may not be the only property incorporated in the
                                approved annexation. The City may require
                                development plans exclusively from the petitioner(s)
                                covering the proponent’s property, if it makes a
                                finding that it cannot force development plans from
                                the other property owners who were not petitioners
                                in the process. This notation is a part of this
                                implementation measure provided for explanatory
                                purposes and guidance.)
C. Land Use Designations
In order to manage the long-term growth of the area, the City uses the General
Plan to assign land use designations. The land use designations identify the
types of land uses allowed, the permitted population density and building
intensity, and appropriate development objectives and standards.
Land Use Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan             3-5

The City has jurisdiction over land development policies within its incorporated
limits and the County maintains jurisdiction over the unincorporated area.
However, the City can express what it believes are appropriate land use
designations for unincorporated land within the City’s planning area. The City
can encourage the County to not allow development that would be contrary to
the City’s interests, especially in areas that may someday be annexed into the
City.
Table 3.1, Land Use Designations and Development Standar   Standards, ds, outlines the
City’s General Plan land use designations and the standards for building
intensity and population density that are associated with each designation. The
following discussion outlines the general characteristics of these land use
designations. Additional discussion about these designations and related
development criteria is included later in this Land Use Element.
Resource Lands.
            Lands Resource Lands (RL) are lands that are identified as containing
valuable natural resource values and characteristics that should be protected.
This includes lands containing resources suitable for production of agricultural,
timber, or mineral resources for commercial harvest, production or
conservation. RL uses may include, but are not limited to, farming, ranching,
orchards, mining, construction material processing and recreation-oriented uses
such as campgrounds. Resource Lands also typically have significant natural
resource values for wildlife habitat, watershed and scenic quality. Resource
Lands include private and public open space areas and areas of visual
importance, including lands within the National Forest. General Agriculture and
Agriculture Preserves, including Timber Production Zones, are the zoning districts
whose uses are typically permitted or conditionally permitted on Resource Lands,
subject to the appropriate development standards, code regulations and
performance standards. In some cases, sporadic single-family homes are
acceptable, but land should actually be designated and zoned for residential
development in order to approve projects, including division of property, for the
primary purpose of residential use.
Rural Residential. The Rural Residential (RR) density applies to areas outside the
city limits that are or would be served primarily by individual septic tank systems
and wells, and that have other site features (e.g., access, appropriate slope,
etc.) that make the site suitable for low-density residential use. The typical
density is one unit per 2.5 acres, which is largely dictated by Siskiyou County
Health Department policy. Parcels in these areas may also be used for hobby
farms and limited agricultural uses. If areas are served by the regional waste
water treatment system and/or a community water system, they may be suitable
for a residential land use designation with a higher density of development.
There are no lands within the Mt. Shasta city limits proposed for Rural
Residential densities.
Low-
Low-Density Residential. Low-Density Residential (LDR) lands are lands having
access to community sewer and/or water service, and having other site features
                                                                       Land Use Element
                                        3-6              City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

that make them suitable for residential use at a density of up to eight units per
acre. Low-density residential uses are primarily single-family homes. The uses
permitted or conditionally permitted in the City’s Low-Density Residential and R-
1 zoning district are permitted on lands designated in the General Plan as Low-
Density Residential, subject to the appropriate development standards, code
regulations and performance standards.
Medium-
Medium-Density Residential. Medium-Density Residential (MDR) lands are lands
identified as being suitable for conventional and lower-density residential
developments that are typical of suburban areas or areas near incorporated city
limits. Medium-Density Residential land uses are primarily single-family homes.
Land uses allowed in the Low-Density Residential and Single Family Residential
(R1) zoning districts are permitted or conditionally permitted in Medium-Density
Residential lands, subject to the appropriate development standards, code
regulations and performance standards.
High-
High-Density Residential. High-Density Residential (HDR) lands are lands that
are suitable for residential development with densities traditionally found within
incorporated cities providing urban amenities and services. High-Density
Residential uses are housing types of multiple densities, both attached and
detached single-family homes. Uses permitted or conditionally permitted within
the R1, R2, R3 and R4 zoning districts are allowed on lands designated High-
Density Residential by the General Plan, subject to the appropriate development
standards, code regulations and performance standards.
Commercial Center. Commercial Center (CC) lands are lands identified for
development with businesses that generally require customer traffic in order for
the business to be successful. Commercial Center land uses are not limited in
terms of scope of business, class of customers or the basis of products offered.
Commercial Center uses include, but are not limited to, shopping centers, retail
stores, real estate offices, factory outlet malls and restaurants. Uses permitted or
conditionally permitted by the C1, C2 and CM zones are acceptable on
Commercial Center lands, subject to the appropriate development standards,
code regulations and performance standards.
Employment Center. Employment Center (EC) lands are lands designated for
siting businesses that provide a product or service that generally does not
require onsite customer traffic. Employment Center businesses may manufacture
products for use within the planning area or shipping for offsite sale or resale.
Employment Center businesses may provide a service through its employees to
customers located outside the community area. In effect, Employment Center
uses are uses that generate employment opportunities and do not generally
require onsite customer traffic in order to succeed. These uses include, but are
not limited to, factories, machine shops, automobile repair, service-business
offices, administrative offices, lumber mills, aggregate processing and other
industrial-type uses. Uses permitted or conditionally permitted in the CM and M
zoning districts are acceptable on lands classified as Employment Center,
Land Use Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan          3-7

subject to the appropriate development standards, code regulations and
performance standards.
Mixed Use-
        Use-Planned Development. The Mixed Use-Planned Development (MU-
PD) land use designation may be applied to lands that are suitable for a
compatible mixture of land uses including, but not limited to, light industrial,
commercial, residential uses, and/or public uses. Development shall be subject
to approval of a Development Plan that, when approved, shall typically be
incorporated into a Planned Unit Development (PUD) Ordinance for the site.
Approved Development Plans and related PUD ordinances for particular sites
shall specify the appropriate development standards, code regulations and
performance standards to be applied to development on the site.
Public Land. Public Lands (P) are the existing or proposed sites on which a
publicly-owned facility or use is or will be located. Some public lands, such as
parks, community centers, educational facilities, and nature preserves (lands for
scientific study) are also classified as open space. The Public (P) zone is the most
appropriate zoning district for publicly-owned lands. Development of public land
requires a conditional use permit to be approved prior to the commencement of
non-emergency construction or site development.
                                                                       Land Use Element
                                         3-8             City of Mt. Shasta General Plan
TABLE 3-1
LAND USE DESIGNATIONS AND DEVELOPMENT    EVELOPMENT STANDARDS
                                                                  Persons/Acre                         Lot
         Land Use Designation                                                                                                                   Typical Uses
                                                                  Lots/Acreage                     Coverage
Rural Residential (RR)                                     One Unit per 2.5 Acres                      35%         Land Use Designation consistent with existing Siskiyou County Land
                                                                                                                   Uses within Plan Area but outside of the City.
Low-Density Residential (LDR)                               3-24 persons per acre                      45%         Single-family dwellings in residential subdivisions.
                                                            Up to 8 units per acre
Medium Density Residential (MDR)                            3-36 persons per acre                      55%         Single-family, duplex, triplex, townhouse and similar dwellings in
                                                           Up to 12 units per acre                                 conventional suburban densities.
High Density Residential (HDR)                              3-60 persons per acre                      65%         Dwellings in clustered development, duplexes, triplexes, apartments,
                                                           Up to 20 units per acre                                 town homes, and condominiums.
Commercial Center (CC)                                     Up to 20 units per acre                    100%         Allows for a wide range of commercial, office, retail, service and
                                                                                                                   entertainment uses primarily located within the downtown area.
Employment Center (EC)                                                   NA                            75%         Light industrial uses such as manufacturing, repair, fabrication and
                                                                                                                   storage of goods to be sold off-site.
Mixed Use-Planned Development                     Where residential uses are allowed,                  75%         A compatible combination of uses that may include Residential,
(MU-PD)                                           3-60 persons per acre & up to 20                                 Commercial Center, Employment Center, and Public Land Uses.
                                                  units per acre
Public Lands and Parks (PL)                                              NA                            10%         Public lands for schools, parks, nature reserves and similar facilities.
Resource Land (RL)                                      Up to one unit per 10 acres                   <25%         Public and private lands which are suitable for timber production,
                                                                                                                   offer substantial wildlife habitat, serve to protect portions of the
                                                                                                                   City’s watershed and/or contain valuable scenic resources.
Notes: For the purpose of specifying population density in this table, an average of three people per household is assumed.
Land Use Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                 3-9

D. Non-
     Non-Conforming Land Uses
1. Background
No matter how carefully a General Plan is developed, there will be situations in
which parcels of land will have been developed with land uses that do not
comply with new land use designations or standards of a new General Plan.
Even though older land uses were legally established prior to the revised
General Plan being adopted, when the policies of the Plan are applied to the
parcels, the old uses may not meet the criteria of the new General Plan. This
type of land use is called a “legally existing non-conforming land use”. (Note:
The term “legally existing” differentiates a land use that was established in
conformance with City or county regulations, as opposed to a use that, in fact,
may have been operated in violation of the previous land use designations
and/or zoning and, therefore, would not merit recognition as an acceptable
“legal” non-conforming use.)
Legally existing non-conforming land uses are not necessarily in conflict with
adjoining properties; the uses are merely sited in an area that new General Plan
policies are attempting to direct to a different development pattern in the future.
The changes in policy may have been precipitated by changes in community
values, a newer but different land use pattern that developed since the original
use was started, or a deficiency in City services that makes it infeasible to
provide services to new land uses similar to the nonconforming use. Whatever
the reason, an important community value is to respect and protect the
investment that has been made by a property owner and to ensure that the older
land use can continue to operate, can be sold, or can be rebuilt if it were to be
somehow destroyed. Policies and implementing programs are incorporated into
the General Plan to provide this protection.
The simplest solution in dealing with non-conforming uses might appear to be
designating the non-conforming land use with a land use classification that
corresponds to the existing use. The problem is that land use classifications used
in the General Plan are applied to parcels on a city-wide basis. This approach
ensures that the General Plan has a comprehensive series of internally consistent
policies. State law mandates internal consistency between policies and elements.
If an isolated commercial parcel is classified as “commercial” because that has
been the long-standing use of the parcel – and under the new General Plan that
same parcel does not meet the criteria for commercial land uses – an argument
may be generated that parcels surrounding the nonconforming land use should
also be considered commercial.
The provisions of this General Plan related to legally existing non-conforming
land uses are to provide recognition of the established land use and real estate
investment of particular parcels. Provisions similar to this are common among
cities and counties in California.
There are special considerations that must be a part of this protection program
for legally existing non-conforming uses. The use must continuously operate,
and it must operate in conformance with standards that would apply if it were a
                                                                      Land Use Element
                                      3-10              City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

conforming land use. Generally, a limitation is established that if the use is
abandoned for a period of time, usually one year, it loses its ability to continue
by right.
There are existing commercial uses located on lands within the general plan
planning area but outside the city limits. Many of these scattered uses are not
within Commercial Centers or within any other commercial land use designation
in the City’s General Plan. During the process of preparing the 1993 General
Plan, there was concern that, in the event of annexation by the City, such parcels
should have the ability to retain the commercial zoning if the uses have been
developed in conformance with County regulations. The consensus of the City
was that, as noted for non-conforming uses in general within the city limits, the
property owners have made a substantial investment that deserves recognition in
the General Plan. Policies were included in the 1993 General Plan to protect
the existing commercial uses in the event of annexation, but were intended to
prevent additional commercial zoning and uses from being approved in those
areas that are not classified as Commercial Centers. These policies have been
generally retained in the revised General Plan.
2. General Plan Objectives and Programs: Non-      Non-Conforming Land Uses
Goal LU-LU-3:      Protect the property rights of legally-existing non-conforming
                   land uses.
Policy LU-
         LU-3.1: Allow legally-existing non-conforming land uses to continue
                   under the provisions of the General Plan.
                   Implementation Measures:
                   LU-3.1(a): Following the adoption of any change in the
                                General Plan that causes a legally established use or
                                structure to become non-conforming, the City shall
                                allow the use to continue under the provisions of this
                                section.
                   LU-3.1(b): A legally existing non-conforming land use or
                                structure abandoned for a period of twelve
                                consecutive calendar months or longer shall forfeit
                                its status as a legally existing non-conforming land
                                use. After twelve months, the abandoned use shall
                                not be re-established.
                   LU-3.1(c): Agriculture, timber production, and mineral resource
                                production uses are defined as intermittent uses, and
                                shall be entitled to maintain legally-existing non-
                                conforming status provided that the use is not
                                abandoned for more than twenty-four calendar
                                months. After twenty-four months, the abandoned
                                use or structure shall not be re-established.
Land Use Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan            3-11

                 LU-3.1(d): The City’s development code shall incorporate
                             precise provisions for the review, re-permitting and
                             re-establishing of legally-existing non-conforming
                             land uses and structures.
                 LU-3.1(e): Expansion of a legally existing non-conforming land
                             use or structure shall require approval of a
                             conditional use permit prior to the expansion being
                             initiated. Expansion is defined as a measurable
                             increase in structure area, gross floor area,
                             developed lot coverage, or intensity of the land use
                             as measured by measurable increases in noise,
                             traffic, or operations occurring as a result of the
                             expansion. Construction for Americans with
                             Disabilities Act (ADA) and similar actions shall not
                             require a use permit.
Policy LU-
       LU-3.2: Land in the unincorporated planning area with legally existing
                 commercial zoning districts and with legally existing commercial
                 uses shall be permitted to retain the commercial zoning.
                 Implementation Measures:
                 LU-3.2(a): When reviewing proposals for commercial
                             development on lands in the unincorporated area,
                             recognize and support the existing commercial
                             zoning for the commercially-developed parcels.
                 LU-3.2(b): If the County refers an application for new
                             commercial zoning within the Planning Area that
                             adjoins a non-conforming commercial zone, the City
                             shall notify the County that the proposal is not
                             consistent with the City’s General Plan for that area,
                             and indicate that a General Plan amendment must
                             be approved first.
E. Land Use Criteria
1. Background
Land use and development laws have evolved over the years with additional
regulations, legislatively or court-imposed environmental issue considerations,
and the increasingly precarious fiscal ability of local government to continue to
serve its constituents. The major purpose of the Land Use Element of a General
Plan is to combine the written regulatory requirements and policy programs of
the General Plan into a map that identifies where future land uses will occur.
When considering a proposed change of land use designation, the City needs to
evaluate the proposal against several particular criteria. This criteria, including
                                                                       Land Use Element
                                        3-12             City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

basic levels of service, are defined throughout the general plan, but can
generally be summarized as follows:
     •    Infrastructure. Is there sufficient road capacity, water and sewer lines,
          storm drainage, parkland, etc., to meet the anticipated needs of the
          project? Can the project include expansion of some, or all, of the
          infrastructure to ensure that the needs are met? Typical community
          standards are established in the General Plan and in implementation
          documents to help guide these determinations.
     •    Site opportunities and constraints. Can the site support the proposed
          land use? Will significant features such as mature trees, streams,
          wetlands, riparian areas, slope or geologic features be incorporated into
          the design, or substantially altered to provide for the project?
     •    Surrounding land uses and activities. Will the approval of the land use
          designation prohibit or restrict future uses that would be consistent with
          the General Plan? Will uses developed consistent with the plan outside
          of the area proposed for amendment affect development potential of the
          land being considered for change?
     •    Broad Development Pattern. Does the proposed change to the land use
          pattern “fit” within the broader context and plan for the community.
          Wholesale changes to the land use pattern should not be summarily
          rejected if the new plan is both consistent with the goals of the
          community and demonstrably better than the existing plan.
2. Land Use Standards
Land use standards are provided in this General Plan for residential and non-
residential land uses. (See Table 3-   3-1) Two important terms used for land use
standards are 1) building intensity and 2) population density. Building intensity
for residential uses is defined in terms of the number of dwelling units per acre
of gross land area.
Population density on residential lands within the incorporated city limits is
calculated with an average of 2.15 persons per household (based on California
Department of Finance projections for average household population). This
information is used as a means of projecting the potential population that could
exist if parcels were developed to the maximum number of units allowed and if
the families in the dwelling units were typical of the area’s average.
Building intensity standards for non-residential uses are expressed as the amount
of square footage of footprint per acre allowed by the General Plan. The control
over the size of the footprint is called lot coverage. Lot coverage is generally
expressed as a percentage of total area. For example, if the non-residential
density of a 10,000 square foot parcel allows a thirty percent lot coverage, the
largest building footprint permitted would be 3,000 square feet. While there are
more sophisticated and complex methods of measuring building intensity, the lot
coverage basis is simple to calculate and implement. The total size of the
building – including number of stories and total square footage – is controlled
by the zoning code in terms of parking requirements, lot coverage by the
Land Use Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan           3-13

building footprint, setbacks from streets and property lines, and the amount of
landscaped area required.
Architectural guidelines have been identified by the City to guide new
development. These guidelines have been developed as a stand-alone
document and are intended to promote cultural appreciation, economic vitality
and the general welfare of the public through the preservation of the downtown
district and maintenance of district landmarks.
The City of Mt. Shasta has expressed concern with the potential for “big box”
development and building size restrictions. In March 2005, the City adopted an
ordinance (codified as Municipal Code Chapter 18.70) entitled “Size
Restrictions for Large Scale Commercial, Industrial and Multi-family Residential
Facilities.” Among the several purposes cited for adopting the ordinance are the
purposes of breaking up the apparent mass and scale of “large scale” structures
in order to ensure that such structures and development are compatible with the
City’s design principles, ensuring that large scale developments are
harmoniously integrated with their surroundings, and to encourage excellence in
urban design and improvement in overall City appearance.
With some noted exemptions, the size-restriction provisions generally limit the
ultimate size of commercial and multi-family buildings to a maximum GFA
(gross floor area) of 50,000 square feet, and require that a provisional permit
be approved for any commercial, industrial or multi-family building exceeding
20,000 square feet GFA. (“Gross Floor Area” is basically defined as the sum (in
terms of square feet) of the areas of the several floors of the building, including
basements, cellars, mezzanine and intermediate floored tiers and penthouses of
headroom height.)
The primary exemptions are that hospitals, certain public buildings, and
conference or convention facilities may exceed 50,000 square feet GFA, subject
to approval of a provisional permit, which is required if such structures are
proposed to be larger than 20,000 square feet.
The size-restriction provisions established criteria, including site and building
design standards, to be used by the City for evaluation of applications for
provisional permits. For example, the development is to be compatible with the
uses in the general vicinity and harmoniously integrated with its surroundings,
and architecture and site design of the development must meet the architectural
design and site planning standards of the Design Manual.
Two particular provisions of the code section are that a traffic impact analysis
prepared by a licensed traffic engineer is required for commercial and industrial
structures and for “large scale” development that requires a provisional permit,
and an economic impact analysis shall be conducted for any retail use with a
gross floor area of 20,000 square feet or larger.
Additional land use standards are addressed in this General Plan and in the
City’s Municipal Code.
                                                                      Land Use Element
                                       3-14             City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

F. Resource Land Use
1. Background
Lands within and outside the city limits having the Resource Land Use (RL)
classification are indicated on Figure 3-     3-1, General Plan Land Use Map:
Planning Area and Figure 3-     3-2, General Plan Land Use Map - Detail, City of Mt.
Shasta. Resource Lands are generally endowed with geologic characteristics and
soil types that support or could support commercial and economically-viable
resource uses. Resource Lands may also contain a variety of natural resources
including wildlife habitat, watershed functions, and scenic resources.
The only Resource Land Use site recognized within the city limits is the Sousa
Ready Mix aggregate mine at the north end of the Spring Hill area. The principal
natural resource economic uses that are found in the Mt. Shasta planning area
include: timber production (silviculture, management, harvest and production of
timber resources); agribusiness (the management of orchards, vineyards, row
crops or livestock/poultry production); and mineral resource production (the
extraction and processing of construction material or precious metals. The
bottling of water may also be considered a resource use, although the bottling
plant itself may be considered an “Employment Center” land use.
Resource Land is one of two classifications in this general plan that includes
“open space” land (the other classification being “Public Land”). This category
includes both public and private open space that is used for natural resource
management, natural habitat, recreation, and protection of scenic viewsheds.
Privately-owned Resource Lands are not considered to be permanent “Open
Space”, although some RL lands may appear to serve that purpose due to the
lack of visible or developed use of the property. The Plan does not use the Open
Space classification for lands that may be used for resource purposes in order to
avoid future conflicts over the definition of whether open space lands may be
“developed” with timber harvest, mining or other resource uses.
2. Siting Criteria
To be classified as Resource Land, a parcel must satisfy criteria for its
designation. This may include a proposal to use that land for a resource use
such as timber harvesting, agribusiness or mineral resource production, or it
may be based on findings from the Open Space/Conservation Element.
Traditionally, lands are not usually changed from an urban-type use designation
to a Resource Land Use designation. Usually the requests are to shift the lands
from Resource Land to a more “urban” development classification (e.g.,
residential).
Natural resources generally cannot be moved or directed to alternate sites. For
example, mineral resources are located on the lands that have appropriate
geologic substrata and minerals available for economic extraction. Timberlands
are much the same way; the land must have commercial-grade timber available
for harvest, and/or have site characteristics conducive to producing commercial
quantities of timber.
Land Use Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan          3-15

There is further discussion about the various types of natural resources in the
planning area and policies applicable to them in the Open Space/Conservation
Element.
Element
G. Residential Land Use
1. Background
Residential development within Mt. Shasta historically took place adjacent to the
commercial district along Main Street. Older residential neighborhoods extend
along and off of Mt. Shasta Boulevard. Homes outside of town were primarily
associated with farms and other agricultural uses. During the post-war period,
houses were increasingly built in outlying areas. Since the 1970’s, substantial
low-density residential development has occurred outside the city limits.
Traditionally in rural communities, residential development follows urban-style
development patterns. Smaller parcels and higher density development is
located closest to the center of the City, outlying parcels tend to increase in size.
Exceptions may occur with multiple-family residential parcels located on main
roads but outside the central areas of town. This takes place because multi-
family developments require larger land areas than typically remain available in
the central portions of town. Mt. Shasta follows this pattern.
Residential ownership opportunities in the area are changing with the economy.
Conventional wisdom has looked at housing in the area as being primarily
“single-family residential.” Effectively, with today’s construction techniques, the
cost of land and facilities and other construction features, it is possible to offer
home ownership with the units being attached – such as a town home or
condominium unit – or detached, such as a conventional single-family home.
Other types of detached housing are also possible. For example, a parcel that
may have areas delineated as a wetland could maintain the same land use
density by clustering detached housing units on smaller parcels (three to four
thousand square feet instead of six to seven thousand square feet, as an
example), and preserving the wetland area as open space. Traditional zoning
codes often make this a complex process, but “planned development” zoning
can creatively accommodate this type of development.
Historically, the downtown area of the City included more residential use than it
currently has. Along with downtown commercial uses, there is increasing interest
in having mixed-use residential development for a more traditional downtown
community mix. In some communities, such an expansion of residential
development has helped to revitalize the downtown area.
High-
High-Density Residential Development
High Density or multi-family residential developments within the planning area
include some older projects, which tend to contain a small number of units as
well as newer, larger-volume development. Rezoning of the Central Business
District (CBD) fringe for higher density residential development has led to
numerous smaller multi-family projects. Substantially larger and newer multi-
family developments are located to the west of the CBD.
                                                                       Land Use Element
                                        3-16             City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

Criteria used for siting urban-density residential development primarily focuses
on the availability and capacity of public facilities to serve the property with
adequate street access, domestic water and removal of wastewater, and the
compatibility of higher-density development with surrounding land uses.
Additional considerations that can result in changes in the maximum density may
also include the potential for flooding or inundation, the delineation of
wetlands, and the location of noise contours along highways and railroad
tracks.
Medium-
Medium-Density Residential Development
Medium-density single-family residential development has occurred in the Mt.
Shasta area during different periods. Originally, single-family residential
development took place adjacent to the commercial district along Main Street.
Older single-family residential neighborhoods still flank Mt. Shasta Blvd. through
most of the town. During the post-war period, housing was developed in the
outlying area extending westward, such as along Caroline and Carmen Streets
and Kenneth Way.
Medium-Density Residential development is the classification that is used for
land that is best suited for conventional detached single-family residential
development on individual parcels of land. While it is anticipated that most
Medium-Density Residential development will occur in traditional single-family
detached housing patterns, the use of clustering may be permitted. Clustering
permits the use of smaller-than-average home lots in exchange for creation of
more open space, thereby maintaining the same overall average density per
acre.
Land Use Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan       3-17

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Planning Area Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                          I-5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Interstate 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Railroad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Commercial Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Employment Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mixed Use-Planned Development
                                                                                                                                                                                                                High Density Residential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Medium Density Residential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Low Density Residential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Rural Residential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Resource Lands
                                                                        GH
                                                                     RIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Public Land and Parks
                                                          Z
                                                                  SP
                                                              I-5      I LL
                             Un                                          DRIVE                                                                                                                                  Proposed Park (conceptual location)
                               ion Pa
                                        cific Railro
                                                    ad
                                                                                                                                                          RI T
                                                                                                                                                      EV E
                                                                                                                                                            EMO
                                                                                                                                                          TM
                                                                                                                                                                    L HW
                                                                                                                                                                 RIA
                                                                                                                                                                       Y
                                                                                                                                                                         d
                                                                                                                                            dR         ailroa
                                                                                                                                     McClou
                                                                  D
                                                         NORTH OL
                                                                              LASSEN LN                                                                      ROCKFELLOW DR
                                                                                                                                        ST
                                                                     E
                                                                  AG
                                                                                                                                                                       WASHINGTON STREET
                                                                                                                                  IV
                                                                ST                                                                   Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                JEFFERSON DR
                                                                                                                            CH                 ST
                                                                      RD
                                                                                                                                                                                               ADAMS DR
                                                                                                                                ES           M
                                                                                                                                 TN           A
                                                                                                                   PI                UT   AL
                                                                                                                      NE                ST
                                                                                                                           ST                  ST
                                                                                                                                                 RE
                                                                                                                                                    ET
                                                                                                                                                                                           MCCLOUD AVE
                                                                                                                   Z
                                                                                                                                    E
                                                                                                                                L AK
                                                                                                                   I-5
                                                                                                                                                                  TA
                                                                                                     TH                                                        AS
                                                                                                 SO U                                                       SH
                                                                                                                                                          T
                                                                                                     OL
                                                                                                                                                       UN
                                                                                                       D
                                                                                                             ST
                                                                                                               AG
                                                                                                                                               SOUTH MOREAM AVE
                                                                                                                  E   RD
                                                                                                              RR
                                                                                                                                                                   BOULEVARD
                                                                                                      W.A. BA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  OLD M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CCLOU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           D   AVE
                                                                                                          RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HWY 89
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                89
                                                                       Lake
                                                                          Siskiyou                                                                                                                                     Z       I-5
     N
0        .5    1
                   Mile
Source: City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       FIGURE 3-1
                                                                                          3-18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GENERAL PLAN LAND USE MAP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PLANNING AREA

T:\_GIS\SISKIYOU_COUNTY\MXDS\MTSHASTA\GENERAL_PLAN_2008_PROPOSED.MXD - 7/22/2008 @ 3:04:52 PM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Proposed Park (Conceptual Location)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Parcel Boundaries
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Proposed General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LDR Low Density Residential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MDR Medium Density Residential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 HDR High Density Residential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CC Commercial Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 EC Employment Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MU-PD Mixed Use - Planned Development
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PLP Public Land and Parks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RL Resource Lands
                                                                                                                                           NG
                                                                                                                                        RI
                                                                                                                                     SP
                                                                                                                                           HI L
                                                                                                                                                L
                                                                                                                                                DR
                                                                                                                                                               NI X
                                                                                                                                                                 O
                                                                                                                                                                      NR
                                                                                                                                                                           D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CARMEN AVE   CAROLINE AVE   SKI BOWL DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            E IVY ST                                             ROCKFELLOW DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       JEFFERSON DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   VD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             M
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ST              AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ADAMS DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                        T
                                                                                                                                                                                                     U        TA                                                          R
                                                                                                                                                                                                   TN                     ER                                             D
                                                                                                                                                                                     ST                    AS            D                                           E
                                                                                                                                                                                                ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AL                                       K
                                                                                                                                                                                         ST             SH
                                                                                                                                                                                   E
                                                                                                                                                                               PI
                                                                                                                                                                                  N
                                                                                                                                                                                               H                                                            LA
                                                                                                                                                                                      AR      C       T                                  ST
                                                                                                                                                                                    ED              M
                                                                                                                                                                                   C             S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            OREM ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MCCLOUD AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                               WATER ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MILL ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       WASHINGTON DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            IDA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SOUTH A ST        SOUTH B ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                               SISSON ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       REAM AVE      K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  OA
                                                                                                                                                                  Co ld
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ST                                                   D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VIE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             M
                                                                                                                                                     Bro wns          Cre e
                                                                                                                                                      Lake
                                                                                                                                                                       k
                                                                                                                                     Wa
                                                                                                                                          gon Ck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CHURCH STREET
                                                                                                                  Lake
                                                                                                                               Siskiyou
                                                                                                Source: Siskiyou County, PMC
                                               1,000                                                       0        1,000                                                                                                                                                                                                                 City of Mt. Shasta, CA
                                                                                                         FEET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Proposed General Plan 2008

Low-
Low-Density Residential Development
Low-Density Residential development consists of single-family housing that is
located on larger parcels. As in other rural areas of California, Mt. Shasta
experienced expansion of Low-Density Residential development starting in the
1970’s. Substantial new Low-Density Residential development has taken place
outside the City limits, notably west of Interstate 5 and in the area east of the
City. This included the re-subdivision of the Adams/Jefferson neighborhood
within the City and, outside the City, development of Monte Shasta, Shasta
Uplands, Sun Mountain Subdivision and numerous other subdivisions north of
Lassen Lane. Some Low-Density Residential development in the area is occurring
upon hillsides surrounding the City.
An issue related to Low-Density Residential development is the case that most of
this type of development outside the City utilizes septic tanks and individual
wells. The County Health Department has established a minimum parcel size of
2.5 acres for such parcels.
2. Residential Development Trends
During preparation of the City of Mt. Shasta General Plan Housing Element:
2003-2008 (as revised in 2005), analysis was made of the City’s growth trends
and housing needs. Because of the relationship of housing issues to land use,
the following observations from the Housing Element are included here and
have been considered in the context of the Land Use Element.
     •   Population could increase by 222 persons during the planning period
         [2003-2008], based on a growth rate of 1.0 percent, which is double
         that of the last decade.
                          Table 3-2
                          City of Mt. Shasta
                          Growth Trends
                            Year        Population        Gain          Annual Percent
                                                                            Increase
                            1960          1,936            ----                 ----
                            1970          2,256            320                 1.6%
                            1980          2,837            581                 2.3%
                            1990          3,460            623                 2.0%
                            2000          3,621            161                 .47%
                           Source: U.S. Bureau of Census, as referenced in City of Mt. Shasta
                           Housing Element: 2003-2008.
     •   Based on consideration of the City’s growth trends and projections
         made by the California Department of Housing and Community
Land Use Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan             3-20

         Development (referred to as the “Regional Share Housing Demand
         Allocation”), the Housing Element concluded that the City of Mt. Shasta
         should plan for and facilitate the construction of 135 housing units in
         the period of 2004 to 2008.
     •   In considering what has been proposed as the City’s “regional share
         allocation” of housing for various income groups for a term of 2001 to
         2008, the Housing Element reported that, of a total of 176 housing
         units, the distribution should be: Very Low Income – 43 units (24
         percent); Other Low Income – 32 units (18 percent); Moderate Income –
         30 units (17 percent); Above Moderate Income – 71 units (40 percent).
     •   Since the 2000 Census, the cost of housing has escalated, limiting
         housing opportunities for the “very low” and ”low” income households.
         Rising costs have even resulted in making housing virtually unaffordable
         in Mt. Shasta for “moderate” income households.
In terms of the availability of land for housing, the Mt. Shasta Housing Element
found that adequate land with appropriate zoning and land use designations is
generally available to meet local housing needs. An inventory of vacant land
prepared for and included in the housing element estimated that there are
approximately 971 acres of vacant land within the current boundaries of the
City. Of this area, approximately 271 acres are “residential” land, allowing
residential development “by right”. As many as 1,474 units could be built on
land that is already zoned for residential use, and 48 percent, or 715 units,
could be built on land zoned for multi-family use. Additional housing could be
built on land that is zoned for commercial uses with approval of conditional use
permits. However, many of these residential development opportunities are
constrained by limitations in the capacity of various elements of the community’s
infrastructure, primarily the City’s wastewater collection system.
3. Affordable Housing and Related General Plan Proposals
As noted above, one of the major issues in the City of Mt. Shasta concerning
residential land use is the affordability of housing. The high cost of housing is
both a social and economic issue. Young families and people in the low to
moderate-income groups find it extremely difficult to purchase an affordable
home in or near the City. Economically, the fact that many workers cannot
afford to live in the area is a constraint to businesses wishing to locate or
expand in the area. Commute distances increase as workers must drive into the
area from communities where housing is more affordable.
Concerning the issue of housing affordability and related proposals involving the
General Plan Land Use Element, the following discussion is offered in summary
of the Affordable Housing Strategy that was completed in 2005 for the City of
Mt. Shasta.
                                                                        Land Use Element
                                       3-21               City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

In 2004, the City retained a housing consultant, Bay Area Economics (BAE),
teamed with Indigo Architects, to complete tasks concerning affordable housing
in Mt. Shasta. The project was financed by Community Development Block
Grant funds. The primary tasks of the project were to:
     •    Analyze resident and workforce housing needs, culminating with a
          Housing Needs Assessment and Market Analysis;
     •    Conduct an affordable housing workshop with related community
          outreach;
     •    Evaluate available vacant land in and around Mt. Shasta to identify
          opportunity sites best suited for affordable housing; and
     •    Prepare a preliminary site concept plan and financing analysis
          concerning projects to purchase land and construct affordable housing.
The study resulted in recommendations that were presented to the Mt. Shasta
City Council in May 2005. A stated purpose of the memorandum from BAE,
dated May 18, 2005, which included “Affordable Housing Strategy
Implementation Recommendations”, was to recommend implementation steps to
facilitate affordable housing development. Some of the recommendations
concern general plan and zoning issues. These land use issues are summarized
below:
     a. Eliminate discrepancies between allowed unit density and traffic
          generation limits. Currently, traffic circulation standards limit allowed
          densities on parcels adjacent to smaller collector streets.
     b. Increase allowed unit densities in the High-Density Residential Zone.
          Increase the allowed density to up to 20 dwelling units per acre in the
          high-density zone.
     c. Reduce site development standards for high-density residential zones.
          Some of the City’s site development standards are more suburban in
          character than existing neighborhoods in the City. To facilitate more
          affordable housing, the City may wish to reduce set-back and parking
          requirements on properties designated high-density residential.
     d. Review the current supply of vacant commercial and industrial land for
          possible rezoning opportunities. Considering the ample supply of
          commercial and industrial land in Mt. Shasta, the City may wish to
          consider options to rezone portions of commercially and industrially
          zoned property to allow residential uses. Some sites could be designated
          for mixed-use to offer greater flexibility in land uses.
     e. Continue to expand sewer and water infrastructure.
Land Use Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan          3-22

     f.   Prepare a program-level environmental impact report for the housing
          development strategy. Rather than handle each rezoning and annexation
          action concerning affordable housing as a single project with its own
          environmental review, the City should package all of the actions (e.g.,
          for the three initially targeted sites described below) as a single project
          with its own environmental review.
In addition to the more general recommendations just described, the Affordable
Housing Strategy Report provided a series of recommendations for each of three
prioritized housing development sites. The three sites were: 1) The Orchard
Property; 2) The Radio Tower Property; and 3) The Former Southern Pacific
Property (AKA, Bob Hammond Property). The following comments are generally
limited to issues related to the general plan, zoning code or need for
annexation. The Affordable Housing Strategy also outlined recommendations
concerning design issues, financing and the programmatic development of
housing projects on these sites.
     Orchard Property. Includes approximately 2.73 acres of “developable” land.
     The Orchard Property is owned by the City of Mt. Shasta but is located
     outside the city limits. The study recommended designating the property
     “high density residential” through the general plan process, and initiation of
     the annexation process.
     Radio Tower Property. Includes approximately 2.8 developable acres. Need
     to alleviate the traffic standards that prevent the maximum allowable density
     at the site. Reduce front setback and parking standards to increase the total
     unit production potential at the site.
     Former Southern Pacific Property. Approximately 3.15 acres in size with 2.19
     acres “available for development”. Recommended to designate the property
     for high-density residential development in the general plan and reduce site
     development standards to allow for maximum unit production on the site.
Bay Area Economics (BAE) recognized additional sites in Mt. Shasta that had
various opportunities for the development of affordable housing. For various
reasons, these sites were not considered further in the recommended Affordable
Housing Strategy. That does not imply, however, that other sites do not also
offer opportunities for the provision of needed housing.
4. Land Use Element Relationship to Housing Element Element
Although all General Plan elements need to be internally consistent, the land
use element has a special relationship with the housing element. Among the
many content requirements for housing elements (outlined in California
Government Code Section 65583) is an inventory of land suitable for residential
development, including vacant sites and sites having potential for
redevelopment, and an analysis of the relationship of zoning and public facilities
and services to these sites, and an analysis of potential and actual governmental
                                                                         Land Use Element
                                         3-23              City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

constraints on the maintenance, improvement and development of housing.
Furthermore, among other requirements, housing elements need to include a
program that sets forth a five-year schedule of actions that the local government
is undertaking or intends to undertake to implement the policies and achieve the
goals and objectives of the housing element through the administration of land
use and development controls, etc.
In May 2005, the Mt. Shasta City Council approved a revision of the City of Mt.
Shasta Housing Element: 2003-2008. Housing elements are typically updated
every five years. Although this land use element will refer to the City’s latest
adopted housing element, it is expected that the City will update its housing
element at least once during the proposed term of this land use element.
Therefore, the excerpts listed below may become obsolete or will be otherwise
revised.
The following excerpts from the 2005 Housing Element are emphasized here
because of the close relationship of these objectives and policies to issues
addressed in the City’s Land Use Element. Of special concern are objectives and
policies in the housing element that may necessitate corresponding policies or
implementation measures in the land use element and/or related sections of the
Development Code. It is also necessary to insure that land use element policies
that have been carried over from the 1993 General Plan are not now
inconsistent with the latest housing element. Foremost among these, in this
context, are:
         Objective HO-
                     HO-12: Maintain compliance with Housing Element law and
         consistency between the Housing Element and General Plan elements at
         all times.
         Program HO-HO-12.2 The Housing Element shall be reviewed annually to
         incorporate projected census data and any new provisions of applicable
         state codes as appropriate. Consistency of the proposed new Element
         versus other existing General Plan elements shall be reviewed prior to
         adoption.
Other pertinent objectives and policies selected from the City of Mt. Shasta
Housing Element: 2003-2008 are cited in Table 3-  3-3.
Land Use Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan       3-24

Table 3-3
Mt. Shasta Housing Element
Selected Housing Element Objectives, Policies and Programs
Policy HO-
         HO-1.6: Ensure that adequate sites, served or readily able to be served by City
utilities and services, are available to support projected housing needs over the planning
period.
Objective HO-
            HO-2: Encourage construction of approximately 135 new housing units
(including single family as well as multi-family) over the five-year implementation period
(2004-2008): the135 units will be needed to meet needs generated by population
growth and the City’s share of the Regional Housing Demand.
Program HO-HO-2.1:
                2.1 The Land Use Element designates adequate land to support identified
housing construction needs. Appropriate zoning shall be maintained or applied to these
lands to ensure availability for development during the planning period.
Program HO-HO-2.4:
                2.4 Prior to adoption of any policy or regulation which could significantly
impede the development of housing, the Planning Commission and City Council will
consider the adverse effects of the policy or regulation on the City’s ability to provide
housing; and minimize to the degree feasible adverse effects.
Program HO-HO-2.5: With all due financial consideration and consistent with other General
Plan policies, encourage, participate and cooperate in extension of City services to
currently unserved areas, including direct financial participation when deemed
appropriate by the City Council.
Program HO- HO-2.6:
                2.6 The City will not place any condition on approval of a residential
project (which lowers the proposed density) if the project otherwise conforms to the
General Plan, zoning and or development policies in effect, unless the findings required
by Government Code Section 65589.5 are made.
Program HO- HO-2.7: The City Zoning Ordinance allows residential uses within the CBD
[Central Business District] on second floors and above in commercial structures.
Encouragement of this concept will continue as a means to provide additional
affordable and convenient housing.
Program HO-HO-3.3:
                3.3 A 25% density bonus shall be granted to qualifying projects, pursuant
to Government Code 65915. The zoning ordinance shall be updated to address density
bonuses pursuant to the Government Code.
Program HO-HO-3.8: During the General Plan update the City will identify additional lands
which could be suitable for higher density, affordable housing density, and/or areas
where multi-family housing densities could be increased.
Program HO- HO-4.2:
                 4.2 The City will continue to review its planning, permitting and
environmental review programs to identify any potential constraints to housing
development and means by which those constraints may be reduced.
Program HO- HO-4.3:
                4.3 The City, during the update of its General Plan, will modify the
residential density limitations related to street classification to be consistent with the
densities allowed by the Zoning Ordinance.
Objective HO-
            HO-6: Over the planning period (2004-2008), support preparation for
development of adequate building sites for a minimum of 135 dwelling units.
Program HO-HO-6.1:
                6.1 Subject to availability of funding, the City will work with developers of
                                                                              Land Use Element
                                           3-25                 City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

housing located outside existing sewer and/or water service areas, or in areas where
existing systems are at or near capacity, to develop or improve essential utility systems to
facilitate housing development. City assistance may involve direct participation in
improvements or cooperation in the formation of assessment districts or other means of
financing necessary improvements.
Program HO- HO-6.2:
                  6.2 The City will continue to develop and implement plans to expand
domestic water and sewage collection and treatment systems such that planned
development over the General Plan 20-year time frame can be accommodated.
Housing construction goals identified in Objective HO-6 can be achieved without
expansion of existing facilities.
Program HO- HO-7.1: In rezoning, permit or other discretionary decisions, the City shall
consider the potential effects of the decision on affordable housing, particularly for low
and moderate-income households.
Program HO- HO-10-
                 10-.2: The zoning ordinance should be amended to specifically address
group homes of 6 or less persons and 7 and more persons. The definition of group
home shall include homeless shelters, transient housing as well as other group housing
accommodations considered to be residential uses by the State Government Code.
Source: City of Mt. Shasta General Plan Housing Element: 2003-2008, (Revised, May 2005).
5. Residential Use Siting Criteria
Population Density
                Density and Building Intensity
Table 3-1 shows the maximum allowable densities for Residential Lands. Other
factors, in addition to or in combination with criteria on Table 3-1, that may
affect the allowable maximum density on a site-specific basis include: proximity
to streams; resource lands; and natural features on the property such as
wetlands or slopes.
Density Transfer
The concept of density transfer as used in the Mt. Shasta General Plan is similar
to the concept of “density averaging”. A simple use of the density transfer
provision would allow a property owner to create a variety of different types of
subdivisions. For example, if a low-density residential density was one unit per
five acres, the maps could depict four five-acre parcels, or three 2½-acre
parcels and one 12½-acre parcel, or other combinations of not more than four
parcels. The parcel sizes and dimensions would, however, also need to conform
to related building, land development, and health codes.
A more traditional type of density transfer involves the construction of a planned
unit development or “cluster” residential project. In this scenario, the density is
transferred to townhomes or patio homes and the remaining land area is
retained in joint tenancy or by a homeowners association. The density transfer
concept encourages and simplifies clustering of homes in conformance with the
land development code and other implementing programs.
Land Use Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                  3-26

Density transfer mechanisms may be used at the City’s discretion. The Planning
Commission and City Council will need to assess the effects of density transfer
proposals on the existing characteristics of a neighborhood. In an area, for
example, where there is a predominance of traditional single-family homes on
suburban- or estate-sized lots, allowing attached housing under a density
transfer concept may not be found to be compatible with the character of the
established neighborhood.
6. General Plan Objectives and Programs: Residential Land Use
Goal LU-
      LU-4:       Provide opportunities for a broad variety of housing types.
Policy LU-
       LU-4.1:
           4.1:   Facilitate the development of housing in a logical pattern.
                  Implementation Measures:
                                    Measures:
                  LU-4.1(a): Permit higher densities in conformance with the
                               requirements of population density and building
                               intensity reflected in Table 3-1, Land       Land Use
                               Designations and Development Standards, in
                               areas with adequate City services and roads.
                  LU-4.1(b): Preclude urban density residential development in
                               the unincorporated planning area.
Goal LU-
      LU-5:       Facilitate the use of clustering to encourage creative site
                  planning resulting in open space areas as a part of new
                  development.
Policy LU-
       LU-5.1:
          5.1:    Allow onsite density transfer to accommodate clustered
                  development resulting in open space areas as a part of new
                  development.
                 Implementation Measures:
                                   Measures:
                  LU-5.1(a): Allow for onsite density transfer as a part of the
                               subdivision process.
                  LU-5.1(b): Density transfer shall be at the discretion of the
                               City. The development code shall include
                               requirements for Planning Commission approval of
                               density transfer projects and of the size of parcels
                               or other design features of the density transfer
                               project.
                                                                       Land Use Element
                                      3-27               City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

H. Commercial Land Use
1. Background
Mt. Shasta’s commercial core was originally developed along and oriented to
the Southern Pacific Railroad. As U.S. 99 (now Mt. Shasta Boulevard) was
improved, the town extended along the highway alignment. Since the
completion of Interstate 5, commercial areas have also extended westward from
Mt. Shasta Boulevard toward the freeway. Due to the growth of tourism as an
industry, commercial development in Mt. Shasta and the types of businesses that
locate here are largely focused on the tourist/visitor market. However, the
Central Business District has also expanded as a service center for residents and
businesses in south Siskiyou County.
Central Business District – Downtown: The distinctive downtown area of Mt.
Shasta centers around the intersection of Mt. Shasta Boulevard and Lake Street.
Improvements to Chestnut Street have encouraged more interest in expanding
the central business district. The stores in this area are largely representative of a
traditional downtown, providing goods and services to both residents and
visitors to the area. As noted in the discussion of residential uses, historically the
downtown area included more residential use than it currently has. Along with
downtown commercial uses, there is increasing interest in having additional
residential development for a more traditional downtown community mix. In
some communities, such an expansion of residential development has helped to
revitalize commercial activity in the downtown area.
North and South Mt. Shasta Boulevard: Mt. Shasta Boulevard, in its former role
as Highway 99 prior to completion of Interstate 5, once provided the major
north-south transportation link through the area. Commercial development
extended along the highway from the downtown area. This strip development
was less intensive than that found in the downtown and was primarily oriented
toward automobile-related commerce. Many of the areas motels, restaurants
and auto-oriented businesses are still found along these two stretches of the old
highway to the north and south of downtown, although the north side tends to
be more “heavy commercial” in character.
West Lake Street: Commercial development in Mt. Shasta has occurred along
West Lake Street, which was extended west to meet Interstate 5 shortly after
completion of the freeway. Commercial development in this area largely serves
the needs of freeway travelers as well as local residents with gas stations, fast
food restaurants, and other businesses. Two shopping centers are located off of
West Lake Street.
Other Commercial development: Other commercial development exists in the
planning area, providing convenience shopping and services to local residents
and visitors. One distinct area is outside the city limits at the far south end of
South Mt. Shasta Boulevard. Other commercial uses are scattered throughout
the planning area (e.g., Lassen Lane, the Mount Shasta Resort).
Land Use Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan         3-28

2. Commercial Use Siting Criteria
In the past, communities such as Mt. Shasta have developed a number of
classifications for commercial land uses. Sometimes the uses were separated
with broad nomenclature like “General Commercial” or “Regional
Commercial.” Other classifications were created for “Neighborhood
Commercial,” “Retail Commercial,” “Office Commercial,” “Visitor Commercial”
or similar titles. In small communities, the distinction between one commercial
classification over another is often blurred.
The Mt. Shasta General Plan identifies most commercial land use sites in
general under the designation of “Commercial Center”. Performance standards
related to Commercial Center land uses are reflected in the General Plan
Objectives and Programs below, which establish the goals and policies for
commercial land uses. In addition to the criteria in Table 3-1, Land Use
Designations and Development Standards, and the implementing programs of
this Land Use Element, site-specific factors related to available services and
adjoining land uses may have an effect on the building intensity of commercial
uses allowed by the Plan. Three important factors for locating commercial uses
are the three A’s - access, available services and adjoining uses.
Access: As a location issue, access is based on the types of streets that will bring
customer traffic to a business. Generally, businesses that must draw customers
into the store for their ongoing success prefer sites located on streets with high
traffic volume. The greater the need for customer traffic, the more important it
becomes to site Commercial Center land uses on streets capable of safely
handling commercial traffic volume. Adequate parking is also an important
factor concerning access.
Available Services: From several perspectives, available services are a location
factor. Many Commercial Center land uses require larger water and sewerline
capacities and demand more electricity and phone service than residential
development. Depending on the nature of the business, the size of the services
needed may have an effect on where that business can locate. If one or more
services are not available in the size or quantity required, the business may incur
additional costs to extend the service to the site. This can add substantially to the
capital cost of starting a business or constructing a commercial building.
The availability of services has another impact on a business’ site. If a service
line has to be extended past undeveloped parcels or non-commercial uses to
reach the selected building site, the entrepreneur may be required to pay for
excess capacity in the utility extension. Generally, the person requiring the
extension pays for the construction cost, including excess capacity, and is then
reimbursed for the extra costs as other development occurs. This extra cost at the
time of construction can add a burden to the business in terms of the amount of
rent paid, funds mortgaged, or the long-term cost of doing business.
                                                                        Land Use Element
                                       3-29               City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

Adjoining Uses: The types of land uses adjoining a Commercial Center parcel
can have an impact on the basis of land use compatibility. One type of
business, such as a small medical office, may be able to blend visually with
adjoining residences. However, the use may not be compatible if the office will
be large enough to generate more traffic than is usually found in or near a
residential neighborhood. A business that tends to be open late at night or early
in the morning may not be compatible in a location near residences, but might
be appropriately sited at a street intersection with fewer houses around.
As discussed above under general land use standards, the City has expressed
concern with the potential for “big box” commercial structures and large
structures in general. In March 2005, the City adopted provisions whereby
special review and permitting procedures are required for the proposed siting of
buildings exceeding 20,000 square feet and limits the maximum size of
commercial buildings to 50,000 square feet of gross floor area. Two particular
provisions are that a traffic impact analysis prepared by a licensed traffic
engineer is required for commercial and industrial structures and for “large
scale” development that requires a provisional permit, and an economic impact
analysis shall be conducted for any retail use with a gross floor area of 20,000
square feet or larger.
As proposed in the 1993 General Plan, rather than trying to use formal and
specific business categories to classify commercial land use locations, the
classification of commercial uses in the Mt. Shasta General Plan remains
general with broad standards to define where commercial land uses can be
located. Implementing tools such as the land development code, revised as
needed, define what intensity of commercial uses can go in at certain locations.
3. General Plan Objectives and Programs: Commercial Land Use
Goal LU-
       LU-6:        Encourage customer-oriented businesses in Commercial
                    Center areas.
Policy LU-
        LU-6.1:
            6.1:    Identify lands    that   are  suitable  for  customer-oriented
                    businesses.
                    Implementation Measures:
                    LU-6.1(a): Commercial Center lands shall typically derive
                                access from a road classified as an arterial or
                                collector.
                    LU-6.1(b): Commercial Center lands shall have access to a
                                public water supply and public sewage disposal
                                system.
Land Use Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan         3-30

               LU-6.1(c): Amend the land development code to establish
                          performance criteria that will assist in the siting of
                          Commercial Center land uses. Include within the
                          amended code standards for the following:
                          •    Intensity of business and types of land uses
                               based on the relationship of the volume of
                               traffic and type of vehicles associated with the
                               proposed uses.
                          •    Intensity of business and types of land uses
                               based on the existing and proposed land use
                               classifications that adjoin the commercial
                               parcel.
                          •    General definitions to separate those
                               businesses by market and customer segments
                               from areas within the city.
Goal LU-
      LU-7:    Support the economic viability and success of downtown Mt.
               Shasta.
Policy LU-
       LU-7.1:
          7.1: Encourage an attractive downtown business center.
               Implementation Measures:
               LU-7.1(a): Incorporate beautification and design standards
                          for new construction and exterior remodeling for
                          downtown businesses.
               LU-7.1(b): Continue supporting the Beautification Committee
                          in its efforts to establish a program to enhance the
                          attractiveness of the Mt. Shasta area.
Policy LU-
       LU-7.2:
          7.2: Support economic growth in the downtown area.
               Implementation Measures:
               LU-7.2(a): When reviewing proposed projects involving
                          construction of Commercial Center facilities of
                          more than twenty thousand square feet, ensure
                          that there is an economic impact analysis provided
                          as a part of the project review.
               LU-7.2(b): Ensure that alternative sites in the Downtown area
                          are considered prior to approving major
                          commercial center development that may draw
                                                                     Land Use Element
                                  3-31                 City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                                traffic and customers away from the central
                                business district.
Policy LU-
         LU-7.3: To help expand vitality downtown, support residential
                    development in the downtown area in a compatible mix with
                    commercial uses.
                    Implementation Measure:
                                      Measure:
                    LU-7.3(a): Revise the development code to support residential
                                uses in the downtown area when appropriate
                                parking and development standards can be met.
I.   Employment Center Land Use
1. Background
The timber industry, agriculture and rail transportation were early and important
mainstays of the Mt. Shasta area economy. However, commercial agriculture in
the area has declined and, after the 1950- to 1970-boom years, the timber
industry operates at a lower production level and is not expected to substantially
increase in activity. Where once there had been two major mills in the planning
area, there are now none. Major growth in locally-based railroad operations is
not expected either.
Today the area’s economy is largely based on providing goods and service to
residents and visitors to the Mt. Shasta area. According to the 2000 Census
figures, retail trade and services provided 29 percent of the City’s employment.
Manufacturing employed four percent and transportation and public utilities
employed five percent. Among the largest sectors are government, which
employed 20 percent, and education and health services which employed 26
percent of the resident population. Future economic growth in the area is
expected to be strongest in areas associated with recreational development and
tourism. The prospects for expansion of tourism development are expected to
stimulate related economic growth. The aesthetic and recreational amenities of
the Mt. Shasta area will continue to attract new residents needing goods and
services. Some businesses will relocate to the area largely because of the
amenities offered by living in Mt. Shasta.
One category of recent employment growth in south Siskiyou County has been
in the industry of bottled spring water. In the planning area, the Danone Waters
of North America water bottling plant began operation in April 2001. The plant
is located on Ski Village Drive, just outside the city limits on the site of an old
sawmill. The ownership became CCDA Waters, LLC, in July 2002 when Danone
entered into a joint venture with the Coca-Cola Corporation. The partnership is
credited for bringing increased production to the plant and more employment
opportunities at the facility.
Land Use Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan         3-32

Another significant development in terms of Employment Center land use has
been the closure of the Roseburg Forest Products mill, which was located just
south of the City limits, and the acquisition of the mill site by the City of Mt.
Shasta. The Roseburg property, (much of which is also known as the Roseburg
Commerce Park), was deeded to the City of Mt. Shasta by Roseburg Forest
Products in 1989 after closure of the mill. The City’s 1993 General Plan
designated much of the property for Employment Center land use and portions
of the property along South Mt. Shasta Boulevard were designated for
Commercial Center land use. In 1998, the City adopted a development plan for
the Roseburg Commerce Park, annexed the property into the city limits and
zoned the property for “Planned Unit Development” to allow for a variety of
commercial and light industrial uses. A park area was designated around the
old mill pond at the northern end of the site. An Environmental Impact Report
was prepared for the Roseburg Commerce Park Development Plan.
Development of the Roseburg Commerce Park has been recognized by the City
and regional economic development agencies as a high-priority project for
economic development and job creation. The City has also shown interest in
allowing use of portions of the property for residential development. The 2007
General Plan proposes to change the land use designations of the site to a “Mix
Use-Planned Development” designation to support a more flexible combination
of land uses that could include light industrial, commercial, residential, and
public uses. (See Section L., Mixed Use-
                                     Use-Planned Development Land Use,   Use at the
end of this Land Use Element.)
2. Employment Center Use Siting Criteria
Industrial lands are traditionally divided into two classifications, “Heavy” and
“Light.” This breakdown goes back to the days when “heavy industry” had huge
smokestacks billowing steam, smoke and gasses into the sky. “Light industry”
was considered “clean manufacturing” because such facilities had no
smokestacks. Industry in America does not neatly fit into these categories any
longer. Many of the “heavy” industries are closed. Some of the so-called
“clean” industries have been found to be serious polluters of groundwater rather
than the air. Today, the issue of job creation largely centers on what type of
employment is feasible in a rural community such as Mt. Shasta.
For purposes of the Mt. Shasta General Plan, the term “industrial land” as a
land use classification is not used. Following the concept used in the 1993
General Plan, land area designated for primary employment is classified as
“Employment Center.” Employment Center land uses not only include many
traditional industrial uses but also encompass service industry uses such as
insurance claims processing centers or call centers. The basic difference
between a Commercial Center land use and an Employment Center land use is
that Employment Center uses typically do not require intermittent customer traffic
in order to be successful. An Employment Center land use has traffic generated
by employees during set periods of the day, possibly freight traffic in and out
                                                                     Land Use Element
                                     3-33              City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

during the day, and occasional visitors or vendors. The Employment Center land
use derives the major portion of its financial success from production and sales
to customers outside of the area.
Land siting criteria for Employment Center uses are reflected in the General Plan
Objectives and Programs below. In addition to the implementing programs of
the Land Use Element, site specific factors related to available services and
adjoining land uses may have an effect on the building intensity allowed by the
Plan.
In today’s climate of environmental regulations, newly constructed industrial
facilities must conform to current environmental standards no matter what the
prior environmental history of the business category may be. For this reason, in
terms of impacts such as air quality and water quality, it is feasible for “heavy”
industries to also be considered as “clean” industries. The major issues
associated with siting such uses then focus on concerns of community
importance: traffic and access, available infrastructure, noise and appearance.
There are many similarities between the land use criteria for siting Commercial
Center land uses and Employment Center land uses. The major differences
primarily involve transportation and traffic patterns and the provision of
adequate infrastructure. Many Employment Center uses need to be able to
receive raw materials from suppliers, move a product from the facility to market,
and safely mix the transport traffic with passenger traffic. Some larger facilities
may even support rail freight. (However, these transport requirements are often
less of an issue for Employment Center uses that process information or are
otherwise based on communication technology.) The employees of Employment
Center uses tend to work in shifts where all or a mix of employees need to safely
travel from home to work and home again.
Employment Center uses that require heavy equipment to perform services or
create products may generate substantially more noise on a continuing basis
than the noise levels of a typical Commercial Center use. Larger Employment
Center uses may require exterior storage, warehouse space, or larger land areas
than the typical Commercial Center use. In order to accommodate the long-
term need to provide for Employment Center land uses, the intent of the
General Plan is to be as flexible as possible to encourage new employment
opportunities.
3. General Plan Objectives and Programs: Employment Center Land Use
Goal LU-LU-8:       Encourage businesses that provide primary employment.
Policy LU-
         LU-8.1:
            8.1:    Establish locations expressly for Employment Center land uses.
                    Implementation
                    Implementation Measures:
Land Use Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan         3-34

                   LU-8.1(a): Maintain the land development code to clearly
                                define the zoning districts permitted in the
                                Employment Center land use designation.
                   LU-8.1(b): Locate Employment Center land uses in areas with
                                suitable current or future public services and
                                transportation which ensures that lands have
                                access to an arterial or collector road, public
                                water supply and public sewer system.
                   LU-8.1(c): Define Employment Center-compatible land uses
                                in the land development code to discourage these
                                areas from becoming commercially-oriented to the
                                local customer market. When appropriate, mixed-
                                uses may be considered (e.g., with planned
                                developments designed for a compatible
                                combination of employment center, commercial
                                center, and other uses.)
Goal LU-
      LU-9:        Protect the City’s long-term need to conserve land area for
                   Employment Center development.
Policy LU-
       LU-9.1:
          9.1:     Identify larger tracts of land with the potential to serve as
                   Employment Center lands and retain them for future
                   development, unless a transition of use can be found to be in
                   the economic or social interest of the community.
                   Implementation Measures:
                   LU-9.1(a): Site Employment Center lands with an emphasis
                                on transportation, land use compatibility, existing
                                and future public facilities and services in
                                conformance with the requirements of Table 3-1.
                   LU-9.1(b): Ensure that project approvals on Employment
                                Center lands continue to meet the goal of
                                providing primary employment for area residents.
J. Public Facilities and Services
In the context of the Land Use Element, public facilities are important both as
land uses themselves and for the ways in which they support other land uses and
the community in general. The following section addresses planning issues
concerning public facilities and the services that are provided
                                                                       Land Use Element
                                       3-35              City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

1. Background
a. Fire Protection
Fire protection services and emergency response in the planning area are
provided within the city limits by the Mt. Shasta Fire Department and outside the
City by the Mt. Shasta Fire Protection District. The City Fire Department and the
Fire Protection District have a mutual aid agreement, and the department is a
partner with all other fire protection agencies in Siskiyou County in a countywide
mutual aid agreement. Both the Fire Department and the District work
cooperatively with the U.S. Forest Service and the California Department of
Forestry and Fire Protection to reduce fire threats to the community from
adjacent forest and wild-land areas.
Mt. Shasta Fire Department operates on a combination of paid and volunteer
status. The Chief receives a salary and the assistant chief, deputy chief and
secretary receive partial compensation. Volunteer firefighters receive minimal fire
pay.
The Department maintains two facilities within the City: the main station
adjacent to City Hall near the intersection of Lake Street and Mt. Shasta
Boulevard, and an equipment garage located west of the railroad tracks off of
Pine Street. The Fire Protection District has two station locations outside the city
limits, one on North Old Stage Road and one on Ream Avenue.
Communities are classified with respect to their fire defenses and physical
characteristics as an aid to underwriting fire insurance. These classifications are
referred to as Insurance Service Offices (ISO) ratings and range from 1 to 10.
These ratings indicate a community’s ability to suppress a fire. An ISO rating of
1 is the highest level of fire protection and 10 is the lowest. The City of Mt.
Shasta currently (2006) has an ISO rating of 5. Outside the City, the area had
an ISO rating of 8B for many years. A rating of Class 4 for structures within a
five-mile radius of the fire station went into effect in August 2005. Any
residences beyond five miles would still be rated 8B.
The capital cost of fire protection equipment is substantial. Both fire apparatus
and equipment for firefighters can place a substantial strain on district and
department budgets. One method of assisting in management of fire hazards is
through the enforcement of fire prevention and protection measures. These
remedial steps, when combined with a long-term program to update and
modernize necessary equipment, result in methods of extending limited available
dollars.
Protection of public health and safety from fire hazards is addressed in the Safety
Element.
Element.
Land Use Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan         3-36

b. Police Protection
Police protection services and emergency response within the City of Mt. Shasta
are provided by the Mt. Shasta Police Department. The Siskiyou County Sheriff’s
Department provides services to the unincorporated area surrounding the City.
The Police Department is located at Lake Street and Mt. Shasta Boulevard. The
Department staffing in 2005 included nine full-time officers, seven public safety
dispatchers, and a number of police reserves. The department also oversees
animal control within the City.
The County Sheriff’s Department has a substation located on Ski Village Drive
adjacent to and north of the City of Mt. Shasta. This station serves the entire
south County area including the vicinities of Mt. Shasta, McCloud, Dunsmuir,
Weed, and surrounding areas.
c. Schools and Libraries
Public education in the planning area for kindergarten through eighth grade is
provided primarily by the Mt. Shasta Elementary School District. High School
education is provided by the Siskiyou Union High School District.
Mt. Shasta Elementary School District: The Mt. Shasta Elementary School
District has five schools: Mt. Shasta Elementary, Sisson Elementary School,
Challenge Home Charter, Headwaters Day School and Mt. Shasta Options for
Youth. The 2003-2004 student enrollment for the District was 903 students.
Siskiyou Union High School District: The Siskiyou Union High School District
operates three high schools within the City: Mt. Shasta High School, Jefferson
High School and South County Community Day School. The 2003-2004
enrollment was 474 students.
Mt. Shasta High School has over 80 acres of undeveloped land at the school
site. A Master Plan for the site has been completed.
Mt. Shasta Library: The Mt. Shasta Library is located adjacent to Sisson
Elementary School. The library is a branch of the Siskiyou County Library, which
is an affiliate of the North State Library Cooperative System (NSCLS). The North
State Library Cooperative System facilitates an extensive inter-library loan
program between independent city and county libraries in cooperation with
academic library affiliates to provide services to the 13 Northern California
counties.
d. Parks and Recreation
Generally, the Mt. Shasta area has an abundance of public open space and
recreational lands. National Forests, State Parks and local recreation areas
provide a variety of regional and local recreational opportunities. The City of
Mt. Shasta does not maintain a parks department. Public recreation facilities
and programs are managed primarily by the Mt. Shasta Recreation and Parks
                                                                      Land Use Element
                                       3-37             City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

District. A detailed discussion of park and recreation facilities is incorporated in
the Open Space/
            Space/Conservation Element of this General Plan.
Private recreational developments in the planning area include three
recreational vehicle parks, athletic gyms, a movie theater, dance and gymnastic
schools and a number of recreation guide services. These facilities, however, are
generally recognized as Commercial Center land uses.
e. Medical Facilities
Mercy Medical Center in Mt. Shasta is the general hospital serving southern
Siskiyou County. Mercy Medical Center Mt. Shasta is sponsored by Catholic
Healthcare West, a network of not-for-profit hospitals and health service
companies providing care in California, Arizona and Nevada. Fully accredited
by the Joint Commission of Healthcare organizations, Mercy Medical Center is
licensed for 33 acute care beds and 47 skilled nursing beds. The hospital
employs 391 people (Ilene Smith, Mercy Medical Center, personal conversation,
March 7, 2005).
Mercy Medical Center offers a broad range of services including: general
surgery; orthopedic surgery; ear, nose, and throat surgery; urology; radiology;
family practice and internal medicine. The emergency room has a doctor on
duty 24 hours a day and has been designated a Level III Trauma Center. The
hospital has access to an air ambulance for transfer to its sister facility in
Redding.
The Mt. Shasta facility also has facilities for intensive care, coronary care, a
skilled nursing facility, obstetrical delivery, and an alternative birthing room.
Mercy Medical Center Mt. Shasta also offers other full-service, in-patient and
out-patient facilities.
f.   Solid Waste Management
Solid waste disposal occurs at the Black Butte Transfer Station, located just north
of the city limits. The Black Butte Landfill, which was located at this site, has
been closed. The county-owned transfer station is operated by Gerard Pelletier
Backhoe and Excavation. Solid waste collection services in the planning area
are provided under franchise by John Smith Sanitation.
A curbside recycling program is operated within the city limits. The Siskiyou
Opportunity Center is a fee for service and grant-funded, non-profit corporation
that provides recycling services to the residents of the Mt. Shasta area. Drop-off
of aluminum, glass and other specified materials are accepted at the recycling
facility located on Bear Springs Road.
g. Wastewater System
Wastewater disposal and treatment systems in the Mt. Shasta area include a
regional sewage treatment system and individual on-site septic systems. A
Land Use Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan        3-38
regional sewage treatment plant was completed in 1976 and is located
approximately two miles south of the city limits. A gravity collection system
connects the city infrastructure with the wastewater treatment plant.
The City of Mt. Shasta 1992 Master Sewer Plan for the Sewage Collection and
Treatment Facilities contains the results of an investigation of the sewage
collection system and treatment facilities by PACE Civil, Inc. Additionally, it
includes conceptual plans, staging, and cost estimates for the major capital
improvements that will be necessary for the time period of 1992-2012.
The City completed a Wastewater Treatment Plant Capacity Evaluation report in
2003. The report concluded that the plant is currently operating at 80% capacity
and, for the treatment plant to reach its existing design capacity, improvements
need to be made. The City intends to complete improvements to the wastewater
treatment plant by 2006. The report also addressed the need for increased
capacity of the wastewater collector and interceptor lines, some of which are
currently at capacity during wet weather conditions.
On September 26, 2005, the City Council of the City of Mt. Shasta declared an
emergency moratorium on sewer connections to the City’s sewer collection
system. The decision was reached based on input received from the California
Regional Water Quality Control Board regarding violations of discharge
permits, specifically manhole overflows, and the possible imposition of
significant fines and other penalties as a result of such violations. Based on this
information, the City Council directed staff to not issue any new building permits
that require new sewer connections. On November 14, 2005, Resolution No.
CCR-05-72 was adopted to provide more specific details on how the
moratorium would be managed and how previous commitments for connections
would be considered.
Resolution No. CCR-05-72 concluded that action was needed because of the
history of discharge permit violations in the form of manhole overflows of
untreated sewage in the sewer collection system, caused primarily by peak wet
weather flows and high inflow and infiltration. There had been multiple
determinations by engineers that areas of the collection system were exceeding
capacity due to the inflow and infiltration and, despite many improvements to
reduce or eliminate sources of inflow and infiltration, the sewer collection system
was still subject to significant overloading in peak wet weather flow.
The City Council, in passing Resolution CCR-05-72, recognized the urgent need
to upsize the main interceptor line and other areas of the sewer collection system
to increase capacity and further recognized the immediate need to temporarily
suspend new connections to the system in the interest of public health, safety
and welfare. The resolution identified a number of exemptions including, but not
limited to, existing connections that did not require additional capacity charges,
approved building permits that were issued prior to September 26, 2005,
properties with current or extended individual parcel “Will Serve Letters” issued
                                                                       Land Use Element
                                       3-39              City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

prior to September 26, 2005, and all pre-paid connections and out of City
properties that had failed septic systems and for which the City sewer collection
system would be considered available, subject to the provisions of Resolution
No. CCR-05-22. For a complete list of exemptions, please refer to Resolution
No. CCR-05-72.
The moratorium will be re-evaluated after the implementation of the Roseburg
Commerce Park Infrastructure Installation project, and removal of the
interceptor-piping problem at the “bottleneck” in the vicinity of Ream and Old
Stage Road. Additionally, the replacement of the manhole at Alma and Mt.
Shasta Boulevard, and addition of a line from that point west along Alma Street
to the new manhole at the Pine Street Alley at St. Anthony’s Church, will allow
for the reevaluation of the moratorium for projects proposed in the area upslope
of this manhole. The City also resolved to continue efforts to find, reduce, and
eliminate sources of inflow and infiltration throughout the collection system.
Extensive development of septic tank leachfield systems has occurred outside the
city limits. However, many of the soils within the planning area present severe
limitations for the use of on-site leachfield sewage disposal systems. These
limitations include the lack of filtration capacity in the coarse soils and areas
with a high water table. Systems to the west of the city are especially subject to
failure. The 1993 General Plan expressed concern that water quality monitoring
by the Central Valley Regional Water Quality Control Board (CVRWQCB) had
indicated that the use of on-site sewage disposal systems west of the City may be
contributing to high bacterial contamination of Wagon Creek.
h. Water Systems
The City of Mt. Shasta owns and operates a domestic water distribution system
for the City with water supplied by Cold Springs, located to the east of the City,
and by two wells within the city limits. The City of Mt. Shasta 1986 Master Water
Plan was prepared by PACE Civil, Inc., and contains the results of investigation
of the water system including supply, storage, and distribution facilities. It
includes preliminary plans, staging, and cost estimates for the major capital
improvements that were expected to be necessary in the time frame of 1986-
1996.
The normal capacity of the City’s water sources is 3.8 million gallons per day
(MGD). Water is stored in three tanks on Quail Hill, located east of the City,
with a total storage capacity of 1.7 MGD. The average water demand in the
City is approximately 1.3 MGD and a maximum daily demand of about 3.6
MGD (Roseburg Commerce Park Infrastructure Installation Project IS/MND,
2005). The entire city domestic water system is un-metered.
Water is distributed by a network of 4- to 10-inch mains located throughout the
City’s streets. With the exception of the Adams/Jefferson neighborhood, water
pressure is provided by gravity from the Quail Hill storage system. Future water
Land Use Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan         3-40

supplies appear to be readily available from additional groundwater sources,
although storage capacity is currently a limiting factor.
The 2004 Annual Consumer Confidence Report for the City of Mt. Shasta
describes the City’s water sources, storage, distribution and conservation as well
as summarizes the results of water quality monitoring during 2004. The
Consumer Confidence Report states that the City’s water supply is pure and
does not require treatment. The report notes that water use during the heat of
the summer is in excess of 1,000 gallons per person per day. The national
average water use is less than 200 gallons per person per day (U.S. EPA and
USGS). As stated in the Consumer Confidence Report, the current water usage
requires the city to operate both wells non-stop during hot summer months to
meet peak demand. Occasionally the city is unable to meet peak demand even
with the wells operating, forcing the city to encourage voluntary watering
restrictions. It may become necessary to implement mandatory watering
restrictions should the water use continue to occasionally exceed water supply
during hot summer months. Additionally, if the City’s irrigation usage was
reduced by 20 percent, it is estimated that the city would only need to operate
their pumps occasionally rather than non-stop, thus saving millions of gallons of
water and thousands of dollars per year in energy costs.
The City of Mt. Shasta 1986 Master Water Plan identifies a number of the
primary recommendations for the system; some of which have been
accomplished and some that are still outstanding. Outstanding improvements
include the construction of a new 1.0 million gallon reservoir (No.5) at the base
of Spring Hill and the construction of new Wells No. 3 and 4 (located on Ivy
Street and at the base of Spring Hill, respectively).
The Big Lakes Water Distribution System Report was completed by
Schlumpberger Consulting Engineers, Inc. in 2005. This report covered the area
from Ivy Street to the south, to the City Park to the north, and to the Big Lakes
line to the east, to Kingston Way/Pine Street to the west. The Big Lakes area
currently does not meet the ISO fire flow requirements and the system has areas
of very low pressures. Water pressures are also very low in the City Park area
and in the Kingston Way area, both of which are areas of residential use as well
as large commercial buildings where the fire hazard is considered high. The Big
Lakes Water Distribution System Report concludes that any future development
may contribute to further reduction in fire flows and pressures throughout the Big
Lakes Area.
A number of options were identified in the report that would help eliminate the
low-pressure issue in this area and allow for future developments as well as
supply additional fire flow to the downtown area. The pressure deficiencies in
the Big Lakes portion of the City can most readily be eliminated by the
development of a municipal well along North Mt. Shasta Boulevard,
construction of a reservoir located within the Spring Hill area, and installation of
                                                                        Land Use Element
                                      3-41                City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

a 12-inch pipeline to be connected to the city’s existing water distribution system
(referred to as Phase 1 of the Big Lakes report).
The City’s water distribution system does not extend north of North Mt. Shasta
Boulevard to the Spring Hill area. Development in that area currently requires
individual wells and private water storage for fire protection.
The unincorporated portion of the planning area is largely served by individual
on-site water systems, either consisting of personal wells or small community
water systems. Private community water systems serve some areas including the
Sun Mountain, Monte Shasta, Shasta Holiday and Siskiyou Lake Highlands
subdivisions. A few subdivisions neighboring the City are served by the City’s
water system, including the Quail Hill Subdivision.
In order to provide adequate fire flows to some areas, additional storage,
upgrading of mains or connection to the City water system will be necessary.
i.   Storm Drainage System
The Preliminary Storm Drainage Master Plan was completed for the City of Mt.
Shasta in 1998 by Kellogg Engineering. The plan outlines the existing storm
drainage system, proposed improvements, design criteria and financing for the
drain system. Storm drainage within the City of Mt. Shasta and the Planning
Area consists of both surface and subsurface drainage features. Surface storm
drainage features consist of natural waterways, man-made ditches, and/or
remnants of natural watercourses. Subsurface storm drainage features consist of
historic drainages that have been enclosed with some type of pipe (iron,
corrugated metal, clay or concrete).
A significant portion of the City does not have curb and gutter, nor does the City
have a regular maintenance schedule for the exiting surface and subsurface
drainage features. Additionally there are a number of constriction points where
drainage transitions from surface to subsurface drainage channels. Field Street,
Water Street and Smith Street are known drainage constriction points. The Storm
Drainage Master Plan identifies a number of proposed improvements including
installation of new subsurface drainage infrastructure and the installation of curb
and gutter. The Strom Drainage Master Plan also includes improvement
guidelines for both new development and infill development.
j.   Snow Removal
Snow removal in the City of Mt. Shasta is an ongoing challenge during winter
months. The City Public Works Department works in cooperation with private
contractors to keep roads accessible during major snowstorms. Snow is
generally plowed to the center of streets in commercial districts to allow
maximum access and parking for businesses and, in residential districts, is
generally plowed to the sides of the streets. Snow is removed from the downtown
area following a storm at the earliest opportunity to facilitate the flow of traffic.
Land Use Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan        3-42

See the Safety Element of this General Plan for further discussion of snow
removal and related policies and programs.
2. General Plan Objectives and Programs: Public Facilities and Services
Capital Improvement Program
Goal LU-
      LU-10:
          10:    Develop and regularly update a capital improvement
                 program.
Policy LU-
       LU-10.1:
          10.1: Utilize the capital improvement program as a means of
                 keeping pace with the needs of facilities and infrastructure.
                 Implementation Measures:
                 LU-10.1(a): Prepare and adopt a capital improvements
                             program that projects facility and equipment needs
                             over a rolling five to ten year period.
                 LU-10.1(b): Review the capital improvements program
                             concurrently with budget preparation each year to
                             measure achievement of program needs.
                 LU-10.1(c): As each fiscal year concludes, amend the capital
                             improvement program to add a new last year to
                             the document. This will ensure that there is always
                             a five to ten year program being reviewed.
                 LU-10.1(d): Coordinate capital improvement construction with
                             the County and other special districts to share
                             costs, resources, and efforts.
Fire Protection
Goal LU-
      LU-11:
          11:    Provide adequate fire protection services
Policy LU-
       LU-11.1:
          11.1: Provide fire management services which meet area needs.
                 Implementation Measures:
                 LU-11.1(a): Incorporate fire prevention measures in the land
                             development code for the design and construction
                             of new buildings and facilities, such as sprinklers,
                             fire resistant construction, use of fire resistant
                             vegetation, and other fire protection and
                             defensible space.
                 LU-11.1(b): Utilize planning and design standards to reduce
                             risk of structural damage from fire. This includes
                                                                       Land Use Element
                                     3-43                City of Mt. Shasta General Plan
                                the use of loop roads adequate for all-weather fire
                                apparatus access and evacuation, limitations on
                                the lengths of cul-de-sacs, and elimination of
                                extended driveways for “flag” lots.
                    LU-11.1(c): Amend the City’s building code to incorporate fire
                                prevention and wildfire protection measures.
                    LU-11.1(d): Utilize the expertise and experience of area fire-
                                fighting personnel to recommend a workable
                                program that can be used to gain public
                                cooperation in protecting property and lives
                                against fire hazards.
Policy LU-
        LU-11.2:
            11.2: Develop a program to collect funds for upgrading fire fighting
                    apparatus and firefighter equipment.
                    Implementation Measure:
                    LU-11.2(a): Until the recommendations from fire fighters are
                                submitted and considered by the City Council,
                                begin to collect capital equipment funds through
                                the use of fees on new projects.
Policy LU-
        LU-11.3:
            11.3: A program shall be created to collect funds for fire protection
                    equipment.
                    Implementation Measure:
                    LU-11.3(a): The capital equipment funds collected by fees shall
                                be initiated through an appropriate ordinance that
                                contains provisions to ensure a fair, rotational, and
                                equitable distribution of the capital costs for future
                                equipment. Fees shall be determined on a fair and
                                equitable basis.
Policy LU-
        LU-11.4:
            11.4:    Provide adequate fire fighting facilities.
                  Implementation Measures:
                    LU-11.4(a): When population growth requires, the City will
                                construct a new fire department branch facility.
                    LU-11.4(b): The City may utilize collected capital equipment
                                funds for the construction and equipping of
                                additional fire stations.
Land Use Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan          3-44

                  LU-11.4(c): Ensure that fire protection facilities and equipment
                               are included in the City’s capital improvement
                               plan.
Police Protection
Goal LU-
      LU-12:
          12:     Provide adequate police protection.
Policy LU-
       LU-12.1:
          12.1: Develop programs to ensure adequate police services
                  capabilities.
                  Implementation Measures:
                  LU-12.1(a): Determine and maintain a desirable ratio of sworn
                               police personnel to population as the community
                               continues to grow.
                  LU-12.1(b): Establish a program to maintain on-going police
                               personnel training.
                  LU-12.1(c): Maintain adequate levels of supplies and
                               equipment to serve the needs of the police
                               department.
                  LU-12.1(d) Coordinate police protection services with the
                               County Sheriff.
Policy LU-
       LU-12.2:
          12.2: Provide adequate facilities for the police department.
                  Implementation Measure:
                  LU-12.2(a): Consider creating a capital facility fund paid for
                               from funds generated by new development as a
                               means of acquiring monies to construct a new
                               police department facility.
Education
Goal LU-
      LU-13:
          13:     Support efforts to provide adequate education to all age
                  levels.
Policy LU-
       LU-13.1:
          13.1: Ensure that the school districts participate in the review of
                  residential development proposals.
                                                                       Land Use Element
                                      3-45               City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                    Implementation Measure:
                    LU-13.1(a): Send proposals for new development to the school
                                districts as part of the project application review
                                process.
Medical Care
Goal LU-
       LU-14:
           14:      Support efforts to provide high-quality medical care for the
                    community.
Policy LU-
        LU-14.1:
            14.1: Maintain open          communications   with   the   health  care
                    community.
                    Implementation Measures:
                    LU-14.1(a): Using Mercy Hospital as the coordinating agency,
                                seek comments on major development proposals
                                from the medical community.
                    LU-14.1(b): For large residential, commercial and employment
                                projects, or proposals that may raise unmitigated
                                health issues, send copies of project applications
                                during the normal review process to Mercy
                                Hospital.
Land Use Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan          3-46
Solid Waste Management
Goal LU-
      LU-15:
         15:    Maintain coordinated waste management efforts.
Policy LU-
       LU-15.1:
          15.1: Keep the Source Reduction and Recycling Element of the
                County Integrated Waste Management Plan up-to-date as it
                applies to the City of Mt. Shasta.
                Implementation Measure:
                LU-15.1(a): The City of Mt. Shasta Source Reduction and
                             Recycling Element is acknowledged as the City’s
                             primary management document for waste
                             management issues.
                LU-15.1(b): The City will help facilitate community recycling
                             and compost programs and other efforts to reduce
                             the volume of solid waste that would otherwise go
                             to the transfer station.
Wastewater Management
Goal LU-
      LU-16:
         16:    Maintain a wastewater collection system and treatment plant
                that serves the need of the community.
Policy LU-
       LU-16.1:
          16.1: Ensure that the growth of the community does not outstrip the
                capacity of the wastewater collection system and treatment
                facility.
                Implementation Measure:
                LU-16.1(a): Using the provision of connection fees, ensure that
                             funds are collected to meet long-term capital
                             improvement program needs.
                LU-16.1(b): If the City has compelling information that
                             indicates that the wastewater treatment and/or
                             collection system does not have adequate capacity
                             to accommodate additional connections, including
                             capacity during peak flow periods, the City shall
                             utilize and sustain moratoriums or other restricting
                             policies to ensure that new connections do not
                             result in adverse environmental impacts or
                             violations of management standards until the
                             capacity of the system can be expanded or
                             otherwise determined to be adequate.
                                                                    Land Use Element
                                     3-47             City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

Policy LU-
        LU-16.2:
            16.2: Require connection to the sewer system for multi-family,
                    commercial, and employment center land uses within the City
                    limits.
                    Implementation Measures:
                    LU-16.2(a): As a condition of project or building permit
                                approval, require that all multi-family, commercial,
                                and employment center land uses within the City
                                limits connect to the City sewage disposal system.
                    LU-16.2(b): Require as a condition of annexation that non-
                                single family residential properties, including
                                already developed properties, connect to the City
                                sewage disposal system.
Goal LU-
       LU-17:
           17:      Ensure safe individual onsite sewage disposal systems.
Policy LU-
        LU-17.1:
            17.1: Work with County Health to ensure that septic systems
                    conform to appropriate standards.
                    Implementation Measure:
                    LU-17.1(a): Require approval from the County Health
                                Department for projects requiring individual onsite
                                sewage disposal systems prior to issuing building
                                permits.
Water System
Goal LU-
       LU-18:
           18:      Maintain a water supply and distribution system that meets
                    drinking water standards and that serves the domestic and fire
                    protection needs of the community.
Policy LU-
        LU-18.1:
            18.1: Ensure that the growth of the community does not outstrip the
                    water supply and distribution system of the City.
                    Implementation Measures:
                    LU-18.1(a): Ensure that appropriate development impact fees
                                are established and collected to meet long-term
                                capital improvement program needs including new
                                wells, pumps, mains, over-sizing mains, treatment,
                                storage and other water system improvements as
                                needed to serve existing and new development.
                    LU-18.1(b): Update the City Water Master Plan and utilize the
                                updated Water Master Plan to prioritize water
Land Use Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan          3-48
                              infrastructure improvements and expansion
                              programs to serve the existing and planned
                              development of the community.
Policy LU-
       LU-18.2:
          18.2: Ensure that the City’s drinking water source is protected from
                 biological, chemical and other contaminants that may pose a
                 health risk.
                 Implementation Measure:
                 LU-18.2(a): The City shall encourage the enforcement of all
                              federal, state, regional and county regulations and
                              shall enforce local regulations regarding the
                              preservation and enhancement of water quality as
                              it relates to the City’s water sources.
                 LU-18.2(b): The City shall strive to protect its spring water
                              sources by means such as preventing development
                              (especially the use of septic tanks) within adequate
                              buffer areas in the vicinity of its spring water
                              sources, and/or facilitating the purchase or
                              dedication of land or development rights in those
                              areas.
Policy LU-
       LU-18.3:
           18.3: Require connection to the City’s water system for multi-family,
                 commercial, and employment center land uses within the city
                 limits, unless the City determines that it will not be able to
                 serve a proposed project with water service in a timely manner
                 and that the proposed private water system for the project will
                 be adequate and compatible with the City’s water system
                 plans.
                 Implementation Measure:
                 LU-18.3(a): As a condition of project or building permit
                              approval, require that all multi-family, commercial,
                              and employment center land uses within the City
                              limits connect to the City water supply and
                              distribution system.
Policy LU-
       LU-18.4:
          18.4: The City shall encourage and facilitate the use of water
                 conservation through education, permitting, design review and
                 applied technology.
                 Implementation Measures:
                                                                        Land Use Element
                                      3-49                City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                    LU-18.4(a): Encourage the use of water conservation building
                                design, appliances and landscaping throughout
                                the city.
                    LU-18.4(b): Develop educational materials and programs that
                                encourage and facilitate water conservation
                                throughout the community.
Policy LU-
        LU-18.5:
            18.5     In order to ensure the protection and management of the
                     water system in the best interest of residents and property
                     owners in the City, the City will retain the water system in
                     municipal ownership and management.
Storm Drainage System
Goal LU-
       LU-19:
           19:      Provide for the efficient collection, transport, and discharge of
                    stormwater in a safe manner and protect people and property
                    from flooding.
Policy LU-  19.1: Utilize the Storm Drainage Master Plan to improve existing
        LU-19.1:
                    storm drainage conditions and ensure adequate storm
                    drainage infrastructure design and construction for future
                    developments.
                    Implementation Measures:
                    LU-19.1(a): Work with the Regional Water Quality Control
                                Board (RWQCB) to resolve drainage and flooding
                                issues that can result from discharging stormwater
                                into area waterways.
                    LU-19.1(b): New development shall provide flood retention
                                facilities as necessary to avoid increasing peak
                                storm runoff in drainage channels.
                    LU-19.1(c): Establish, adopt and collect appropriate drainage
                                impact fees to be charged for new development,
                                when applicable, to fund drainage facilities
                                described in the City Storm Drainage Master Plan.
                    LU-19.1(d): Natural drainages may be incorporated into the
                                City’s stormwater drainage system with proper
                                management and protection. Vegetation along the
                                drainages should be managed effectively to allow
                                as much of the vegetation as possible to remain as
                                habitat and filtration, while not impeding the
                                drainage’s role in preventing localized flooding.
Land Use Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan           3-50

K. The Spring Hill Area
1. Background
The Spring Hill Area, located at the far north end of the City on the east side of
Interstate 5, has been identified as a special planning area in the City because
of its unique development opportunities as well as the challenge of infrastructure
limitations and development constraints.
There are several distinct sub-areas of the Spring Hill Area. One area consists of
the smaller-sized parcels along Spring Hill Drive. Some of these lots have been
or are already in the process of being developed with commercial uses (e.g., the
Les Schwab Tire Center, Blue Star Gas. A permit for a hotel complex was
approved for a site on the west side of Spring Hill Drive adjacent to the Interstate
5/Abrams Lake Road Interchange). A second sub-area consists of two large
parcels to the east behind the lots fronting Spring Hill Drive. A third sub-area at
the northernmost portion of the City is the Sousa Ready Mix aggregate mine.
A fourth sub-area of the Spring Hill Area is the prominent hill called “Spring Hill”
itself. Although development on the hill is not proposed at this time, any future
development proposals will need to be carefully considered due to steep slopes,
visual impact and other development constraints.
The Spring Hill Area was annexed to the City in 1979 and was subsequently
zoned for industrial and commercial development. In 1993, the City updated its
General Plan and designated the bulk of the property (i.e., the larger parcels to
the east) for “Community Residential” land use.
Opportunities, Constraints and Special Issues
Following is a list of some of the special opportunities and features of the Spring
Hill Area:
     •    Much of the area, especially along Spring Hill Drive, is highly visible
          from Interstate 5.
     •    Spring Hill Drive is readily accessible from Interstate 5 at the Abrams
          Lake Road interchange.
     •    The area has exceptional views of Mount Shasta and the Eddies to the
          west.
     •    Much of the area is in large parcels of land with consolidated
          ownership, which is conducive to master planning.
     •    There is a substantial amount of vacant land in the Spring Hill area with
          few anticipated environmental constraints.
     •    The property is relatively flat with few mature trees.
                                                                          Land Use Element
                                          3-51              City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

     •   The area has a good aquifer and could become a reliable source for
         municipal water.
     •   Spring Hill Drive to the Abrams Lake Road overpass is one of the few
         routes for bicyclists and pedestrians to cross over Interstate 5.
Following is a list of some of the constraints and special planning issues that
need to be addressed concerning future development of the Spring Hill Area:
     •   The City’s water system does not extend to and serve the Spring Hill
         Area. Consequently, commercial uses have been approved and
         developed with private systems. This is generally contrary to the City’s
         policies concerning water service for commercial uses and may
         complicate the development of a more efficient public water system in
         the future.
     •   The Spring Hill Area needs better street connections with central Mt.
         Shasta, including at least one improved road connection to the Everitt
         Memorial Highway. The intersection of Spring Hill Drive and North Mt.
         Shasta Boulevard needs substantial improvements to connect the area
         back into town.
     •   There is an eight-inch sewer main that extends up Spring Hill Drive,
         which will have limited capacity to serve full build-out of the area. There
         are also capacity constraints in the sewer interceptor from the Spring Hill
         Area to the wastewater treatment plant over four miles to the south. Like
         many areas of the City, new connections to the system in the Spring Hill
         Area may be prohibited until the City resolves capacity limitations in the
         sewage collection system.
     •   Because this part of the City is so visually exposed to Interstate 5, it is
         especially critical that strong and well-defined design standards be
         applied to protect the City’s image to the regional traveler.
     •   The future mix of commercial and other land uses is uncertain and may
         be evolving in a somewhat haphazard pattern.
     •   The existing aggregate mine needs protection from the encroachment of
         incompatible land uses.
     •   The Spring Hill Area is vulnerable to potential mud flows from Mount
         Shasta in the event that a volcanic event triggers such flows.
     •   As the Spring Hill Area is developed with residential uses, ample park
         and recreation facilities will be needed to serve the area. The portion of
         this area that is designated “High Density Residential” is approximately
         two miles from the closest established park. As discussed in the Open
Land Use Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan          3-52

         Space/Conservation Element, a typical standard for service areas for
         neighborhood parks is a radius of ½ mile. Given the size and potential
         density of this area, two or more parks of varying size and character of
         amenities may be needed. The Specific Plan that will be required for this
         area will need to address the provision and maintenance of park
         facilities and identify the best locations for such parks. The Specific Plan
         should also incorporate walkways and trails into its circulation plans to
         provide access to the parks, as well as to facilitate pedestrian and
         bicycle connections to the rest of the community.
The Spring Hill Mine
One of the issues identified above concerns the existing aggregate mine. The
Spring Hill Mine, owned by Sousa Ready Mix, is 98 acres in size. The permit to
mine the site was approved in 1980 when the site was located outside the city
limits. The property was annexed to the City soon after the mining operation
began.
Concern has been expressed by the owners of the Spring Hill Mine over the
need to protect the mine from encroachment of incompatible uses. Owners of
sensitive-types of uses, especially residential uses, in time could, if allowed to
locate near the mine, complain about the mining operation and demand that
the mining operation be closed or curtailed. It has been suggested that land
uses around the mine should be “tiered” with an area of commercial uses
adjacent to the mine to buffer more sensitive residential areas in the vicinity.
However, certain commercial uses including restaurants and motels may also be
sensitive to mining activity if located too close to the operation. A second
suggested method to protect the mining operation would be to have a “buffer”
area between the site and all uses that would be expected to be annoyed by
noise and dust related to the mining operation. This could consist of a low-
density land use designation (e.g., five-acre minimum) with special non-building
area setbacks adjacent to the mine. Other forms of mitigation, including walls
between new uses and the existing mine, may further reduce trespass problems
and noise.
Specific Plans
The 2007 revision of the 1993 General Plan does not propose any changes in
the land use designations for the Spring Hill Area, as indicated on the General
Plan Land Use Maps. The City still needs to rezone the parcels that were
designated “Community Residential” in the 1993 General Plan from the
General Industrial and Controlled Manufacturing zoning districts to an
appropriate residential zoning district.
However, it is recommended that, in order to better coordinate development of
the Spring Hill Area with infrastructure development and other planning issues, a
specific plan is needed for much of the area.
                                                                         Land Use Element
                                        3-53               City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

What is a Specific Plan? A specific plan is a tool for the systematic
implementation of a general plan. It establishes a link between implementing
policies of the general plan and individual development proposals in a defined
area. Although the range of issues to be addressed in a specific plan is largely
left to the discretion of the decision-making body, according to California
Government Code Section 65451, a specific plan needs to be structured as
follows:
     a) A specific plan shall include a text and a diagram which specify all of the
         following in detail:
         1) The distribution, location, and extent of the uses of land, including
              open space, within the area covered by the plan.
         2) The proposed distribution, location, and extent and intensity of
              major components of public and private transportation, sewage,
              water, drainage, solid waste disposal, energy, and other essential
              facilities proposed to be located within the area covered by the plan
              and needed to support the land uses described in the plan.
         3) Standards and criteria by which development will proceed, and
              standards for the conservation, development, and utilization of
              natural resources, where applicable.
         4) A program of implementation measures including regulations,
              programs, public works projects, and financing measures necessary
              to carry out paragraphs (1), (2) and (3).
     b) The specific plan shall include a statement of the relationship of the
         specific plan to the general plan.
By working with the City to prepare a specific plan to design and implement
development plans for the Spring Hill Area, the property owners can better
address and resolve the infrastructure constraints and other issues that may
otherwise limit or prohibit their development opportunities.
The Circulation Element of this General Plan addresses the indication of
proposed roads in the Spring Hill Area, including improvements to the Spring
Hill Drive/North Mt. Shasta Boulevard intersection and connections to the Everitt
Memorial Highway.
It is also recommended that the City adopt provisions to prevent incompatible
land uses from encroaching on the Spring Hill Mine aggregate operation. In the
Open Space/Conservation Element, there is a policy that reads:
         Residences and commercial uses having overnight accommodations
         (e.g., hotels, motels) should be required to obtain a conditional use
         permit if proposed to be located within 300 feet of the property line of a
Land Use Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan          3-54
         parcel on which there is a permitted mining or related processing
         operation.
This provision should be incorporated into the development code and future
specific plan and would give the City an opportunity to review uses, otherwise
possibly allowed by right, which could present the most problematic constraints
for continued operation of the mine.
The City should also be cautious in considering approval of other land uses in
the vicinity of the mining and processing operations to prevent land use
conflicts.
Design Sensitivity
Because of the visibility of the Spring Hill Area from Interstate 5, the quality of
development in this area will substantially affect the impression that regional
travelers will have of the City. If travelers are displeased with the appearance of
this important gateway to the community, they will be less likely to be drawn to
the community as a whole. Whether development of the Spring Hill Area will be
coordinated under a Specific Plan or other form of area plan, or allowed to
evolve on a parcel-by-parcel basis, the City should maintain high expectations
concerning the visual qualities of the area. Special attention needs to be given
to design review criteria for new development to ensure that buildings and signs
do not obstruct or significantly detract from the grand view of the mountain.
Property owners should also appreciate the great amenities that the exposure to
Interstate 5 and the views have for their property values and business images
and should be committed to proposing architectural features that compliment
the setting.
2. General Plan Objectives and Programs: Spring Hill Area
Goal LU-
       LU-20:
           20:     To establish a clear path for subsequent development of the
                   Spring Hill Area and provision of adequate infrastructure to
                   support that development.
Policy LU-
        LU-20.1:
           20.1: The City will require that a Specific Plan be prepared to
                   encompass the entire Spring Hill Area generally from Interstate
                   5 to Everitt Memorial Highway, and from Ski Village Drive to
                   the city limits north of the Sousa Ready Mix Quarry. The City
                   recognizes that some of the smaller parcels may develop
                   before the Specific Plan has been completed.
                   Implementation Measure:
                   LU-20.1(a): The City will seek grant and other funding to
                                prepare backbone infrastructure plans for the
                                Spring Hill Area. These plans should outline the
                                basic water and wastewater needs of the area and
                                                                         Land Use Element
                                        3-55               City of Mt. Shasta General Plan
                                 can be prepared in conjunction with a Specific
                                 Plan or private development proposal.
                    LU-20.1(b):The General Plan Land Use Map indicates
                                 proposed parks in the Spring Hill Area. The exact
                                 location, necessary number (i.e., one or more),
                                 and character of these facilities will be determined
                                 when the first major residential development
                                 project is considered in this area, and/or when a
                                 Specific Plan is prepared for this area.
Policy LU-
        LU-20.2:
              .2: Until a Specific Plan is adopted for the Spring Hill Area,
                    proposed development along Spring Hill Drive shall be
                    reviewed to consider the following needs:
                    1. Be designed to connect to municipal services once
                         available.
                    2. Shall not obstruct or significantly detract from views of
                         Mount Shasta.
                    3. Shall incorporate adequate storm water quality provisions.
Policy LU-
        LU-20.3:
            20.3 When formulated, the Spring Hill Area Specific Plan shall
                    outline special design standards for development to minimize
                    impacts on the scenic values of the area, including standards
                    for signage.
L. Mixed Use-Use-Planned Development Land Use
1. Background
“Mixed Use” land use designations generally allow consideration of
development plans that provide for a combination of compatible land uses.
Rather than a strict separation of land uses such as commercial and residential
uses, and the rigid zoning that traditionally separates such uses, mixed use
development involves projects that feature a more flexible mixture of uses. The
development standards that are applied to mixed use development areas, as
well as development in special areas where innovative development concepts
are encouraged, are usually considered as “planned development” proposals.
In the City of Mt. Shasta, the concept of mixed use-planned development land
use primarily evolved in consideration of proposed land use on the Roseburg
property.
The Roseburg property (which includes an area considered as the primary area
of the Roseburg Commerce Park), was deeded to the City of Mt. Shasta by
Roseburg Forest Products in 1989 after the closure of the mill on the site. When
Land Use Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan          3-56

the 1993 Mt. Shasta General Plan was prepared, the Roseburg property,
although owned by the City, was still outside the city limits. The City adopted a
development plan for the Roseburg Commerce Park portion of the property in
1998, annexed the property into the city limits and zoned the property to PUD,
Planned Unit Development, district to primarily support commercial and light
industrial uses. A park area was designated around the old mill pond at the
northern end of the site.
The Planned Unit Development zoning provisions of the property were embodied
in the Development Plan for the Roseburg Commerce Park. The development
plan/zoning provided for various land uses, which are assigned to several
“development areas” that were designated on the site.
Development of the Roseburg Commerce Park has been recognized by the City
and regional economic development agencies as a high-priority project for
economic development and job creation. The City has considered entering into
development agreements with a “master developer” to manage development of
the property, and/or selling portions of the property.
The City has pursued grant and loan funding to extend water and wastewater
infrastructure to the site. The City worked with the U.S. Department of
Commerce Economic Development Administration to obtain funding assistance
for the infrastructure project. In February 2005, a mitigated negative declaration
was completed for a project that would extend water and wastewater services to
the property to facilitate development.
In addition to the Roseburg Commerce Park portion of the land obtained by the
City in 1989 from Roseburg Forest Products (east of the railroad tracks), there is
an area of the property, approximately 29 acres in size, located west of the
railroad tracks. Due to various development constraints (e.g., accessibility from
Ream Avenue, wetlands), this portion of the property was not included in the
development plan for the Roseburg Commerce Park and was not annexed to the
City when the commerce park portion was annexed. This area includes a site
that has been dubbed the “Orchard Property”, which was proposed in the
Implementation Recommendations of the 2005 Affordable Housing Strategy as
an “opportunity site” for development of affordable housing.
The 1993 General Plan designated this area of the former Roseburg property
for “Employment Center” land use. After closer review, however, the site has
been found to have low suitability for employment center uses. Therefore, the
2007 General Plan update proposes that the property be designated “Mixed
Use-Planned Development”, thereby providing greater flexibility for the City to
consider a development plan and Planned Unit Development zoning that would
include a more appropriate choice of uses, including residential use.
Although the concept of the Mixed Use-Planned Development land use
designation in the City of Mt. Shasta has initially been focused on the Roseburg
property (in part to conform with the Development Plan and PUD zoning
                                                                       Land Use Element
                                       3-57              City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

adopted in 1998), it is conceivable that the concept could be applied to other
properties in the future. A landowner of property having a land use designation
of, for example, Commercial Center, could apply concurrently for: 1) a general
plan amendment to be designated Mixed Use-Planned Development; 2)
approval of a site-specific development plan; and 3) a rezoning to PUD that
would establish the development standards of the development plan as the
zoning criteria of the property. If approved by the City, the development plan
could allow a compatible mixture of land uses that would not otherwise be
obtainable under the Commercial Center designation.
2. Mixed Use- Use-Planned Development Siting Criteria
Siting criteria for development of land designated Mixed Use-Planned
Development will be evaluated in detail as part of the review for the
development plans that are required in such areas. In addition to the typical
siting criteria (e.g., traffic and other infrastructure) that would be considered for
certain types of uses (e.g., light industrial, commercial, residential), a critical
siting issue is the compatibility of the land use mixture.
Although it is not required that there be a mixture of land uses in a Mix Use-
Planned Development area, the likelihood that there would be a mixture would
necessitate design features and mitigation measures to ensure that various uses
are compatible with each other, as well as with uses on adjacent properties. For
example, if residential development is permitted in an area that is otherwise
predominately commercial, or that may allow certain types of light industrial
activity, it would be important to ensure that the residential areas would not be
adversely affected by impacts associated with the non-residential land uses. This
could include impacts such as noise, traffic, air quality, etc.
3. General Plan Objectives and Programs: Mixed Use-        Use-Planned
                                                                Planned Development
     Land Use
Goal LU-
       LU-21:
            21:      Employ the concept of Mixed Use-Planned Development land
                     use when determined by the City to be warranted and
                     appropriate, based on the characteristics of the site and
                     related development issues.
Policy LU-
        LU-21.1:
             21.1: Development of lands designated Mixed Use-Planned
                     Development shall be subject to approval by the City of a
                     development plan that shall specify the allowed uses and
                     development standards for the site.
                     Implementation Measures
                                      Measures:
                     LU-21.1(a): The City may incorporate a development plan for
                                  land designated Mixed Use-Planned Development
                                  into an ordinance that establishes Planned Unit
                                  Development (PUD) zoning for the site.
Land Use Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan          3-58
                   LU-21.1(b) The City should have a development plan
                                prepared for the “Orchard Property” portion of the
                                property obtained from Roseburg Forest Products,
                                and determine whether or not annexation should
                                be initiated to facilitate development.
REFERENCES:
Bay Area Economics, Affordable Housing Strategy, 2005.
California Governor’s Office of Planning and Research, The Planners Guide to
        Specific Plans, 1998.
City of Mt. Shasta, General Plan Housing Element: 2003-2008, 2005.
City of Mt. Shasta, 2004 Annual Consumer Confidence Report, 2004.
City of Mt. Shasta, Draft Development Plan for the Roseburg Commerce Park,
        1998.
Kellogg Engineering, Preliminary Storm Drainage Master Plan, 1998.
PACE Civil, Inc., City of Mt. Shasta Master Sewer Plan for the Sewage Collection
        and Treatment Facilities, 1992.
Pacific Municipal Consultants, Roseburg Commerce Park Infrastructure
        Installation Project: Initial Study/Mitigated Negative Declaration, 2005.
Schlumpberger Consulting Engineers, The Big Lakes Water Distribution System
                         Report, 2005.
Siskiyou County, General Plan Land Use Element, 1980.
                                                                          Land Use Element
                                         3-59               City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

4. CIRCULATION ELEMENT
The objective of the Circulation Element is to provide long-term policies
concerning the movement of people, goods, and services within the Mt. Shasta
planning area. The Circulation Element addresses streets and highways, public
transit, rail and air transportation, non-motorized transportation (e.g., bicycle and
pedestrian circulation), and public utilities.
Each roadway is designed to accommodate different types and amounts of traffic.
Generally, local and private roads direct traffic to collector and ultimately arterial
roads. Typically, collector and arterial roads provide access to commercial or
more traffic-intensive land uses. Arterial and collector roadways also provide
connections to Interstate 5 or State Route (Highway) 89.
Table 4-4-1, Existing Arterial and Collector Streets, lists, and Figure 4-
                                                                        4-1 shows, the
roadway classifications for routes within the City and the planning area. In
addition to existing roadways, this element includes proposed linkages that will be
needed as development occurs. These future road linkages are summarized in
Table 4-4-4, Future Roadways
                      Roadways, and are also shown on Figure 4-    4-1. The alignments
shown in Figure 4-  4-1 are for graphic purposes only, and are intended to indicate
that eventually a roadway connection will be needed in the general area
indicated. The precise alignment of new roadways will need to be incorporated
into plans for the eventual development of the area. Table 4-   4-5, Future Intersection
Improvements, lists intersections that may need to be improved as the City
continues to grow.
A. Street Types
Roadways are designed to accommodate different types and amounts of traffic.
Generally, local roads direct traffic to collector and ultimately arterial roads.
Typically, collector and arterial roads provide access to commercial or more
traffic-intensive land uses. In the planning area, arterial and collector roadways
generally provide connections to Interstate 5 or State Route (Highway) 89 for
regional traffic. The following types of roadways can be found in the planning
area.
Interstate: An interstate highway is a Federal or State designated road that consists
of multiple lanes with opposing traffic separated by a barrier or median. Access is
derived exclusively from sanctioned interchanges. Interstate 5 is the only interstate
within the planning area.
Highway: Also referred to as a State Route, a highway is designed to convey
regional traffic. Lanes may be separated by a median or barrier but, in the
planning area, State Route 89 is the only highway in the planning area and it is
typically a rural two-lane roadway with occasional passing lanes.
Circulation Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan         4-1
                 Arterial: An arterial is a major street that is intended to move traffic into and
                 through an area. An arterial road is a work-horse road or “main” street road
                 within a community. Access to an arterial street may be limited to improve the flow
                 of traffic.
                 Collector: A collector is a street designed to collect and move traffic, generally
                 from residential areas, to an arterial street or into a business district. Access to the
                 collector tends to be available for each parcel having frontage or easements.
                 Local: A local street typically connects residences to a collector or arterial street. A
                 local street is intended for slower traffic as its role is to provide direct access to
                 homes. Typically, a residential street is designed to discourage through traffic, but
                 retains connectivity to ensure adequate emergency access.
                 Private: Private streets are not city-owned or maintained streets. They typically
                 provide access to one or more residences and are used in areas where
                 conventional city street standards may not work with the project design. Private
                 streets can also provide access to commercial uses.
Table 4-1
Existing Arterial and Collector Streets
Mt. Shasta Planning
            Planning Area
Arterials
Arterials    Abrams Lake (North Old Stage Road to Spring Hill Drive)
             Alma Street (Cedar Street to Rockfellow Drive)
             Chestnut Street
             Everitt Memorial Highway
             Fish Hatchery Lane (I-5 to South Old Stage Road)
             Lake Street
             Lassen Lane (Pine St. to North Old Stage Road)
             Mount Shasta Boulevard (SR89 to I-5)
             North Old Stage Road (Abrams Lake to Azalea Road)
             Pine Street (Lake Street to Lassen Lane)
             Rockfellow (Alma Street to Everitt Memorial Highway)
             Spring Hill Drive (Abrams Lake to North Mt. Shasta Boulevard)
             Washington Avenue (Lake to Rockfellow)
Collectors
Collectors   Ivy Street (North Mount Shasta Boulevard to Rockfellow)
             North Old Stage Road (Abrams Lake north)
             Old McCloud Highway (South Mount Shasta Boulevard to Eddie Drive)
             Pine Grove (Lassen Lane to North Old Stage Road)
             Ream Avenue (W.A. Barr to South Mount Shasta Boulevard)
             Rockfellow Drive (Everitt Memorial Highway to Jefferson Drive)
             Rockfellow Drive (Ivy Street to Alma Street)
             Siskiyou Lake Boulevard (W.A. Barr Road to South Old Stage Road)
             Ski Village Drive (North Mount Shasta Boulevard to Everitt Memorial Highway)
             W.A. Barr Road (South Old Stage to Siskiyou Lake Boulevard)
             Washington (Lake Street to Old McCloud Road)
             McCloud Avenue
                                                                                           Circulation Element
                                                          4-2                 City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

B. Level of Service
1. Background
A Level of Service (LOS) rating is a guideline established by the Institute of
Transportation Engineers (ITE) as a means to quantify the subjective measure of
traffic tolerance. To try to prevent roads from reaching a level in which traffic
moves with poor efficiency from point-to-point, cities establish guidelines at which
a street or road is considered to have reached the highest service volumes that are
tolerable within a community. Rated in grades from A (best) to F (worst), levels of
service are based on increasing amounts of congestion and delay.
LOS E represents traffic levels at the full capacity of the road segment with the
road unable to carry more traffic. Prior to reaching this level, it is important for the
City to have plans to either improve the street to acceptable levels or construct
another street to relieve the crowded street. Table 4-                       4-2 shows the approximate
volume of traffic that a particular roadway can usually accommodate at each level
of service. These figures should be considered guidelines rather than absolute
because road alignments, intersection controls, types of traffic and adjacent land
uses factor into the handling capacity of a given roadway.
Table 4-4-2
Road Type and Approximate Average Daily Trips by Level of Service
                                                                 Average Daily Trips (ADT)
Road Type
                                                     LOS A        LOS B         LOS C         LOS D     LOS E
4-Lane Divided Arterial w/Turn Lane                  22,000      25,000         29,000        32,500    36,000
2-Lane Arterial w/Turn Lane                          11,000      12,500         14,500        16,000    18,000
2-Lane Arterial                                       9,000      10,500         12,000        13,500    15,000
2-Lane Collector                                      6,000        7,500         9,000        10,500    12,000
Local                                                   600        1,200         2,000         3,000     4,500
Notes:
1. Based on Highway Capacity Manual, Fourth Edition, Transportation Research Board, 2000.
2. All volume thresholds are approximate and assume ideal roadway characteristics. Actual thresholds for each
     LOS listed above may vary depending on a variety of factors including (but not limited to) roadway
     curvature and grade, intersection spacing, driveway spacing, percentage of trucks and other heavy vehicles,
     lane widths, signal timing, on-street parking, volume of cross traffic and pedestrians, etc.
3. Based on Traffic Impact Analysis Guidelines, County of Sacramento, July 2004.
2. General Plan Objectives and Programs: Level of Service
Goal CI-CI-1:            Ensure that land development does not exceed road capacities.
Policy CI-
        CI-1.1:
             1.1:        Level of service shall be the standard for judging whether a road
                         has adequate remaining capacity for average daily traffic
                         generated by a proposed project.
Circulation Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                      4-3
Policy CI-
       CI-1.2:
          1.2: Level of service “C” shall be the minimum acceptable service
               level during normal conditions. Peak-hour reduction to level of
               service “D” may be permitted provided there are plans in place
               to make improvements required to improve the level of service.
               Implementation Measures:
               CI-1.2(a): Public Works, in cooperation with Caltrans and
                           Siskiyou County, shall regularly monitor traffic
                           volume on roads that presently have levels of service
                           of C or D. Average Daily Trips (ADT) shall be
                           determined and made available to the Planning
                           Department for review of development proposals.
               CI-1.2(b): When a road segment or intersection is found to be
                           approaching Level of Service C (defined as ADT
                           being within ten percent of the highest LOS C traffic
                           volume threshold), or to have significant safety issues
                           related to the volume of use, the City shall initiate
                           plans for improvements designed to increase
                           capacity, and/or to improve other operational
                           features of the roadway or intersection to improve
                           the LOS and traffic safety.
               CI-1.2(c): The improvements shall be designed to be initiated
                           by the time traffic volume is approaching Level of
                           Service D. This may result in the generation of
                           impact fees as a means of accumulating funds for
                           the improvements caused by private development.
               CI-1.2(d): The city shall require traffic analysis to be conducted
                           for all projects that will generate sufficient traffic to
                           use ten (10) percent or more of the capacity of the
                           roadway at LOS C as shown in Table 4-2. When a
                           project will potentially impact a state highway,
                           consideration will be given to the Caltrans Guide for
                           the Preparation of Traffic Impact Studies to
                           determine when and how a related traffic study
                           should be completed.
               CI-1.2(e): Projects that will impact streets and/or intersections
                           that currently, or are projected to operate, at below
                           LOS C, shall prepare a traffic analysis to determine
                           the extent to which they impact the streets and/or
                           intersections. For facilities that are (short-term
                           conditions), or will be (cumulative condition),
                           operating at unacceptable Levels of Service without
                           the project, an impact is considered significant if the
                                                                     Circulation Element
                                    4-4                 City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                                 project: 1) increases the average delay at
                                 intersections by more than five seconds, or 2)
                                 increases the volume-to-capacity ratio by 0.05 or
                                 more on a roadway segment.
                     CI-1.2(f):  If a street and/or intersection is impacted by a
                                 project for short-term conditions, and the project's
                                 pro-rata share is equal to or above twenty five (25)
                                 percent, then the project shall be required to
                                 construct the necessary improvements to maintain an
                                 acceptable level of service.
                     CI-1.2(g): If a street and/or intersection is impacted by a
                                 project for cumulative conditions, and the project's
                                 pro-rata share is below twenty five (25) percent, then
                                 the project shall be required to pay their pro-rata
                                 share of the cost of constructing these improvements.
                     CI-1.2(h): The City shall regulate truck travel as appropriate for
                                 the transport of goods, consistent with circulation, air
                                 quality, noise, and land use goals.
                     CI-1.2(i): The City may install, or require to be installed, traffic
                                 calming measures on existing and future streets.
C. Circulation Standards and New Roads
1. Background
Figure 4-4-1, General Plan Circulation Map, shows the location and classification of
existing and proposed streets and other transportation facilities. Standards for
local streets and highways for applicable functional classifications are shown in
Table 4-4-3, Street Standards.
                      Standards Road rights of way are frequently reduced to avoid
natural features such as mature trees or hillsides, or enlarged to provide for
intersection improvements or turnouts. These modifications are proposed at the
direction of the City Engineer and reviewed during project approval.
Table 4-4-3
Street Standards
Road Classification                  Lanes          Typical Right-of-Way Width (feet)
Urban Arterial                        2-4                          80
Collector                              2                           60
Local                                  2                           50
Private                                                 As determined by project.
Circulation Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan           4-5
Proposed Roads and Intersection Improvements
To accommodate new development within the planning area, a number of
proposed new roadway and intersection improvements are shown on Figure 4-             4- 1.
Tables 4-
        4-4 and 4-5 list these improvements. The following applies to each of the
future improvements:
•   The proposed “routes” are conceptual and are not intended to designate
    actual proposed alignments. They are intended to indicate the intention that a
    road should and may be developed from a Point A to a Point B. It is
    recognized, however, that more detailed engineering, environmental impact
    analysis and, in some cases, coordination with the development plans of
    various property owners, is necessary to define the preferred alignment.
•   The fact that the proposed roads are indicated does not imply any obligation
    that the City will finance and construct each road. The timing of if and when
    certain roads will be constructed is dependent upon various priorities and
    opportunities (e.g., coordination with future development projects). Some of
    the roads may be constructed by private developers and offered to the City or
    County for acceptance into their street systems. The details of when and how
    certain roads will be developed will also be coordinated with the Regional
    Transportation Plan process.
•   It should be noted that the indicated proposed streets are, for the most part,
    proposed as public arterials and collectors. Other future roads, especially as
    part of private development projects, may be proposed that are not indicated
    in the General Plan. The case that those roads are not indicated as being
    proposed in this General Plan is not intended to suggest that such roads
    would be “inconsistent” with this Plan.
With Interstate 5 passing through the City of Mt. Shasta, and State Route 89
intersecting with I-5 just south of the City, the condition and operation of these
highways is of concern to the City. In turn, development within the City and
elsewhere in the planning area may impact the interchanges and ramps onto and
off of those highways. Table 4-    4-5, Future Intersection Improvements,
                                                               Improvements notes
concerns with the intersection of North Mt. Shasta Boulevard and Spring Hill
Road, which is at the northbound on-ramp to Interstate 5, as well as the overpass
that serves as part of the south-bound I-5 off-ramp to Mt. Shasta Boulevard.
Future improvements to these traffic facilities will need to be designed in a
coordinated manner to address all of the related circulation issues.
The south end of South Mt. Shasta Boulevard also functions in a close relationship
with the Interstate 5/State Route 89 Interchange. Redevelopment of these
interchanges will need to be coordinated and may have implications concerning
land use in the vicinity. Also, land use development in this area may have issues
concerning operational improvements related to the highways to accommodate
increased growth.
                                                                       Circulation Element
                                       4-6                City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

Caltrans has noted that, as the community continues to develop, the potential
impacts to highways will need to be evaluated concerning not only the
interchanges discussed above, but also the Interstate 5 interchanges at Lake Street
and Abrams Lake Road. When projects have the potential of impacting the state
highway system, the design and environmental review processes need to consider
the Caltrans Guide for the Preparation of Traffic Impact Studies to determine
whether a traffic study is needed to evaluate potential impacts to the highway.
Circulation Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan        4-7

                                                                                                                                                                SP RI
                                                                                                                                                              I-5
                                                                                                                                                                    NG
                                                                                                                                                                     HILL
                                                                                                                                                                         DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           EVERITT
                                                                                                                                                                                      NORT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   HM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    UN
                                                                                                                                             PINE GROVE DR                                                                                                                                                     MEMORIAL HWY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             T                            SKI VILLAGE DR
                    LEGEND                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SHA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A
                                            CITY LIMITS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              KINGSTON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    D
                                            PLANNING AREA
                    I-5                     FREEWAY                                                                          LASSEN LANE                                                                                          W      Y                                              ROCKFELLOW                    DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ST
                                            EXPRESSWAY                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          IV                     ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MONROE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MADISON DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          JEFFERSON DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E               M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ADAMS DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PI          CH
                                            ARTERIAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           WASHINGTON STREET
                                                                                                                RT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     I-5                    NE                      T                 ET
                                                                                                              NO                                                                                                                                                 ST               NU                RE
                                                                                                                          H                                                                                                                                                     ST                 T
                                            COLLECTOR                                                                         OL
                                                                                                                                 D                                                                                                                                                      ST       S
                                                                                                                                        ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    W       AY
                                            PROPOSED ROADS                                                                                AG
                                                                                                                                            E                 RD                                                                                                                                                          MCCLOUD AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E
              * Unmarked roads are                                                                                                                                                                                   RY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LAK
                 Residential Roads                                                                                                                                                                                 HE DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SOUTH
                                                                                                                                                                                                               HA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                EDDY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           UT                                 OU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BARR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SO                                  M R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 EAM AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  W. A .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            OLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E                                                                             MCCLO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AG                                                                                     UD RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      I-5                   BLVD
                                                                                                        INSET
                              I-5
                          NO
                            RTH
                                O   LD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        HWY 89
                                       ST                    K   E
                                                          LA
                                        AG  ER       MS                       H
                                              D ABRA                      ING
                                                                       SPR
                                                                            ILL
                                                                                    DR
                                                                                       I                  Lake Siskiyou
                                                                                       VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                      EVERITT
                                                                                                  I-5
                                                                                        PINE GROVE DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                               MEMORIAL HWY
                                                                                                                                        SKI VILL AGE DR
                                                                                                            KINGSTO
                                                                            LASSEN LANE                        N
                                                                                                                 W    Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ROCKFELLOW DR
                                                                                                                                        CH
                                                                                                                              PI               ES T
                                                                           H                                                       NE
                                                                        RT                                                              ST                   NU
                                                                                                                                                                T                      ET
                                                                      NO                                                                                                          RE
                                                                              O                                                                                                 ST
                                                                                                                                                                                           WASHINGTON STREET
                                                                               LD                                                                                   ST
                                                                                    ST
                                                                                      AG
                                                                                         E     RD                                                    E
                                                                                                                                        LAK
                                                                                                                                        I-5
                                                                                                                                                                     REAM AVE
                                                                                                                      BARR
                                                                                                                                                                                       M
                                                                                                               W. A .
                                                                                                                                                                                              T.
                                                                                                                                                                                                         SH                              O   LD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                A S TA B LV D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CLOUD R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      D
                                                                     INSET                                            RD
                                                                                                                                             L         VD
                                                                                                                                        EB                                           I-5
                                                                                                                                   LAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HWY 89
                                                                                                                                                                            HO
                                                                                                                                                                        SOUT
                                                                                                                               OU
                                                                                                                                   Y
                                                                                                                              KI
                                                                                                                      SIS                                                        LD   ST
                                                                                                                                                                                        AG                                               A
                                                                                                                                                                                           E                   RD        AZ
                                                                     Lake Siskiyou                                                                                                                                         EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          I-5
   N
Source: PMC, 2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               FIGURE 4-1
                                                                                                                                              4-8                                                                                                                                                                                                        CIRCULATION MAP

           Table 4-4-4
           Future Roadways
           Roadway              Discussion
           Spring Hill Area     A future arterial road should extend from a point roughly half-way between
                                Abrams Lake Road and North Mount Shasta Boulevard. The new arterial
                                should eventually extend to Everitt Memorial Highway.
           Kingston Way         Kingston Way is a private roadway that serves a relatively high number of
           Extension to North   residents. Connecting Kingston Way to North Mount Shasta Boulevard via
           Mount Shasta         Nixon Road will improve circulation and provide for emergency access for
           Boulevard            both Kingston Way and Nixon Road development. This connection, a
                                proposed collector, would also provide for a shorter distance from north
                                Mount Shasta to Mercy Medical Center.
           North Mt. Shasta     This future collector would extend from North Mount Shasta Boulevard just
           Avenue to Shasta     south of its crossing of the McCloud Railway line to access the area west of
           Avenue               Shasta Avenue and north of Hinckley Street. Much of this area is currently
                                zoned R-4, Multiple Residential and Professional District. The conceptual
                                collector street has two alternatives: 1) to connect with the west end of
                                Shasta Avenue, or 2) to connect with the northwest end of Kenneth Way.
           Rockfellow Drive     Rockfellow Drive should be extended approximately 200 feet east to
                                Madison Avenue. There is currently an “emergency” route with a dirt road
                                between the east end of Rockfellow Road and the cul-de-sac at the north
                                end of Madison Avenue. A substantial amount of residential development
                                east of the City has occurred with McCloud Avenue serving as the only
                                access. The extension of Rockfellow Road as a collector would provide a
                                second access and escape route from an area known to have a high fire
                                hazard rating.
           Morgan Way to East   Morgan Way is a private street that provides one of two access points into
           Ream Avenue          the Mt. Shasta Mall shopping center. Extension of Morgan Way as a
                                collector to Ream Avenue would improve access to the designated
                                proposed commercial area behind the shopping center and along Interstate
                                5. Extension of this route will also relieve traffic at the intersection of
                                Morgan Way at West Lake Street.
           East Ream to South   The 1993 General Plan included, and the revised General Plan has
           Mt. Shasta Blvd.     retained, a proposed road from Ream Avenue (perhaps as a further
                                extension of the Morgan Way extension from Lake Street) to South Mt.
                                Shasta Boulevard. The proposed intersection with South Mt. Shasta
                                Boulevard is vague but would conceptually be in the vicinity of Bear Springs
                                Road. A major challenge for this section of road would be installation of
                                another railroad crossing. However, this link would facilitate the use of
                                Morgan Road as an alternative to South Mt. Shasta Boulevard.
           New Road between     Intended as a collector street, this roadway would connect the extension of
           Morgan Way and       Morgan Way to the west, to South Mount Shasta Boulevard in the vicinity of
           South Mount Shasta   Sisson Street. The access would improve circulation in south Mount Shasta
           Boulevard            and relieve pressure on South Mount Shasta Boulevard.
           Bear Springs Road    This collector would connect Old McCloud Road to South Mount Shasta
                                Boulevard.
Circulation Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan          4-9

Table 4-4-5
Future Intersection Improvements
Roadway                              Discussion
North Mt. Shasta                     There is need for improvement of this intersection and its
Boulevard/Spring Hill Road           relation to the North Mt. Shasta Boulevard interchange with
Interchange                          Interstate 5. The current intersection will not be suitable to
                                     handle increased traffic related to development of the Spring
                                     Hill Specific Plan Area.
Ski Village Drive/North Mt. Shasta   Providing for a direct intersection with North Mount Shasta
Boulevard Intersection               Boulevard will improve efficiency of this intersection.
Highway 89 Interchange               CalTrans has proposed a variety of conceptual plans to
                                     improve the Highway 89 Interchange with Interstate 5. As of
                                     2006, however, a preferred design had not been determined.
                                     It is expected that improvement of this interchange will
                                     continue to be proposed. Some plans may affect the south end
                                     of South Mt. Shasta Boulevard.
2. General Plan Objectives and Programs: New Roads       Roads and Vacation
Goal CI-CI-2:       Designate arterial, collector and other streets, including
                    proposed streets that are expected to be needed in the planning
                    area.
Policy CI-
        CI-2.1      The City shall recognize the Circulation Map (Figure 4-1) of this
                    Circulation Element as designating arterial and collector streets
                    and proposed streets in the General Plan planning area.
Goal CI-CI-3:       Ensure that newly constructed roads are built to standards
                    meeting long-term needs.
Policy CI-
        CI-3.1:
           3.1:     Accept roads in the City-maintained road system only when
                    constructed to City standards.
                    Implementation Measures:
                    CI-3.1(a): Where a development is required to perform new
                                roadway construction or road widening, the entire
                                roadway shall be completed by the developer to its
                                ultimate planned and designated width from curb-to-
                                curb prior to operation of the project for which the
                                improvements were constructed, unless otherwise
                                approved by the City Engineer. All such roadway
                                                                           Circulation Element
                                         4-10                 City of Mt. Shasta General Plan
                                 construction shall also provide facilities adequate to
                                 ensure pedestrian safety as determined by the City
                                 Engineer.
                     CI-3.1(b): Private roads may be developed provided they are
                                 constructed to an appropriate roadway standard and
                                 have an identified maintenance program with the
                                 responsible party clearly stated.
                     CI-3.1(c): Typically, all streets should have sufficient pavement
                                 width to provide for parking on both sides of the
                                 street and enough remaining pavement width to
                                 provide for fire and emergency access. However, the
                                 City may consider alternative street designs including
                                 narrower streets, one-way streets, restricted parking
                                 and other similar methods intended to reduce the
                                 amount of area that must be paved and maintained.
                     CI-3.1(d): Where traffic calming devices or techniques are
                                 employed, the City shall ensure adequate access for
                                 police    and      fire  vehicles,   and     adequate
                                 maneuverability for snow removal operations.
                     CI-3.1(e): The City shall require the installation of traffic pre-
                                 emption devices for emergency vehicles at all newly
                                 constructed intersections.
Goal CI-CI-4:        Ensure that new roads are sited to meet demands of growth.
Policy CI-
        CI-4.1:
            4.1:     Construct, or require construction of, identified new roads as
                     development or redevelopment occurs.
                     Implementation Measures:
                     CI-4.1(a): Construct, or require construction of, identified new
                                 roads as development or redevelopment occurs.
                     CI-4.1(b): If the design of the project requires that portions of
                                 the new road be constructed offsite to form a
                                 connection, the proponent shall be required to pay a
                                 proportion of the offsite costs attributable to the
                                 proposed project.
                     CI-4.1(c): If the cost of the improvements funded by the project
                                 proponent are greater than the project’s
                                 proportional share, the City and proponent may
                                 enter into an agreement to collect future impact fees
Circulation Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan          4-11

                               from other projects benefiting from the improvements
                               to be reimbursed to the proponent.
                    CI-4.1(d): Require connectivity between adjacent projects as
                               appropriate to ensure adequate and safe circulation.
Goal CI-
       CI-5:        Abandon streets that serve no public purpose.
Policy CI-
       CI-5.1:
          5.1:      When an application is submitted to vacate a street or
                    easement, ensure that the City has no need for the route.
                    Implementation Measure:
                    CI-5.1(a): Utilize the provisions of California law to consider
                               the abandonment of a street or easement for which
                               the City has no use.
D. Parking
1. Background
Parking within the City of Mt. Shasta involves both residential and commercial
entities utilizing on-street and off-street parking throughout the City. Under the
current zoning ordinance, residential development is required to provide off-street
parking commensurate with the density level of the development. While this has
resulted in less on-street parking in residential neighborhoods than might exist
otherwise, there is still considerable on-street parking along residential streets
throughout the City. There are also residential streets that lack adequate off-street
parking because they developed prior to adoption of such regulations. Where off-
street parking is limited or absent, especially along some of the narrower streets, a
hazard to traffic and/or pedestrians may exist.
Provision of adequate parking in the downtown area is facilitated by the
Downtown Business Improvement District (i.e. the parking district). While the City
of Mt. Shasta established this district with the primary goal of ensuring adequate
parking in the downtown area, the district is also responsible for beautification
projects and other public improvements. The parking district is funded by annual
fees charged to existing businesses and in-lieu fees charged to new businesses that
cannot provide adequate off-street parking.
In conjunction with the City, the parking district owns and maintains six public
parking lots with a total of 202 parking spaces. In addition to the off-street
parking, the district provides 224 on-street parking spaces within the downtown
area. These 426 district-owned spaces are supplemented by a lot on the northwest
corner of Chestnut and Castle Streets that the City leases. This lot provides
approximately 32 off-street parking spaces, for a total of 458 public parking
spaces in the downtown area.
                                                                        Circulation Element
                                        4-12               City of Mt. Shasta General Plan
During much of the year, finding a parking space in the downtown area is a
relatively simple endeavor. During the peak of the summer tourist season,
however, parking spaces along the main business block of North Mt. Shasta
Boulevard may be fully utilized. It is during these times that many residents and
visitors get the impression that there is a shortage of available parking in the City.
This perception inspired the City to conduct an informal study of the parking
district during the peak of the tourist season in August 2005. According to the
study, parking within the district does not exceed 55 percent capacity during
periods of peak usage. This means that there are approximately 200 unused
public parking spaces in the downtown area during the busiest time of the year.
Given the abundance of underutilized parking areas within the downtown, proper
utilization of signs directing visitors to the various parking areas would help
alleviate the perceived parking problem.
Outside the downtown area, considerable on-street parking extends both
directions along Mt. Shasta Boulevard. Even when off-street parking is available, it
seems that drivers prefer to park their vehicles along the street in front of
businesses. Given the width of Mt. Shasta Boulevard and the availability of
parking lanes, on-street parking does not pose a particular hazard outside of
winter storm events. It is during the times of inclement winter weather that the
value of off-street parking is most evident.
2. General Plan Objectives and Programs: Parking
Goal CI-CI-6:        Maintain and enhance parking throughout the City.
Policy CI-
        CI-6.1:
            6.1:     Continue to encourage off-street downtown parking.
                     Implementation Measure:
                     CI-6.1(a): Utilize the Downtown Parking District to ensure that
                                there are adequate funds to continue to meet long-
                                term parking needs, and to cover the costs
                                associated with maintenance and upkeep.
Policy CI-
        CI-6.2:
            6.2:     Ensure adequate, but not excessive, well-designed and
                     convenient on-street and off-street parking throughout the City.
                     Implementation Measures:
                     CI-6.2(a): Develop a long-term parking plan and appropriate
                                development fees for the entire City of Mt. Shasta.
                     CI-6.2(b): Develop parking areas in the perimeter of downtown
                                to create an adequate parking supply to serve
                                existing businesses and future development.
Circulation Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan          4-13
                    CI-6.2(c): On-site parking should be located to the rear or side
                                 of buildings.
                    CI-6.2(d): Businesses with appropriate land uses for effective
                                 shared parking should be encouraged. Examples of
                                 businesses with shared parking opportunities may
                                 include office buildings and uses such as restaurants
                                 and theaters that generate primarily an evening
                                 parking demand.
                    CI-6.2(e): Utilize signs to direct traffic to various parking areas
                                 around the City.
E. Public Transportation
1. Background
The Mt. Shasta area is served by public transit and freight trains but does not have
aviation facilities within the planning area.
Public Transit
The Siskiyou Transit and General Express (STAGE) provides inter-city bus service
within Siskiyou County serving Mt. Shasta, Dunsmuir, McCloud, Weed, Lake
Shastina, Yreka, Gazelle, Grenada, Montague, Hornbrook, Scott Valley and
Happy Camp. The system provides ten northbound and ten southbound runs
through Mt. Shasta Monday through Friday. STAGE makes two scheduled stops
within the City at the Mt. Shasta Shopping Center and Mercy Medical Center and
on-call stops can be scheduled. STAGE does not have a terminal located in the
area. Buses are wheelchair-lift equipped and bike racks are available.
Rail Service
The City has two rail lines running through it; the Union Pacific Railroad (UPRR,
which was formerly the Southern Pacific Railroad) and the line of the McCloud
Railway Company (MRC), a short line railroad based in McCloud. The UPRR
north-south mainline through California runs through the City of Mt. Shasta. The
UPRR line accommodates about 18-20 trains per day, many of which are
approximately 5,500 feet in length. Spur lines are located in the Azalea and
Pioneer areas in the vicinity of Mt. Shasta and a small yard area is located
between Alma Street and Nixon Road where UPRR’s line intersects with the MRC
line.
Two Amtrak passenger trains pass through the City each morning on the Union
Pacific Railroad line. Amtrak currently makes a single stop in Dunsmuir to serve
the south County.
The MRC is a single line in the planning area connecting the community of
McCloud with the UPRR line. This line runs approximately two trains per week
consisting of 5 to 15 cars each. The McCloud Railway Company also operates
                                                                           Circulation Element
                                         4-14                 City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

excursion trains including a dinner train out of McCloud, but such activities only
enter into the City of Mt. Shasta on special occasions.
Air Transportation
There are no aviation facilities within the City of Mt. Shasta or the planning area.
The nearest airports with scheduled commercial service are located in Redding
and Medford, Oregon. Local airports serving light aircraft include the Weed
Airport (Siskiyou County) and the Mott Airport (City of Dunsmuir).
2. General Plan Objectives
                     Objectives and Programs: Public Transportation
Goal CI-CI-7:        Encourage continued public transportation in the Mt. Shasta
                     area.
Policy CI-
        CI-7.1:
            7.1:     Support proposals to expand public transportation options.
                     Implementation Measure:
                     CI-7.1(a): When City support is requested for expansion or
                                 enhancement of public transportation facilities,
                                 provide Council support to the efforts through
                                 resolutions of support or other appropriate actions.
                     CI-7.1(b): Continue to work with STAGE to add transit stops as
                                 appropriate throughout the community.
                     CI-7.1(c): Encourage park-and-ride and shuttle services within
                                 the City.
F. Non-
     Non-Motorized Circulation
1. Background
The gentle topography and natural beauty in and around the City of Mt. Shasta
make walking, bicycling and other modes of non-motorized transportation
attractive alternatives to vehicular travel. Currently there are few off-street trails in
the City or elsewhere in the planning area. Development of a trail system would
encourage both resident and visitor use of non-motorized transportation and
could link homes, schools, parks and recreation areas. Planned correctly, a trail
system would be one more reason for visitors to travel to Mt. Shasta.
Support for community multi-use trails in the area has been one of the most
popular issues supported at community planning meetings over the last several
years. During preparation of the 1993 General Plan, the City conducted an
opinion survey that indicated that a trail network was considered a desired
community amenity. The desire for more and better trails has also been
recognized by more recent Community Action Plan workshops. An early version of
a proposed trail system for the 1993 General Plan was opposed because some
thought it prematurely proposed trails across portions of private property. It was
Circulation Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan          4-15
not necessarily the concept of the trail itself that opponents objected to, but that
some believed the trail system could result in the taking of private property.
As proposed in the Mt. Shasta Community Action Plan (2002), one concept of a
trail system would connect various open space elements in the City, in the sphere
of influence and beyond. Popular destinations would include the City Park, Sisson
Meadows, Lake Siskiyou, the State Fish Hatchery and the proposed park on the
former Roseburg property (See Figure 4-2, Mount Shasta Conceptual Trail
Network). Black Butte and Horse Camp have also been proposed as destinations
for a comprehensive hiking trail network from downtown. In order to meet the
alternative transportation needs of the community at the same time, it would be
best to develop a contiguous trail network linking not only open space and
recreation areas but also residential neighborhoods, schools, and employment
and commercial centers. A contiguous trail network as envisioned would create an
alternative transportation network that would be separate from vehicle traffic zones
and would provide for safe, year-round recreation for residents, children and
visitors alike. As much as possible, such a trail system should be developed “off-
street” for greater safety and a more pleasant user environment. However, the
acquisition of land for the creation of an off-street network may prove to be
extremely difficult given the current level of development within and around the
City. It may be that a mix of off-street and on-street circulation routes for non-
vehicular travel is the most practical network to accomplish.
The “routes” illustrated in Figure 4-2 are conceptual only and are not intended to
represent precise alignments. They illustrate how a trail or pathway could be
developed between various locations within the planning area. More detailed
planning, environmental impact analysis and coordination with various property
owners is necessary to determine the best alignments and develop segments of the
network.
It is expected that most, if not all, trails to be developed in the area will be multi-
use trails. They will need to accommodate walkers, joggers, bicycles, wheelchairs,
skateboarders and other users. Some trails may be designed to also
accommodate horseback riders, but the mix of equestrians with other users
presents special safety and design challenges and is often not preferred. The
terminology for bikeways is often used to classify different types of trails. The
following section provides a description of the various bikeway classifications with
illustrative examples.
Typical Bikeway and Trail Classifications
Class I - Bike Paths
Typically referred to as “multi-use paths”, this type of bikeway is separate from the
road and provides an exclusive right-of-way for the use of bicyclists, pedestrians
and other users. Cross-flows by motorists are minimized to the extent possible. The
recommended minimum paved width for a one-way bike path is generally eight
feet and a minimum of ten feet for a two-way facility. Providing an additional two
                                                                         Circulation Element
                                         4-16               City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

feet of gravel on either side allows for better drainage, accommodates periods of
increased use, and is often preferred by joggers as a running surface.
Class II - Bike Lanes
Class II bike lanes are one-way facilities on each side of a road or street with
specific lines of demarcation between areas reserved for bicyclists and motorists.
When properly designed and posted with street signs, bike lanes improve the
public’s awareness of bicycle traffic. The minimum width of a bike lane should be
five feet. Bike lanes should be located between the parking area and the traffic
lane along roadways with on-street parking. Where parking is permitted and not
marked, the minimum width should be 12 feet. In the case of Class II facilities,
pedestrian traffic in urban areas will usually be accommodated with the use of
sidewalks. In rural areas without sidewalks, the bike lanes will typically
accommodate pedestrians, joggers and other non-motorized users.
Class III – Bike Routes
Bike routes are designed to provide continuity of the bikeway system along routes
not served by Class I or Class II facilities. Bike routes require bicyclists to share the
roadway with motor vehicles and are identified solely by the use of signs. These
bikeways do little to protect bicyclists from conflicts with motor vehicles and are the
least desirable of bikeway options. On arterial and collector streets where parking
is permitted, a minimum 30-foot lane should be provided to accommodate a
properly-signed bike route. Specifically designated bike routes are not required for
Circulation Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan          4-17

residential streets. Along roadways that have significant amounts of vehicular
traffic but lack paved shoulders, shoulder paving is advisable in order to improve
safety and convenience of use.
Siskiyou County Bicycle Transportation Plan
An administrative draft of a Siskiyou County Bicycle Transportation Plan was
prepared in 2000 for the Siskiyou County Planning Department by Tom
Hesseldenz and Associates. While the plan was never adopted, it nevertheless
provides some recommendations for bicycle-related transportation improvements
in the planning area.
The Draft Bicycle Plan had several key goals, objectives and policies relating to
circulation planning. The first was to promote bicycle routes that connect
residential neighborhoods with major employment centers, schools, libraries,
shopping areas, commercial centers, parks, museums, government offices, post
offices, and other destinations within and between communities.
Goal V of the Bicycle Plan proposed to, “Ensure effective bicycle transportation
planning and design”, and was supported by policies to, “Consider bicycle facility
needs in the planning, design, construction, reconstruction, and maintenance of
all transportation systems, with highest priority given to designated bicycle routes.”
Figure 16 of the Draft Bicycle Plan addressed proposed designated bikeways in
the Mt. Shasta City area, and Table 14 consisted of a list of proposed bikeways
with recommended improvements. The Draft Bicycle Plan acknowledged the need
to plan bicycle facilities in a manner that minimizes conflicts between users and
private landowners, and contained an objective with policies concerning legal
access for bicycle routes.
Figure 4-3, Conceptual Primary Bike Routes, is included in this General Plan to
indicate the public streets and roads that also serve as primary bike routes in the
planning area. These routes connect with schools and parks, and also provide
connections to regional destinations as part of a larger network (e.g., Lake
Siskiyou, Bunny Flat, Weed, Dunsmuir and McCloud. The indicated routes are not
intended to be exclusive. Other routes are understood to also be commonly used
by bicyclists.
                                                                         Circulation Element
                                       4-18                 City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

          This figure also does not attempt to distinguish between streets and roads
          that have been or that could be improved to provide “Class II” type bike
          lanes beside the motor vehicle roadway, or “Class III” routes where the
          roadway is shared by motor vehicles and bicyclists.
          In addition to the primary bike routes indicated in Figure 4-3, there have
          been several proposals in the community for multi-purpose trails of the
          “Class I” variety, as suggested in Figure 4-2. One such conceptual route
          would connect the downtown area of the City with the City Park via a route
          west of the railroad tracks. Another conceptual route would extend west
          from South Mt. Shasta Boulevard through the “Roseburg Site” and
          underneath Interstate 5 to connect to South Old Stage Road.
          More detailed study is needed to identify opportunities for specific
          improvements and proposed alignments for Class I trails, as well as Class
          II bike routes. The General Plan supports preparation of a master plan that
          provides more detailed plans for the location and development of
          walkways, trails and bikeways. It is expected that such a master plan will
          provide much more detail than, and which may vary from, the conceptual
          routes indicated in Figure 4-2 or Figure 4-3. Since the routes indicated in
          these figures are only conceptual, the development of more detailed
          routes will not need to be “consistent” with this figures.
          Safe Routes to School
          The Federal government maintains a program entitled “Safe Routes to
          Schools”. In California the program is administered by Caltrans. The
          primary purposes of the program are: 1) to enable and encourage
          children in kindergarten through eighth grade, including children with
          disabilities, to safely walk, bicycle, or otherwise wheel to school and, per
          the Americans with Disabilities Act Guidelines, traverse to school via
          accessible routes; 2) to make walking and bicycling to school a more
          appealing mode choice, and; 3) to facilitate the planning, design, and
          implementation of projects that will improve safety, the environment, and
          overall quality of life. Expected outcomes of the program include:
               •   Increased bicycle, pedestrian, and traffic safety around schools.
               •   More children walking and bicycling to and from schools.
               •   Decreased traffic congestion around schools.
               •   Reduced childhood obesity.
               •   Improved air quality, community safety and security, community
                   involvement.
               •   Improved partnerships among schools, local agencies, parents,
                   community groups, non-profit organizations.
          Funding opportunities are available through the program for creating
          operational and physical improvements to the infrastructure surrounding
Circulation Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan           4-19

        schools that establish safer and fully accessible crossings, walkways, trails
        and bikeways, and/or that reduce speeds and potential conflicts with
        motor vehicle traffic. Physical improvements must be located within a two-
        mile radius of a school. The Safe Route to Schools program emphasizes
        community participation in the development and implementation of
        projects. Applications that have the best chance of being selected for
        funding are those that are developed with community participation and
        incorporate the key program elements of education, encouragement,
        engineering, enforcement, and evaluation.
2. General Plan Objectives and Programs:
                                    Programs: Non-
                                               Non-Motorized Circulation
Goal CI-
      CI-8:       Promote safe and efficient pedestrian and bicycle transportation
                  and other modes of non-motorized transportation.
Policy CI-
       CI-8.1:    Promote the development of bikeways, sidewalks, pedestrian
                  pathways and multi-use paths that connect residential
                  neighborhoods with other neighborhoods, schools, employment
                  centers, commercial centers and public open space, and that
                  separate bicyclists, skateboarders and pedestrians from vehicular
                  traffic whenever possible. Ensure that pedestrian facilities follow
                  logical routes designed to serve pedestrian needs and are not
                  constructed as “sidewalks to nowhere”.
                  Implementation Measures:
                  CI-8.1(a): Amend the development code to require that new
                               sidewalks, pedestrian pathways, multi-use paths
                               and/or bikeways be constructed for new
                               development based upon current and foreseeable
                               future needs in the area of proposed projects.
                  CI-8.1(b): When siting sidewalks, pedestrian pathways,
                               bikeways and/or multi-use paths, the City shall
                               examine where existing facilities are located and
                               determine if there are other more logical travel
                               patterns that should also be served.
                  CI-8.1(c): The City should create an Alternative Transportation
                               Advisory Committee (ATAC) to serve as an advisory
                               body on matters relating to planning of the City's
                               bikeway, sidewalk, pedestrian pathway and multi-use
                               path system, as well as future modifications and
                               expansion of that system.
                                                                        Circulation Element
                                       4-20                City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

SOURCE: MT. SHASTA COMMUNITY ACTION PLAN, 2002
                                                                  FIGURE 4-2
                                               4-21 MOUNT SHASTA CONCEPTUAL
                                                               TRAIL NETWORK

                                                                                                                                                                SP RI
                                                                                                                                                              I-5
                                                                                                                                                                    NG
                                                                                                                                                                     HILL
                                                                                                                                                                         DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 EVERITT
                                                                                                                                                                                      NORT
                                                                                                                                                                                                     HM
                                                                                                                                                                                                        O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         UN
                                                                                                                                             PINE GROVE DR                                                                                                                                           MEMORIAL HWY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  T                            SKI VILLAGE DR
                    LEGEND                                                                                                                                                                                                        SHA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        A
                                            CITY LIMITS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   KINGSTON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         D
                                            PLANNING AREA
                    I-5                     FREEWAY                                                                          LASSEN LANE                                                                               W      Y                                              ROCKFELLOW                     DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ST
                                            EXPRESSWAY                                                                                                                                                                                                            Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               IV                     ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MONROE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MADISON DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                JEFFERSON DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E               M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ADAMS DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PI          CH
                                            ARTERIAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 WASHINGTON STREET
                                                                                                                RT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          I-5                    NE                      T                 ET
                                                                                                              NO                                                                                                                                      ST               NU                RE
                                                                                                                          H                                                                                                                                          ST                 T
                                            COLLECTOR                                                                         OL
                                                                                                                                 D                                                                                                                                           ST       S
                                                                                                                                        ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                          W       AY
                                            PROPOSED ROADS                                                                                AG
                                                                                                                                            E                 RD                                                                                                                                                MCCLOUD AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E
              * Unmarked roads are                                                                                                                                                                   RY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LAK
                 Residential Roads                                                                                                                                                                 HE DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                 TC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SOUTH
                                                                                                                                                                                               HA
                                            PRIMARY BIKE ROUTE
                                               (CONCEPTUAL)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      EDDY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                UT                                 OU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BARR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SO                                  M R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      EAM AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       W. A .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  OLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E                                                                              MCCLO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AG                                                                                      UD RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           I-5                    BLVD
                                                                                                        INSET
                              I-5
                          NO
                            RTH
                                O   LD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HWY 89
                                       ST                    K   E
                                                          LA
                                        AG  ER       MS                       H
                                              D ABRA                      ING
                                                                       SPR
                                                                            ILL
                                                                                    DR
                                                                                       I                  Lake Siskiyou
                                                                                       VE
                                                                                                                                                                                            EVERITT
                                                                                                  I-5
                                                                                        PINE GROVE DR
                                                                                                                                                                                               MEMORIAL HWY
                                                                                                                                        SKI VILL AGE DR
                                                                                                            KINGSTO
                                                                            LASSEN LANE                        N
                                                                                                                 W    Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                ROCKFELLOW DR
                                                                                                                                        CH
                                                                                                                              PI
                                                                                                                                                                                               WASHINGTON STREET
                                                                                                                                               ES T
                                                                           H                                                       NE
                                                                        RT                                                              ST                   NU
                                                                                                                                                                T                      ET
                                                                      NO                                                                                                          RE
                                                                              O
                                                                               LD                                                                                   ST          ST
                                                                                    ST
                                                                                      AG
                                                                                         E     RD                                                    E
                                                                                                                                        LAK
                                                                                                                                        I-5
                                                                                                                                                                     REAM AVE
                                                                                                                      BARR
                                                                                                                                                                                       M
                                                                                                               W. A .
                                                                                                                                                                                            T.
                                                                                                                                                                                             SH                               O   LD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MC
                                                                                                                                                                                                 A S TA B LV D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CLOUD R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           D
                                                                     INSET                                            RD
                                                                                                                                             L         VD
                                                                                                                                        EB                                           I-5
                                                                                                                                   LAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    HWY 89
                                                                                                                                                                            HO
                                                                                                                                                                        SOUT
                                                                                                                               OU
                                                                                                                                   Y
                                                                                                                              KI
                                                                                                                      SIS                                                        LD   ST
                                                                                                                                                                                        AG                                    A
                                                                                                                                                                                           E    RD          AZ
                                                                     Lake Siskiyou                                                                                                                            EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               I-5
   N
Source: PMC, 2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FIGURE 4-3
                                                                                                                                              4-22                                                                                                                                              CONCEPTUAL PRIMARY BIKE ROUTES

                     CI-8.1(d): Develop a Walkways, Trails and Bikeways Master Plan
                                  that incorporates the recommendations of the
                                  Community Action Plan, the draft Siskiyou County
                                  Bicycle Plan, and other planning proposals, where
                                  appropriate, to plan the location and development
                                  of future trails and alternative transportation routes
                                  in the City and the vicinity.
                     CI-8.1(e): When the City prepares a master plan and, prior to
                                  completion of such a plan as the City considers
                                  issues related to walkway, trail and bikeway issues,
                                  the City will consider the following needs and
                                  general objectives:
                                  A. The city bicycle network will connect with the
                                       countywide bicycle network. The city will
                                       encourage and work with the county in
                                       development of a countywide bicycle network.
                                  B. Signage should be provided (where automobile
                                       traffic merges with or intersects bicycle traffic) to
                                       notify automobiles of the presence of cyclists.
                                  C. Repair or development of railroad crossings
                                       should be done in a way that allows safe
                                       crossing by bicycles.
                                  D. The timing of traffic lights and sensitivity of traffic
                                       sensing equipment should accommodate
                                       bicycles.
                     CI-8.1(f): The City, local schools and concerned community
                                  organizations will seek funding opportunities through
                                  the Safe Routes to School program to facilitate the
                                  planning, design, and implementation of eligible
                                  projects to improve the safety and accessibility of
                                  pedestrian and bicycle routes to local schools.
Policy CI-
        CI-8.2:
            8.2:     If the railroad line between the City of Mt. Shasta and McCloud
                     is ever proposed for abandonment, the City supports the
                     conversion of the route for a public multi-purpose trail.
                     Implementation Measure:
                     CI 8.2(a): Should the McCloud Railway Company line ever be
                                  abandoned between the City and the community of
                                  McCloud, the City of Mt. Shasta shall support the
                                  retention and development of the right-of-way for a
Circulation Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan             4-23
                                multi-purpose public trail for non-motorized use
                                (e.g., a “rails to trails” type of conversion).
                     CI-8.2(b): Continue to support rail service into Mt. Shasta, and
                                seek passenger service and rail spur(s) as
                                appropriate.
G. Utilities
1. Background
Utility services provided to the planning area include: water, wastewater disposal,
storm drainage, electricity, cable television and telecommunication.
Water
The City of Mt. Shasta provides water services within the City and to portions of
the planning area outside the city limits. Much of the planning area is served by
individual wells and on-site water systems. The City water supply and distribution
system is discussed in the Land Use Element (Section III). Please refer to the Land
Use Element for further details pertaining to the domestic water system.
Wastewater Disposal
Wastewater disposal in the Mt. Shasta area includes a regional sewage collection
and treatment system and individual on-site septic systems. Although wastewater
lines are a discussion item included in the Circulation Element, this infrastructure is
discussed in-depth in the Land Use Element (Section III). Please refer to the Land
Use Element for further details pertaining to the wastewater disposal and treatment
facilities for the City.
Stormwater Drainage
The planning area is topographically divided into drainage sub-areas including
Wagon Creek, Big Springs Creek, Cold Creek, and Old Mill Creek. A series of
unnamed channels drain the southern portions of the City. Most of the drainages
in the planning area drain into Lake Siskiyou and all of them eventually drain into
the Sacramento River. The 1993 General Plan reported that an eastside
annexation study indicted that many portions of the City’s drainage system are at
or near capacity. Impacts of new development, particularly in areas east of the
City, will likely require improvements to the storm drainage system.
The increased development of non-residential uses with large parking areas and a
tendency towards leveled pads increases the amount of surface water runoff that
enters the drainage system. Stormwater may carry sediment and contaminants that
can impact surface water quality. The City works with the Regional Water Quality
Control Board to implement best management practices for the protection of
stormwater runoff during construction.
                                                                             Circulation Element
                                        4-24                    City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

Electricity
Electrical service in the Mt. Shasta area is provided by Pacific Power and Light
Company (PP&L). Power originates from a 115 kilovolt (KV) line in Weed and then
is transmitted along a 69 KV line that runs along the west side of the valley. A
substation interfaces with this line east of South Old Stage Road. Power is then
delivered along a distribution network. PP&L has indicated that its power supply is
capable of meeting projected power needs in the area. Substations and other
aspects of the electrical supply infrastructure may need to be upgraded or
improved in order to service the population as growth continues (PP&L, 2005).
Telephone and Internet
Telephone services to the area are provided by a number of companies.
Other Utilities
There are no gas, liquid, slurry or other commodity pipelines located in the Mt.
Shasta planning area. Propane is provided through private and individual home
delivery.
2. General Plan Objectives and Programs: Utilities
Goal CI-CI-9:        Ensure adequate utilities to meet community needs.
Policy CI-
        CI-9.1:
            9.1:     Encourage participation of public utilities in the project review
                     process.
                     Implementation Measures:
                     CI-9.1(a): Provide copies of development proposals for the
                                review and comment of public utilities about the
                                capacity to serve the project.
                     CI-9.1(b): Support efforts by utilities to upgrade and improve
                                service to the Mt. Shasta area.
Policy CI-
        CI-9.2:
            9.2:     Develop public utility master plans for water service, sewage
                     disposal and stormwater control.
                      Implementation Measures:
                     CI-9.2(a): Complete, and update as needed, capital
                                improvement plans for City-provided utility services
                                including water, sewer, and stormwater.
                     CI-9.2(b): Require that capital improvement plans include an
                                implementing program with target dates, estimated
                                costs, and possible methods of financing the
                                programs.
Circulation Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan         4-25
                  CI-9.2(c): When commercial development is proposed with
                               new parking facilities, require that a site drainage
                               plan be included with permit applications.
REFERENCES
City of Mt. Shasta, General Plan, 1993.
City Economic Development Advisory Committee. Mt. Shasta Community Action
Plan. 2002.
Siskiyou County Department of Public Works. Siskiyou Transit and General
Express. Website. http://www.co.siskiyou.ca.us/dpw/transportation.htm. 2005.
Tom Hesseldenz and Associates. Siskiyou County Bicycle Transportation Plan
(Administrative Draft) . 2000.
                                                                        Circulation Element
                                       4-26                City of Mt. Shasta General Plan
6. SAFETY ELEMENT
A. Introduction
California Government Code Section 65302(g) specifies that general plans
include a safety element for the protection of the community from unreasonable
risks associated with the effects of various hazards. The list of possible hazards
includes: seismically induced surface rupture, ground shaking, ground failure,
tsunami, seiche, and dam failure; slope instability leading to mudslides and
landslides; subsidence, liquefaction and other seismic hazards; flooding; and
wildland and urban fires. A safety element may also address evacuation routes,
military installations, peak load water supply requirements, and minimum road
widths and clearances around structures as those items relate to fire and
geologic hazards.
The fire safety provisions in the safety element should comply with the minimum
statewide fire safety standards pertaining to road standards, signing standards
for roads and buildings, private water supply reserves, and fuel breaks and
greenbelts.
B. Flood Hazards
1. Background
     Background
Flood hazard in the planning area is very localized. The hazards are generally
limited to riparian areas along streams, the shores of Lake Siskiyou and along
the Sacramento River below Box Canyon Dam. The flooding of streams is
caused by seasonal flow fluctuations and peak storm events. Flooding that
occurs in the planning area generally only affects the immediate vicinity of
particular streams.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency has not mapped floodplains in
the planning area, with the exception of the shore of Lake Siskiyou and a
narrow fringe area along the Sacramento River. Figure 6-     6-1, Flood Hazards,
                                                                          Hazards
shows the areas subject to inundation.
The Box Canyon area below Lake Siskiyou is subject to flood hazards from high
precipitation and from potential dam failure. An inundation study prepared for
the County indicates that portions of the canyon area below the dam would be
inundated in the event of a dam failure. The study was prepared in 1973 by
Olson and Associates Engineering and concluded that, in the planning area,
inundated areas would be confined in the inner canyon area.
Safety Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan         6-1

                 Planning Area
                 City Limits
                             S
                                                   od
                                               ilra
                                             Ra
                                        ific
                                     Pac
                                 ern
                             outh
     Lake
     Siskiyou
                                                        P L ANNING AR EA
          M ap
          Area
                                   INUNDATION AR EA
 N
Source: City of Mount Shasta
                                                                                         FIGURE 6-1
                                                                           6-2   FLOOD HAZARD AREAS

2. General Plan Objectives and Programs: Flood Hazards
Goal SF-SF-1:         Protect people and property from flooding.
Policy SF-
        SF-1.1:
             1.1:     Identify areas subject to inundation
                     Implementation Measures:
                     SF-1.1(a): Require that the limits of flooding resulting from a
                                  one hundred-year storm event be shown on all
                                  permit site plans where lands may be subject to
                                  inundation.
                     SF-1.1(b): When subdivisions or discretionary permits are
                                  sought for lands adjoining streams that have had
                                  a history of overtopping the banks, require that an
                                  assessment be prepared by a qualified engineer or
                                  hydrologist to delineate areas likely to be subject
                                  to inundation from a one hundred-year storm
                                  event.
Policy SF-
        SF-1.2:
             1.2:    Develop a program to identify areas subject to flooding.
                     Implementation Measures:
                     SF-1.2(a): As studies related to flooding are prepared and
                                  submitted for projects, the Department of Public
                                  Works shall maintain a file of such reports and
                                  maps for public use.
                     SF-1.2(b): Each year, upon the annual review and update of
                                  the General Plan, any boundaries of flood studies
                                  prepared during the previous years shall be
                                  identified on a City Flood Sensitive Area map.
C. Geologic Hazards
1. Background
Potential geologic hazards in the area include seismicity (with related impacts
such as liquefaction), slope instability and subsidence, and volcanism.
Seismicity
The severity of the impact of an earthquake on a community depends on the
intensity and duration of ground shaking and on the occurrence of other
seismically-induced phenomena. Factors related to severity include the
magnitude of the seismic event, the distance between the community and the
event fault, and on local geologic and soil conditions. Potential hazards
Safety Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan            6-3
induced by seismic activity include ground shaking, fault rupture, slope failures
and liquefaction.
A fault rupture is an actual crack or breaking of the ground along a fault during
an earthquake. Available literature indicates the planning area is subject to low
levels of seismicity and low risk of fault surface rupture. The planning area is
located in a “moderate” seismicity zone with a possible maximum earthquake
intensity of VI or VII on the Modified Mercalli Scale. Earthquakes of this
magnitude would be noticeable by the public and could cause minor to
moderate structural damage. The planning area has been subject to minor
earthquakes.
Historically, there have been only two recorded earthquakes with a Richter
magnitude of 4.0 or greater occurring in the immediate Mt. Shasta area. The
1994 Fault Activity Map, prepared by the California Division of Mines and
Geology, indicates no active or potentially active faults within the Mt. Shasta
Planning Area. Two faults classified as “potentially active” by the California
Division of Mines and Geology exist near the planning area. One is a north-
south trending fault running through the top of Mount Shasta, the other is an
east-west trending fault that runs from the top of Mount Shasta to a point north
of Black Butte. Because of the active volcanic status of Mount Shasta, these
faults are considered potentially active by the California Geological Survey.
Some soils in the planning area may be subject to liquefaction as a result of
seismic activity. Liquefaction occurs when earthquakes shake loose, wet, sandy
soil. When this occurs, the soils can become almost like quicksand and lose
their ability to support structures. Building foundations can sink, break apart or
tilt. Gravity-fed pipelines can back up. In the planning area, soils underlain with
glacial outwash deposits consisting of sands may be subject to liquefaction.
Pursuant to the Uniform Building Code, the project area is in Seismic Zone 3.
Within the provisions of the Uniform Building Code, there are numerous
differences between the low seismic risk zones of 0 and 1, the moderate risk
zones of 2A and 2B, and the higher risk zones of 3 and 4. These differences
include, among others, design force levels, structural connection details, and
allowable materials (e.g., whether or not unreinforced masonry is allowed in
new construction).
Slope Instability and Subsidence
The terrain of the planning area has primarily low to moderate slopes. During
preparation of the Siskiyou County General Plan (1980), reconnaissance
mapping was undertaken to identify potential geologic hazards. This mapping
revealed no geologic hazards east of Interstate 5 given that slopes are relatively
gentle. Mapping of slope instability of areas west of Interstate 5, including lands
in the Shasta Trinity National Forest, identified landslide features along Rainbow
Ridge and the Box Canyon Gorge. Steep hillsides such as Quail Hill and south
                                                                            Safety Element
                                         6-4              City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

of Old McCloud Road, although unmapped as to geologic hazards, may be
subject to slope instability due to similar geology as Rainbow Ridge.
There are no known significant subsidence hazards in the planning area.
Geologic or hydrologic conditions associated with subsidence are not known to
occur in the area. However, some localized subsidence could result from peat
oxidation in wetlands.
Volcanic Hazards
The City of Mt. Shasta lies on the southwestern flank of the Mount Shasta
volcano, a large, historically active eruptive center in the southern Cascade
Mountains. The Mount Shasta volcano has a long but irregular record of
eruption. It has erupted at least once every 600-800 years for the past 10,000
years with its most recent eruption having occurred over two hundred years ago
in 1786 (Christianson, 1982). The potential volcanic hazards in the vicinity of
Mt. Shasta have been detailed in geologic literature. The most pertinent studies
were completed since the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens in Washington
State (Crandell, 1987).
Fumarolic and hot spring activity persist at the summit area of Mount Shasta,
which suggests that there is still a body of molten rock below the surface. The
eruptive record suggests that the Mount Shasta volcano will probably erupt
again in the future, but at a time and with a magnitude that are not possible to
predict.
The figure and discussion below outline the types of volcanic-related hazards
that could affect the City of Mt. Shasta and its planning area. Various kinds of
volcanic activity can endanger life and property both close to and far away from
a volcano. Some hazards are more severe than others, depending on the extent
of the event, whether people or property are in the way, and the amount of time
in which the community is warned of an impending event.
Although most volcanic hazards are triggered directly by an eruption, some
hazards may occur when a volcano is quiet. Volcanic-related mudflows (often
addressed as a “lahar”; a term from Indonesia) are a mixture of water and rock
fragments that sometimes flow down the slopes of volcanoes and into down-
slope valleys and rivers. Eruptions may directly trigger mudflows by quickly
melting snow and ice on the volcano. Mudflows can also be triggered by
intense rainfall without being related to an eruption. Mudflows vary in size and
speed. Figure 6-   6-2, Potential Mud Flow Channels,
                                             Channels indicates low-lying areas in
the planning area that could potentially experience flows as the result of a
volcanically triggered mudflow event. The potential mud flow areas indicated on
this figure are not precisely defined and have only been presented as advisory
information.
Pyroclastic flows are mixtures of hot gases and dry rock fragments that are
blasted away from a vent at high speeds. Most pyroclastic flows consist of a
Safety Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan          6-5

basal flow of gases and coarse fragments that move along the ground, and a
turbulent cloud of extremely hot gases and ash that rises above the basal flow.
Ash may fall from this cloud over a wide area downwind from the pyroclastic
flow.
Landslides may also be triggered on or near a volcano by an eruption or by
seismic events related to volcanic forces beneath the surface.
In the case of the Mount Shasta volcano, eruptions during the last 10,000 years
produced lava flows around the flanks of the mountain. Pyroclastic flows from
summit and flank vents extended as far as 20 kilometers from the summit. Most
of these eruptions also produced large mudflows, many of which reached more
than several tens of kilometers from the mountain. If a future eruption
resembled those of the past, the City of Mt. Shasta and the vicinity, as well as
the communities of Weed, McCloud and Dunsmuir, would be endangered.
USGS Bulletin 1503 speculated that such eruptions could generate lava and
pyroclastic flows that could affect low areas almost anywhere within about 20
kilometers of the summit and mudflows may cover valley floors and other low
areas for several tens of kilometers from the volcano [Miller, 1980].
Such a major event could be expected to have significant impacts within the
planning area. The City of Mt. Shasta lies in the lower portion of an old, broad
pyroclastic and debris fan on the southwest side of the volcano. Cold Creek,
Big Springs Creek, and Wagon Creek run along the base of the fan and are
likely channels into which any far-traveled flow would empty. The lower portions
of the drainages of Cascade Gulch and Avalanche Gulch are likely pathways
for flows to travel toward the City.
Development located in these hazard areas may be at risk if a future eruption
occurs on the south or west slopes of Mount Shasta. While it is possible to avoid
substantial impacts by precluding development in recognized volcanic hazard
areas (which amounts to approximately 60 percent of the private land in the
planning area), the City has considered a number of factors in adopting its
related attitude that the City will not preclude development in lands that may be
subject to volcanic hazards. The predicted eruption interval of six to eight
hundred years suggests an estimate that Mount Shasta may not erupt until the
year 2376, if at all. If the City were to preclude development in potential hazard
areas, the City could be required to compensate property owners for
condemnation of property. This would be an infeasible fiscal liability in response
to a hazard that has such an uncertain potential of occurring.
Hazards due to potential volcanic airfall and volcanic-related earthquakes can
be reduced by requiring building foundations, walls and roofs to be properly
supported and kept in good repair. Such construction is already required by
building codes due to the potential for non-volcanic (i.e., tectonic) seismic
hazard potential. Proper geotechnical examinations should assure that
foundations are set in well-consolidated deposits or hard rock. Development
                                                                           Safety Element
                                         6-6             City of Mt. Shasta General Plan
should be avoided in poorly consolidated substrata, especially in areas with
high water tables such as marshes and meadows, as well as in river and stream
flood plains. Steeply gabled roofs designed for snow may also be effective for
shedding volcanic ash. Flatter-topped buildings should have easy access to the
roof and handy shovels to remove debris that might result in excessive roof
loads that could cause structural collapse.
Technological advances in volcano monitoring, new and refined volcano-
hazard assessments, and better warning programs have significantly improved
the ability to warn of impending eruptions and related volcanic hazards.
However, volcano monitoring technology and warning plans, no matter how
timely and accurate, will reduce risks only to the extent that warnings are
communicated effectively to emergency personnel and to people who live and
work in potentially hazardous areas.
Education of the citizenry, including distribution of pamphlets on possible
volcanic hazards, can be an important tool as part of the long-term planning
goals and emergency contingency plans for the community.
The general conclusion concerning volcanic risks in the Mt. Shasta area is that it
is recognized that there is a long-term potential for volcanic hazards to property
and infrastructure in the vicinity, but that there is a very low risk to human life
since it is expected that an impending eruption would be detected in ample time
to notify and evacuate people. Although it is understood that some low-lying
areas in the planning area have a higher potential than other areas for
destruction of property that could be caused by volcanic mudflows, etc., the
expectation that such an event may not occur for hundreds of years, if ever,
leads local agencies to conclude that the potential is not regarded as a
constraint to planning and approval of development projects in relatively
vulnerable areas.
Liquefaction
The California Geological Society has identified soils in the planning area that
may be subject to liquefaction as a result of seismic activity. Soils underlain with
glacial outwash deposits consisting of loose sands, silty sands and gravelly
sands may be subject to this condition. For example, it is reported that the
California Geological Society has discovered soils of this type near the Sisson
school site.
Safety Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan         6-7
2. General Plan Objectives and Programs: Geologic Hazards
Goal SF-
      SF-2:    Assure life and property are adequately protected from seismic
               hazards in the area.
Policy SF-
       SF-2.1:
          2.1:   Avoid development in areas of steep slope and high erosion
                 potential.
                 Implementation Measures:
                 SF-2.1(a): Maintain a maximum density of not more than
                             one dwelling per ten acres of gross land area on
                             slopes in excess of thirty percent.
                 SF-2.1(b): Amend the land development code to establish
                             special review standards for areas with slopes of
                             greater than thirty percent.
                 SF-2.1(c): Ensure that site development on steep slopes is
                             designed to avoid creating areas that may be
                             subject to slippage or movement from storm
                             events.
                 SF-2.1(d): Encourage the use of density transfer to avoid new
                             private construction in areas of steep slopes or
                             high erosion potential.
Goal SF-
      SF-3:      Take prudent steps to maintain emergency services in the
                 event of volcanic activity.
Policy SF-
       SF-3.1:
          3.1    Periodically update the City’s emergency service program to
                 minimize destruction from volcanic activity.
                 Implementation Measures:
                 SF-3.1(a): Evaluate power, telephone, water, sewer and other
                            utilities; roads, and landing strips for their location
                            and resistance to the effects of various volcanic
                            hazards, and provide the City Council with
                            recommendations for improvements.
                 SF-3.1(b): Local, state, and Federal governments should
                            develop contingency plans for a possible volcanic
                            eruption at Mt. Shasta, including provisions for
                            emergency communication.
                 SF-3.1(c): Develop programs to educate residents about
                            preparing for volcanic hazards.
                                                                          Safety Element
                                        6-8             City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

Policy SF-
        SF-3.2:
             3.2:    Take steps to protect public facilities and emergency service
                     providers.
                     Implementation Measures:
                     SF-3.2(a): Avoid construction of public or emergency
                                buildings within low-lying areas that may be subject
                                to volcanic flows.
                     SF-3.2(b): Evaluate and upgrade necessary local codes to
                                accommodate the potential effects of volcanic
                                induced seismic and airfall hazards.
Safety Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan          6-9

                                                              B
                                                           A                 A
                                         C
                    5
                                                                Shastina
                               Weed
                                   B
                                                                             Mt. Shasta
                                                       C
                                   Black Butte
                                5
                                                                                       B
                                                B               C
                                                                                    A
                                            Mt. Shasta
                                               City
                                     Lake          5
                                   Siskiyou
           A   High                                               Highway 89
           B   Moderate
           C   Low
                                                                Potential Mud
                                                Dunsmuir
                                                         5      Flow Channels
                                                                                  0  1   2      4
                                                                                                  Miles
 N
Source: Crandell and Nichols, 1987
                                                                                                  FIGURE 6-2
                                                         6-10                  POTENTIAL MUD FLOW CHANNELS

D. Fire Hazards
1. Background
(Note: Fire protection services are addressed in the Land Use Element.)
Due to the abundance of native vegetation, hillside slopes, dry summers, and
the extent of development that is located in the wildland interface, fire hazards
within the planning area include the potential for wildland fires as well as
structural fires.
Wildland fires present considerable risks to development in areas where a
wildland-urban interface exists. A wildland-urban interface is simply the line,
area, or zone where structures and other human development meet or
intermingle with undeveloped wildland or vegetative fuels. Given that much of
the planning area around the City of Mt. Shasta meets the definition of such an
interface, a potential threat to both life and property exists for many residents of
the planning area. Even without a loss of life or structures, wildland fires often
result in substantial suppression costs, a loss of forest resources, considerable
disruption to the surrounding community, and visual scars on the landscape.
In order to better address wildland fire hazards in the vicinity of the City of Mt.
Shasta and develop measures to minimize these risks, the Mt. Shasta Fire Safe
Council obtained funding for, and coordinated preparation of, the Mt. Shasta
Area Community Wildfire Protection Plan (CWPP), dated June 2006 . The
CWPP was prepared with the purpose of identifying areas of high priority for
fuels reduction treatment, and to provide guidelines for the implementation of a
pro-active program that would reduce the potential for loss of life and property
resulting from wildfires. The plan also assessed community fire emergency
preparedness.
According to the CWPP, areas dominated by chaparral pose the greatest risk
for wildfire due to the intensity of the fuel loading, with areas dominated by
grass, brush and timber also posing significant risks. The greatest impact to
structures, however, would likely occur along the southern and eastern edges of
the City where there are not only ample fuels present, but a substantial amount
of development as well.
The CWPP proposes a number of measures to minimize risks to life and
property resulting from wildfires. These include: the creation of fuel breaks and
shaded fuel breaks surrounding the City; forest thinning to reduce the existing
fuel load; enforcement of state defensible space requirements; and
implementation of a public education campaign. While implementation of these
measures would undoubtedly reduce the impact of a wildfire should one occur,
there needs to be resolution concerning how much of the program
recommended in the CWPP will be generally supported by the City and the
general public. Some residents are concerned about the visual impacts of
Safety Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan         6-11
planned projects that would significantly thin forests and develop wide fuel
breaks around the community.
Various provisions of State law address fire safety. The City of Mount Shasta is
rated as being in a “Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone” pursuant to
California Government Code Section 51179. Jurisdictions and property owners
within such zones are required to comply with the requirements of Section
51182 of the Government Code. One such requirement is the maintenance of
at least 100 feet of defensible space around structures, or the clearing of all
flammable vegetation (with a few exceptions) to the property line should that
distance be shorter. Other requirements of the Code are designed to reduce
hazards to residences in the event of a wildfire, but are likewise designed to
minimize the likelihood of fires spreading outward from a structural fire.
Successful responses to structural fires involve short response time, good water
supply, adequate equipment and trained personnel. In areas served by the
City’s water system, hydrant availability, flow and pressure are generally
adequate for fire fighting purposes. Access to development in the planning area
is generally adequate with the exception of some “flag lots.” In addition, winter
snow conditions and railroad crossings may delay response time to structural
fires.
In response to a series of                               FLAG LOTS
devastating fires in the rural
foothills of California and
the infamous Oakland Hills       Flag lots are a term that applies to parcels that are
                                 designed in tandem with another parcel, where one parcel
fire in October 1991,            has “normal” road frontage and the other parcel derives
California       law       has   its access from a narrower-than-normal strip as long as
undergone a number of            the front parcel is deep.
revisions and updates as the
                                               DRIVEWAY (FLAG POLE)
Legislature, the California
Department of Forestry and                                                 “FLAG”
                                      ROAD      “NORMAL”                    LOT
Fire Protection, and local                        LOT
fire-fighting    organizations
strive to improve the means
of protecting property and
life from fire danger.
Sometimes relatively simple measures can benefit community fire safety. Such
measures include requirements for readily-visible street addresses, maintaining
public street signs and ensuring that owners of private roads do the same. The
use of firebreaks in strategic locations along the wildland-urban interface is also
beneficial. Construction standards such as prohibiting flammable roofing
materials, encouraging the use of residential sprinkler systems, and ensuring
that new developments have adequate water pressure to serve fire hydrants are
among the simpler measures that can be implemented. Other key issues are the
lengths of dead-end roads to cul-de-sacs and flag lots, and the standards of
                                                                                Safety Element
                                       6-12                   City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

access roads to accommodate fire-fighting vehicles and ensure the safety of
fire-fighting personnel. The Uniform Building Code (UBC) provides for such
things as firewall standards and sprinkler systems in certain types of new
buildings.
Issues concerning evacuation of neighborhoods in the event of wildfire are
addressed below.
2. General Plan Objectives and Programs: Fire Hazards
Goal SF-SF-4:        Protect property and life from fire hazards.
Policy SF-
        SF-4.1:
             4.1:    Update City codes to provide for fire protection.
                     Implementation Measures:
                     SF-4.1(a): Amend the City’s building and land development
                                 codes to incorporate fire prevention and wildfire
                                 protection measures.
                     SF-4.1(b): Utilize the expertise and experience of the area fire
                                 fighting personnel to recommend a workable
                                 program that can be used to gain public
                                 cooperation in protecting property and lives
                                 against fire hazards.
                     SF-4.1(c): Require street and address signs to be clearly and
                                 legibly displayed for all streets and structures in
                                 the City.
                     SF-4.1(d): Amend the land development code to require
                                 adequate fire suppression water supplies for all
                                 new development, other than the construction of a
                                 single-family home on an existing single family
                                 parcel.
                     SF-4.1(e): Require residents to maintain defensible space
                                 around their homes and businesses consistent with
                                 state standards.
                     SF-4.1(f): The City shall review the recommendations of the
                                 Mt. Shasta Area Community Wildfire Protection
                                 Plan and, when found to be appropriate and
                                 otherwise consistent with City policy, support
                                 and/or implement its recommendations.
                     SF-4.1(g): In evaluating proposed measures for public safety
                                 concerning fire hazards, the City will consider, and
Safety Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan           6-13

                             will encourage the County to consider, the
                             recommendations and standards set forth in the
                             Fire Hazard Zoning Field Guide.
Policy SF-
       SF-4.2:
          4.2:   Adopt and enforce development standards that provide
                 adequate fire protection.
                 Implementation Measures:
                 SF-4.2(a): Avoid individual driveways of more than seventy-
                             five feet in length by requiring as a condition of
                             building permits extra width or mandating a
                             paved, all-weather surface for longer driveways.
                 SF-4.2(b): Amend the land development code to require that
                             cul-de-sacs serving individual parcels with a
                             length of more than three hundred feet be wide
                             enough to allow for incoming-and outgoing-
                             vehicles during a fire emergency. The minimum
                             paved width shall be twenty feet with two four-foot
                             shoulder areas.
                 SF-4.2(c): Amend the land development code to require
                             special fire agency approvals for any new cul-de-
                             sac proposed to have a length greater than one-
                             quarter of a mile. The City may deny a road
                             design on the basis of single access point and
                             length of cul-de-sac.
                 SF-4.2(d): Require all new subdivisions when viewed as
                             complete projects to have at least two points of
                             public ingress and egress unless there are
                             overriding considerations agreed to by the fire
                             chief or California Department of Forestry and
                             Fire Protection for allowing only one public access
                             point.
E. Hazardous Materials
1. Background
Hazardous materials consist of injurious substances that may include flammable
liquids and gases, poisons, corrosives, explosives, oxidizers, radioactive
materials, bio-waste and medical supplies.
Hazardous materials are transported in large volumes on Interstate 5 and on
the Union Pacific Railroad (UPRR). Caltrans indicates that nearly every
conceivable type of hazardous material is transported over Interstate 5. The
                                                                         Safety Element
                                      6-14             City of Mt. Shasta General Plan
most common materials are liquefied petroleum gas and gasoline. Some
transportation of hazardous materials occurs on local streets within the planning
area, but in much smaller quantities compared to the quantities transported on
Interstate 5. UPRR transports hazardous materials through the area. The most
common types of materials transported by rail are flammable and non-
flammable gases, corrosives and flammable liquids.
The “Cantara Spill” of 1991, which is regarded as one of California’s largest
inland ecological disasters, dramatized the hazards associated with
transportation of hazardous materials in the area. On July 14, 1991, railcars of
a Southern Pacific Railroad train (before the line was acquired by UPRR)
derailed just south of the Mt. Shasta planning area at a hairpin turn along the
Sacramento River called Cantara Loop. One railcar was ruptured by the fall
and spilled approximately 19,000 gallons of a highly toxic compound (metam
sodium) into the river. As the chemical moved downstream toward Shasta Lake,
it destroyed aquatic life for approximately 36 miles of the river. The river
ecosystem slowly recovered, but the spill had a significant impact on the river as
well as on the neighboring community of Dunsmuir.
The California Highway Patrol and UPRR both maintain hazardous material
response units. However, these units are not locally based and, therefore, the
Mt. Shasta Police and Fire Departments and the Mt. Shasta Fire Protection
District are expected to respond first to any incidents in the planning area.
Industrial facilities, depending on the nature of their business, may store, use
and generate hazardous materials and hazardous waste. Industries that typically
have hazardous material issues include metal plating, painting and machining,
and manufacturing and testing.
Hazardous materials storage and handling and hazardous waste generation
and disposal are regulated by various federal and state regulations. The
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) has mandated a national
waste management program since 1976. Under RCRA, hazardous waste must
be tracked from the time of generation to the point of disposal. A program must
be instituted by every generator and handler to manage hazardous waste in a
manner that minimizes the present and future threat to the environment and
human health. Each hazardous waste generator must register and obtain an
identification number from the Environmental Protection Agency under RCRA
regulations.
The State Hazardous Waste Control Law is the basic state law that implements
the RCRA waste management system. The Department of Toxic Substances
Control is the primary regulatory agency administering the state hazardous
waste program. DTSC has delegated local agencies to inspect and regulate
small generators.
Safety Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan         6-15

Any business handling hazardous materials (as defined in Section 25500 of the
California Health and Safety Code, Division 20, Chapter 6.95) requires a
permit (typically from the local fire department) in order to register the business
as a hazardous materials handler. Such businesses are also required to comply
with California’s Hazardous Material Response Plans and Inventory Law (AB
2185). AB 2185 requires immediate reporting of any release or threatened
release of a hazardous material to the local administering agency and the State
Office of Emergency Services. In addition, any business handling more than
500 pounds of solid, 55 gallons of liquid, or 200 cubic feet of gaseous
hazardous material, at any one time, is required under AB 2185 to file a
business plan. The business plan must be submitted to the local administering
agency of the program. Emergency response procedures should be included in
the business plan.
2. General Plan Objectives and Programs: Hazardous Materials
Goal SF-
      SF-5:         Protect people and the environment from hazardous materials
                    exposure.
Policy SF-
       SF-5.1:
          5.1:      Assure that the use, storage, and transportation of hazardous
                    materials complies with Federal and State regulations.
                    Implementation Measures:
                    SF-5.1(a): Working with the State Department of Health and
                                the County Health Department, enforce the
                                applicable provisions of State law related to
                                hazardous material storage.
                    SF-5.1(b): Ensure that the Fire Department maintains the
                                appropriate “Right-to-Know” records related to
                                storage, use, and disposal of hazardous materials.
Policy SF-
       SF-5.2:
          5.2:      Develop communications with the railroads concerning the
                    transportation of hazardous materials.
                    Implementation Measures:
                                       Measures:
                    SF-5.2(a): Each year during the annual review of the General
                                Plan, send a letter to the appropriate official of the
                                McCloud and Union Pacific Railroad requesting
                                notification of any changes in the status of the
                                railroads’ procedures for tracking and transporting
                                hazardous materials in the area.
                    SF-5.2(b): At least once every three years, coordinate an
                                emergency services exercise with the County
                                                                            Safety Element
                                        6-16              City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                                Office of Emergency Services to practice
                                procedures related to a hazardous material spill.
F. Railroad Crossing
                Crossing Safety
1. Background
Collisions at highway-rail crossings are one of the leading causes of death and
serious injury associated with railroad operations in the United States.
Two railroad lines are located within the City of Mt. Shasta. The Union Pacific
Railroad (UPRR) line through the City (previously operated by Southern Pacific
Railroad) is the main north/south railroad through Northern California.
Approximately 16 trains per day pass through Mt. Shasta on this interstate line.
The McCloud Railway Company (MRC) operates a short-line railroad out of
McCloud. The MRC line connects with the UPRR line in Mt. Shasta along North
Mt. Shasta Boulevard.
There are a total of seven railroad crossings within the City of Mt. Shasta. Five
grade crossings are located along the Union Pacific line. Two crossings are on
Nixon Street, and there are crossings of Alma Street, Lake Street and Ream
Avenue. All five UPRR crossings are gated. There are two grade crossings for
the MRC line; one for Everitt Memorial Highway and one for North Mt. Shasta
Boulevard. Both MRC crossings are “passive” and are equipped with flashing
lights but no gates.
“Passive” traffic control devices are simply signs and pavement markings that
provide warning to vehicles on the street of an upcoming railroad crossing.
“Active” traffic control devices are activated by a detection circuit in the railroad
track and give warning of an approaching train at the crossing. Typically, the
circuit triggers the flashing of lights, the ringing of audible alarms, and the
lowering of gates across the street. A warning provided by a train’s horn is
required as a train approaches both at-grade crossings with active warning
devices and crossings with “passive” warning measures.
Locomotive engineers typically sound their horns at least 15 seconds before the
train enters a public highway-rail grade crossing. The intent is to sound the horn
loud enough and timely for a vehicle on the street approaching the crossing to
hear the horn. With the objective of the warning having a sound level of 95
dB(A) at the “motorist decision-making point” 50 feet in advance of the grade
crossing, the Federal Railway Administration (FRA) has determined that 108
dB(A) is the optimal sound level for locomotive horns (Federal Railroad
Administration, 2005). A horn sound level of 110 dB(A) is the maximum and 96
dB(A) is the minimum sound level. However, such a warning exposes a
considerable segment of the local community near the tracks to the blast of the
horn as well as the motorists and pedestrians, as intended, who may be
approaching the crossing.
Safety Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan        6-17

The use of train horns as trains approach crossings has raised two particular
issues concerning public safety and related noise impacts to neighborhoods
around the crossings. These issues are 1) the alternative use of “wayside horns”,
and 2) the establishment of “quiet zones”. These issues are discussed in more
detail in the Noise Element of this general plan. However, because the issue is
primarily a public safety concern, a related goal and policy statement with an
implementation proposal are set forth below in this Safety Element.
2. General Plan Objectives and Programs: Railroad Crossings
Goal SF-
      SF-6:       Maintain public safety at locations where rail and other
                  transportation facilities interface.
Policy SF-
       SF-6.1:
           6.1:   Work with Union Pacific Railroad and the McCloud Railway
                  Company to identify measures to reduce the impact of rail
                  traffic on the City’s circulation system.
                  Implementation Measure:
                  SF-6.1(a): Evaluate the adequacy of public safety provisions
                               at railroad grade crossings and                   support
                               improvements where warranted.
Goal SF-
      SF-7:       Maintain adequate levels of public safety at street-rail grade
                  crossings while, when possible, reducing noise impacts
                  involved with warning systems.
Policy SF-
       SF-7.1:
           7.1:   The City will consider the feasibility and means for modifying
                  warning and control systems at selected street-rail grade
                  crossings to reduce related noise impacts, provided that
                  adequate public safety is provided.
                  Implementation Measure:
                  SF-7.1(a): The City will consider the feasibility of establishing
                               “quiet zones” and/or the use of wayside horns to
                               reduce train horn noise impacts pursuant to the
                               criteria of the Federal Railroad Administration. A
                               determination to proceed with implementation will
                               be based on the expected adequacy of public
                               safety and cost feasibility.
G. Evacuation and Related Infrastructure
1. Background
Portions of the planning area may need to be evacuated for a number of
reasons including wildfire, volcanic activity, or truck or railroad accidents
                                                                            Safety Element
                                        6-18              City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

involving significant quantities of hazardous materials. Response and
evacuation procedures have been addressed in the City’s Emergency Plan,
which is updated periodically. The responsibility for day-to-day initial emergency
response is that of the Mt. Shasta Fire and Police Departments, the County
Sheriff, and the Mt. Shasta Fire Protection District.
General evacuation of the Mt. Shasta area could be required prior to a
volcanic eruption. Such an eruption is expected to be preceded by warning
signs detected by seismic and other monitoring devices installed in the Mt.
Shasta area. As in the case of Mt. Saint Helens, a warning would be issued in
ample time prior to an eruption and an orderly evacuation could take place.
Concerning evacuation issues related to wildfire, the need for and scope of
evacuation is dependent on the extent and severity of the fire. Evacuation of
only a few homes within a threatened area would not typically create a serious
traffic control problem. A large scale evacuation, however, may result in
significant traffic problems and would require more extensive traffic control
measures.
Principal evacuation routes from Mt. Shasta include Interstate 5 north- and
southbound and Highway 89 to the southeast. Evacuation routes should be
developed with the intent to direct traffic toward the nearest highway. Due to
vehicle carrying capacity, the highways are logical routes by which to move
people away from endangered areas. In some locations of the planning area,
evacuation could be constrained by the lack of access and egress roads into the
area, or by the length of dead-end and cul-de-sac roads.
Although most primary roads (e.g., Mt. Shasta Boulevard, Everitt Memorial
Highway, Old Stage Road) in the City of Mt. Shasta and the surrounding
community are of sufficient width to allow for passage of emergency vehicles
and evacuating residents, many of the secondary roads that serve residential
areas (e.g., Davis Place Road, Shasta Ranch Road) are narrow and/or may
have few if any ingress/egress options. This would make it exceedingly difficult
for engines, tankers, and other firefighting equipment to enter the area while
residents are evacuating. Traffic control in these less accessible areas would be
crucial in the event of fire.
Evacuation planning needs to be concerned about the capacity of local roads
in the event of sizable fires. Many of the roads that service areas of residential
development, primarily in older neighborhoods, are inadequate to provide safe
passage of residents out of some areas and, at the same time, provide good
access to emergency vehicles responding to a fire. These roads are often
narrow with dense vegetation growing up to the road shoulder. The steepness
of roadway grades can also be an issue.
The lack of multiple access and egress to the unincorporated area east of the
City is a recognized concern. The County has permitted a substantial amount of
Safety Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan       6-19

residential development that relies upon McCloud Avenue as the only paved
street for evacuation and emergency access. Rockfellow Drive, which could
provide an important optional route, has not been extended and developed to
adequately serve this area.
To ensure the provision of adequate evacuation routes, as well as the provision
of adequate access roads for emergency equipment, standards for minimum
road widths and maximum access road lengths are prescribed. For example,
the California Code of Regulations includes basic wildland fire protection
standards of the California Board of Forestry. (California Code of Regulations,
Section 1270, et seq.) Standards include provisions that the maximum length of
a dead-end road shall not exceed 800 feet for parcels zoned for less than one
acre and 1,320 feet for parcels zoned for 1 acre to 4.99 acres in size. Typically,
all two-way roads should be constructed to provide a minimum of two nine-foot
traffic lanes. The grade for all roads, streets, private lanes and driveways shall
not exceed 16 percent. (Many communities limit the grade of roads and
driveways to no more than 12 percent. The California Code of Regulations
should be consulted for a more-complete discussion of these and other
standards.
Evacuation events should be overseen by an “incident commander” and local
police and fire departments. Upon initiation of an evacuation, a local law
enforcement agency such as the Mt. Shasta Police Department or Siskiyou
County Sheriff’s Department would be called upon to mange crowds and traffic
and will be designated as the Evacuation Coordinator. The Evacuation
Coordinator will select the best routes from the endangered area after
considering the nature of the incident, the size of the population to be
evacuated, and road capacity and characteristics. Specific evacuation routes
will be selected as the emergency situation develops. An evacuation location
will be identified. A school, park, or church would generally have enough
parking and facilities to serve this purpose. During an incident, residents would
be briefed on the situation and instructed on how to properly evacuate, which
way to drive out of the area, and where the nearest evacuation point has been
established.
 (See also the related policies and implementation measures in the “Fire
Hazards” section above.)
2. General Plan Objectives and Programs: Evacuation
Goal SF-
       SF-7:       Identify and maintain emergency evacuation routes.
Policy SF-
        SF-7.1:
           7.1:    Working with the County, identify routes to evacuate area
                   residents for different types of emergencies.
                                                                           Safety Element
                                        6-20             City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                     Implementation Measure:
                     SF-7.1(a): Work with the County to establish emergency
                                 evacuation routes in the event of different
                                 categories of emergencies: severe rain or snow
                                 storm, flood, fire, volcanic or seismic.
H. Snow Removal
1. Background
The City of Mount Shasta wishes to ensure the safe and orderly flow of traffic
within and through the City. During the winter months, snowfall presents an
added challenge to achieving this goal. Snow must be properly managed in
order to reduce risks to pedestrians and vehicles, ensure that emergency
equipment has access to all areas of the City, and to minimize impacts on
commerce and community services.
With approximately 50 miles of roadway and other City-owned right-of-ways to
be cleared during each storm event, it can take between eight and twelve hours
to clear 12 inches of fresh snowfall. The City typically initiates plowing once the
snow reaches a depth of four to six inches, with plowing beginning earlier
during storms that pose a greater hazard to the community. The City currently
(2006) has seven snowplows, one truck for spreading sand and 11 public works
employees responsible for snow removal and safety during storms.
During major snowstorms, the City's primary goal is to provide for the safe and
orderly movement of emergency equipment and the traveling public. In these
situations, the priority order is typically:
          1)   Support for emergency response vehicles.
          2)   Clear main arterial roadways and intersections.
          3)   Clear collectors.
          4)   Clear secondary residential streets.
          5)   Clear City-owned parking lots.
During plowing activities, parking along City streets and right-of-ways is
prohibited. This helps ensure that snow removal equipment can operate
unimpeded and can clear the City’s streets in an efficient and timely manner.
For those individuals lacking off-street parking, the City provides a number of
“snow parking” areas. These areas are: a small dirt parking lot behind the
Sportsman’s Den off Castle Street; the public parking lot across from the fire
station on West Lake Street; Ivy Street between Mt. Shasta Boulevard and
Chestnut Street (south side only); the Little League ballpark on Washington
Drive behind Sisson School (near snow parking signs); and the parking lot off of
Alma Street between North Mt. Shasta Boulevard and the railroad tracks.
It is the City’s intent to clear snow from the entire road width prior to allowing
on-street parking to continue. This is accomplished by making multiple passes
Safety Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan           6-21

along each of the City streets. The first pass removes enough snow for the roads
to remain open, with subsequent passes widening the traffic lanes. During big
storms, this process may continue for several days before on-street parking can
resume. So that on-street parking may resume sooner in the downtown area
and permit commerce to continue, snow is plowed to the center of the street
rather than to the curb. The City subsequently removes the snow berms from the
center of the roadways with front end loaders as time and priorities allow.
In order to ensure the safe and orderly flow of traffic through the City during
snow events, the City has adopted several ordinances governing snow removal.
These ordinances have been codified in Chapter 12.24 of the Mt. Shasta
Municipal Code. Two of the more noteworthy sections in this chapter are
Section 12.24.030, which prohibits obstructing snow removal equipment with
vehicles parked along roadways and in City right-of-ways, and Section
12.24.060, which regulates the dumping of snow from private property onto
roadways and City right-of-ways.
Developers should consider snow management at the earliest phase of
development planning and incorporate design features to handle snow plowing
and storage. Snow storage areas must be designated on site; plowing snow
onto public streets is not allowed.
2. General Plan Objectives and Programs: Snow Removal
Goal SF-
      SF-8:       Ensure the safe and orderly flow of traffic through the City
                  during and after winter storm events.
Policy SF-
       SF-8.1:
          8.1:    The City shall enforce rules and regulations that govern the
                  ability of the City to provide roadways unobstructed by snow.
                  Implementation Measure:
                  SF-8.1(a): Enforce Chapter 12.24 of the Mt. Shasta
                                Municipal Code.
REFERENCES:
California Code of Regulations, SRA Fire Safe Regulations, Title 14, Section
1270 et seq., 2000.
Christianson, Robert L., Volcanic Hazard Potential in the California Cascades;
Martin, R. and Davis J. (editors), Status of Volcanic Prediction and Emergency
Response Capabilities in Volcanic Hazard Zones of California (Sacramento:
California Division of Mines and Geology, Special Publication 63, 1982), pp.
41-59.
City of Mt. Shasta, General Plan, 1993.
                                                                          Safety Element
                                        6-22            City of Mt. Shasta General Plan
Crandell, Dwight R. and Nichols, Donald, R., Volcanic Hazards at Mount
Shasta (Menlo Park, CA: U.S. Geological Survey, 1987), pamphlet, 21 p.
Federal Railroad Administration, Final Rule on the Use of Locomotive Horns at
Highway-Rail Grade Crossings, Federal Register, Vol. 70, No. 80, April 27,
2005.
Miller, C. Dan, Potential Hazards from Future Eruptions in the Vicinity of Mount
Shasta Volcano (Northern California: U.S. Geological Survey, Bulletin 1503,
1980), 43 p.
Mt. Shasta Area Fire Safe Council, Mt. Shasta Area Community Wildfire
Protection Plan, June 2006.
Siskiyou County. General Plan Land Use Element, August 1980.
Safety Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan      6-23
7. NOISE ELEMENT
A. Introduction
The primary purpose of a general plan noise element is to clarify policies and
standards by which the local government can limit the exposure of the
community to excessive noise levels. Technical data relating to mobile and fixed
sources is collected into a set of noise control policies and programs. The
policies of the element are to be used as a basis for land use decisions.
The Mt. Shasta General Plan Noise Element is intended to be used to guide
decisions concerning land use and the location of new roads and transit
facilities, since these are common sources of excessive noise. Noise from
existing land uses, including mining, agricultural, and industrial activities, must
be closely analyzed to ensure compatibility, especially where residential and
other sensitive receptors have encroached into areas previously occupied by
these uses.
Noise sources in the Mt. Shasta Planning Area include traffic on major roadways
and highways, railroad operations, and fixed noise sources. Noise modeling
techniques and noise measurements were used to develop generalized “Ldn”
(average day/night sound level) noise contours for the existing conditions of
these sources. Noise contours are used as a guide for establishing a land use
pattern that minimizes the exposure of residents to noise. Because local
topography, vegetation or intervening structures may significantly affect noise
exposure at a particular location, the noise contours should not be considered
site-specific and will need to be adjusted for site-specific factors.
Acoustical Terminology and Noise Fundamentals
Discussion of noise issues requires the use of technical terminology. Following is
a list of frequently used terms.
          Acoustics            The science of sound.
          Ambient Noise        The distinctive acoustical characteristics of a given
                               area consisting of all noise sources audible at that
                               location. In many cases, the term ambient is used to
                               describe an existing or pre-project condition such as
                               the setting in an environmental noise study.
          Attenuation          The reduction of noise.
          A-Weighting          A frequency-response adjustment of a sound level
                               meter that conditions the output signal to approximate
                               human response.
Noise Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                     7-1

        Decibel, or dB     The fundamental measurement unit of sound, defined
                           as ten times the logarithm of the ratio of the sound
                           pressure squared over the reference pressure squared.
        CNEL               Community Noise Equivalent Level. Defined as the 24-
                           hour average noise level with noise occurring during
                           evening hours (7-10 p.m.) weighted by a factor of
                           three and nighttime hours weighted by a factor of 10
                           prior to averaging.
        Frequency          The measure of the rapidity of alterations of a periodic
                           acoustic signal, expressed in cycles per second or
                           Hertz.
        Ldn                Day/Night Average Sound Level. Similar to CNEL, but
                           with no evening weighting.
        Leq                Equivalent or energy-averaged sound level.
        Lmax               The highest root-mean-square (RMS) sound level
                           measured over a given period of time.
        Loudness           A subjective term for the sensation of the magnitude of
                           sound.
        Noise              Unwanted sound.
Noise is often described as unwanted sound. Sound is defined as any pressure
variation in air that the human ear can detect. If the pressure variations occur
frequently enough (at least 20 times per second), they can be heard and hence
are called sound. The number of pressure variations per second is called the
frequency of sound. Measurements of frequency are expressed as cycles per
second, called Hertz (Hz).
Measuring sound directly in terms of pressure would require a very large and
awkward range of numbers. To avoid this, the decibel scale was devised. The
decibel scale uses the hearing threshold (20 micropascals), as a point of
reference, defined as 0 dB. Other sound pressures are then compared to the
reference pressure, and the logarithm is taken to keep the numbers in a
practical range. The decibel scale allows a million-fold increase in pressure to
be expressed as 120 dB. Another useful aspect of the decibel scale is that
changes in levels (dB) correspond closely to human perception of relative
loudness. Figure 7-7-1 shows examples of noise levels for several common noise
sources and environments.
The perceived loudness of sounds is dependent upon many factors including
sound pressure level and frequency content. However, within the usual range of
environmental noise levels, perception of loudness is relatively predictable and
                                                                           Noise Element
                                7-2                      City of Mt. Shasta General Plan
can be approximated by weighing the frequency response of a sound level meter
by means of the standardized “A-weighting” network. There is a strong
correlation between A-weighted sound levels (expressed as dBA) and community
response to noise. For this reason, the A-weighted sound level has become the
standard tool of environmental noise assessment. All noise levels reported in this
document are in terms of A-weighted levels.
Community noise is commonly described in terms of the “ambient” noise level,
which is defined as the all-encompassing noise level associated with a given
noise environment. A common statistical tool to measure the ambient noise level
is the average, or equivalent, sound level (Leq). This corresponds to a steady-
state A-weighted sound level containing the same total energy as a time-varying
signal over a given time period (usually one hour). The Leq is the foundation of
the composite noise descriptor, Ldn, and has very good correlation with
community response to noise.
The Day-Night Average Level (Ldn) is based upon the average noise level over a
24-hour day, with a +10 decibel weighing applied to noise occurring during
nighttime (10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.) hours. The nighttime penalty is based upon
the assumption that people react to nighttime noise exposures as though they
were twice as loud as daytime exposures. Because Ldn represents a 24-hour
average, it tends to disguise short-term variations in the noise environment.
Excessive noise in a community has often been cited as being a health problem,
not necessarily in terms of actual physiological damages such as hearing
impairment but in terms of inhibiting general well-being and contributing to
undue stress and annoyance. The health effects of noise in a community arise
from interference with human activities such as sleep, speech, recreation and
tasks demanding concentration or coordination. When community noise
interferes with human activities or contributes to stress, public annoyance with
the noise source increases and the acceptability of the environment for people
decreases. This decrease in acceptability and the threat to public well-being is
the bases for land use planning policies that limit exposure to excessive
community noise levels.
To control noise from fixed sources that have developed from processes other
than zoning or land use planning, many jurisdictions have adopted community
noise control ordinances. Such ordinances are intended to abate noise
nuisances and to control noise from existing sources. They may also be used as
performance standards to evaluate the creation of a potential nuisance, or
potential encroachment of sensitive uses upon noise-producing facilities.
Community noise control ordinances are generally designed to resolve noise
problems on a short term basis (usually by means of hourly noise level criteria),
rather than on the basis of 24-hour or annual cumulative noise exposures.
Noise Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                 7-3

                          Figure 7-
                                 7 -I
Typical A-
        A-Weighted Sound Levels of Common Noise Sources
  Loudness Ratio Level     A-Weighted Sound Level (dBA)
    128                 130          Threshold of pain
      64                 120         Jet aircraft take-off at 100 feet
      32                 110         Riveting machine at operators position
      16                 100         Cut-off saw at operators position
       8                  90         Bulldozer at 50 feet
       4                  80         Diesel locomotive at 300 feet
       2                  70         Commercial jet aircraft interior during flight
       1                  60         Normal conversation speech at 5-10 feet
     1/2                  50         Open office background level
     1/4                  40         Background level within a residence
     1/8                  30         soft whisper at 2 feet
   1/16                   20         Interior of recording studio
                                                                 Noise Element
                     7-4                       City of Mt. Shasta General Plan
In addition to the A weighted noise level, other factors should be considered in
establishing criteria for noise sensitive land uses. For example, sounds with
noticeable tonal content such as whistles, horns, droning or high pitched sounds
may be more annoying than the A weighted sound level alone suggests. Many
noise standards apply a penalty, or correction, of 5 dBA to such sounds. The
effects of unusual tonal content are generally more of a concern at nighttime
when residents may notice the sound in contrast to low levels of background
noise.
Because many rural residential areas experience very low noise levels, residents
may express concern about the loss of "peace and quiet" due to the introduction
of a sound that was not audible previously. In very quiet environments, the
introduction of virtually any change in local activities will cause an increase in
noise levels. A change in noise level and the loss of "peace and quiet" is the
inevitable result of land use or activity changes in such areas. Audibility of a new
noise source and/or increases in noise levels within recognized acceptable limits
are not usually considered to be significant noise impacts, but these concerns
should be addressed and considered in planning and environmental review
processes.
B. Fixed-
       ixed-Noise Sources
Three primary noise source categories are recognized in this Noise Element.
They are: 1) Fixed-Noise Sources; 2) Roadway Noise; and 3) Railroad Noise.
The production of noise from stationary, or “fixed-noise” sources is often
associated with industrial facilities. Noise exposures within industrial facilities are
controlled by federal and state employee health and safety regulations (OSHA
and Cal-OSHA). Exterior noise, however, is a concern that falls within the
jurisdiction of local agencies.
Commercial businesses, recreational sites, public works operations and
construction activity may also produce noise that affects adjacent sensitive land
uses. These noise sources can be frequent or continuous and may be annoying
to individuals who live in the vicinity. Noise generated from fixed noise sources
may vary due to climatic conditions, time of day, and existing ambient noise
levels.
From a land use planning perspective, fixed-source noise control issues focus
upon two general goals: 1) the prevention of the introduction of new noise-
producing uses in noise-sensitive areas; and 2) the prevention of the
encroachment of noise sensitive uses upon existing noise-producing facilities.
The first goal can be achieved by applying noise performance standards to
proposed new noise-producing uses. The second goal can be met by preventing
the encroachment of noise sensitive uses through zoning and special permit
requirements, and by requiring that new noise-sensitive uses in proximity to
noise-producing facilities include effective attenuation measures to ensure
compliance with noise performance standards.
Noise Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                 7-5

There are three primary areas within and near the City of Mt. Shasta that have
light industrial and commercial uses. The three areas include: 1) the area
adjacent to North Mt. Shasta Boulevard between its intersection with Chestnut
Street and the Mt. Shasta City Park; 2) the south end of Ream Avenue located
near the intersection of Ream Avenue and Court Street; and 3) the south side
area adjacent to Mt. Shasta Boulevard. In addition, the Sousa Ready Mix
facilities at the north end of the City have been identified as sources of fixed
noise.
North Mt. Shasta Boulevard
The commercial area along North Mt. Shasta Boulevard generally north of
Chestnut Street is comprised largely of heavier commercial land uses that
include petroleum product sales, automotive service and repair, tire and
automotive supply, and similar uses. Typical noise sources associated with these
land uses include, but are not limited to, truck traffic, HVAC systems (i.e.,
heating, ventilation, and air conditioning systems), tire breakers, impact
wrenches and compressors.
The majority of the businesses in this area operate during the daytime hours.
The noise environment in this area is largely dominated by local roadway and
railroad traffic. Typically, single event noise levels associated with truck
movements range between 70 and 85 dB SEL at a distance of 75 feet. Data for
maximum noise levels associated with air impact wrenches and tire breakers are
approximately 89 dB and 105 dB, respectively, at a distance of 10 feet.
South Ream Commercial Area
The South Ream Avenue area is comprised primarily of trucking facilities. Noise
sources associated with the operation of these facilities include truck traffic,
HVAC systems and refrigeration trucks. These facilities typically operate during
the daytime hours. However, the refrigeration trucks have compressors that may
operate 24 hours per day and are often the subject of complaints. Sound level
measurements of refrigeration trailer compressors have indicated continuous
noise levels of 64 dB measured at a distance of 50 feet from the trailers.
South Commercial and Industrial Area
This mixed-use area is off and to the east of South Mt. Shasta Boulevard,
generally between Bear Springs Road and Church Street. It includes the City’s
Public Works Yard, an automotive repair and body shop, a contractors yard, the
recycling center operated by the Siskiyou Opportunity Center, and other
commercial uses. Noise associated with the Public Works Yard is primarily
related to the movement of heavy equipment. However, these activities are
infrequent and intermittent.
                                                                        Noise Element
                               7-6                    City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

The recycling center operated by the Siskiyou Opportunity Center is located at
the corner of Mt. Shasta Boulevard and Bear Springs Road. Major noise sources
associated with operation of the recycling center include the operation of
equipment, the handling and loading of aluminum cans and glass, and the
operation of saws for recycling lumber. The Opportunity Center has a building
to house its recycling equipment and provide shielding of noise from the
recycling operation.
Across Mt. Shasta Boulevard and Church Street from this area is the site known
as the Roseburg Commerce Park. Future development of the Roseburg property
is expected to be mixed-use with commercial, light industrial and residential
uses. Mixed-use development of the property will require careful attention to
related noise impact issues to ensure land use compatibility.
Sousa Ready Mix
The Sousa Ready Mix plant is located at 100 Upton Road, outside of the city
limits on the west side of Interstate 5 between the highway and the Union Pacific
Railroad tracks. Sousa Ready Mix provides sand, aggregate and ready-mix
concrete products. The Upton facility contains the operation’s concrete batch
plant and crushing, screening and washing facilities. Typical noise sources
associated with the plant operation that can be heard within the city limits
include the sound of heavy trucks, front loaders, back-up warning devices,
conveyor belt systems, air vibrators that shake material from hoppers into trucks,
and the sound of sand and gravel on metal as trucks are being loaded. The
noise environment in the area of the plant is dominated by the fairly constant
noise of highway traffic on Interstate 5 and periodic noise from trains on the
railroad.
The Spring Hill Mine, also owned by Sousa Ready Mix, is 98 acres in size,
located at the northern-most portion of the City. The permit to mine the site was
approved in 1980 when the site was located outside the city limits. The property
was annexed to the City soon after the mining operation began. Excavated
aggregate is hauled by dump truck from the mine on a private road to Abrams
Lake Road and across Interstate 5 to the Upton site. Excavation of aggregate
involves the use of a variety of heavy equipment including scrapers, loaders,
dump trucks, dozers, and water trucks. Portable crushing and screening plants
have been used at the mine to process aggregates. Most of the work at the mine
is conducted during the summer months.
The operators of the aggregate mine have expressed concern that
encroachment of residential and certain types of commercial uses near their
facilities may increasingly impose constraints to the operation, largely because
of the noise that is characteristic of the operation. The Mt. Shasta General Plan
Open Space/Conservation Element, in addressing Mineral Resources,
acknowledges the need to protect the economic viability of existing mining and
material processing operations (e.g., Goal OC- OC-6) and supports provisions by
the City to avoid the development of “noise sensitive” uses (e.g., residences,
hotels and motels) near such operations.
Noise Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                 7-7

Parks and School Playing Fields
Parks and school playgrounds and playing fields, while being very different in
character from industrial and heavy commercial uses, may also be considered to
be fixed-noise sources. There are several park and school uses within the Mt.
Shasta city limits. The level of noise generated by these uses depends on the age
and number of people utilizing the respective facility at a given time, and the
types of activities they are engaged in. School playing field activities tend to
generate more noise than those of neighborhood parks, as the intensity of
school playground usage tends to be much higher. At a distance of 100 feet
from an elementary school playground being used by 100 students, average
noise levels of 60 dB can be expected and maximum noise levels of 75 dB are
common. At organized events such as high school football games with large
crowds and public address systems, the level of noise generated is often
significantly higher.
A particular issue concerning noise related to parks and recreation has been the
Siskiyou Ice Rink, located at Shastice Park. The park and ice rink are managed
by the Mt. Shasta Recreation and Parks District. The ice rink was built in the fall
and winter of 1999/2000 and operated briefly in the late winter of 2000. The
ice rink has been the subject of complaints and legal action from certain
residents in the vicinity of the park concerning noise and indirect impacts
claimed to be related to noise (e.g., affected property values). In fact, the ice
rink did not operate in the year following first-phase construction due to legal
action against it, but seasonal use of the rink was able to be resumed following
further environmental impact studies, clarification of design plans and resolution
of related issues. Along with the typical noise of a playground (human voices
shouting, etc.), ice rinks generate additional noise from operation of chiller units
and a “zamboni” vehicle used to resurface ice in the skating area. Music is also
often played through outdoor speakers. Various environmental studies were
completed for the facility including an Initial Study and Mitigated Negative
Declaration in 2001. Design and other mitigation measures were incorporated
into the ice rink facility to reduce the level of noise impact in the neighborhood.
C. Roadway Noise
Traffic noise levels for existing and future traffic volumes were calculated for the
Planning Area. The Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) Highway Traffic
Noise Prediction Model was used to develop Ldn contours for all state highways
and major arterial roadways in the Mt. Shasta area. Distances from the
centerlines of selected roadways to the 60 and 65 dB Ldn contours are
summarized in Table 7-    7-1, Roadway Noise Contour Date.Date Figure 7-  7-2 illustrates
the projected locations of the 60 dB Ldn future roadway noise contours.
“Existing” conditions are for the year 2006 and “Future” conditions are
projected for the year 2026.
The curve of a road, its steepness, and factors such as topography or a
depressed road, and even buildup can affect how loud noise is perceived. The
distances reported in Table
                         Table 7-
                                7-1 are estimates of noise exposure along roadways
                                                                             Noise Element
                                  7-8                      City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

in the City of Mt. Shasta based on samples and modeling. Traffic noise contours
were not developed for every roadway in the planning area, only arterials and
collectors.
A general plan provides broad guidance to address noise impacts. The intent of
the generalized roadway noise contours listed in Table 7-    7-1 and, concerning
Interstate 5 and State Highway 89, shown graphically in Figure 7-        7-2 is to
illustrate the potential for conflicts between traffic noise levels and potential
noise-sensitive receivers within the identified noise contours. The noise contours
for Interstate 5 and Highway 89 portrayed in Figure 7-   7-2 are projected for the
year 2026. In areas where noise exposure may be significant, the effects of site-
specific factors need to be evaluated and considered from more precise on-site
noise measurements. For example, the 1993 General Plan recognized that, in
some areas along Interstate 5, the actual noise levels associated with traffic on
the highway ranged between 4.2 and 7.3 dB less than the noise levels predicted
by the FHWA Model at certain measurement points. The actual measurements
were influenced by the topography around the site. In some areas through the
City, Interstate 5 is situated lower than the surrounding area and, therefore,
adjacent properties may be shielded to some extent from traffic noise.
D. Railroad Noise
Railroad activity in the City of Mt. Shasta planning area includes freight and
Amtrak activity on the Union Pacific Railroad (UPRR) tracks and occasional
freight and excursion train activity on the tracks owned by the McCloud Railway
Company. The UPRR line runs generally north/south through the planning area.
Various land uses, including residential uses, are located adjacent to the
railroad tracks. The McCloud Railway Company line extends east from its
junction with the UPRR line to the town of McCloud.
Approximately 16 freight trains and two Amtrak trains operate daily on the UPRR
tracks through the planning area. Freight train operations occur throughout the
day and nighttime periods. The Amtrak trains come through the planning area
primarily in the early morning hours.
The McCloud Railway Company averages approximately two trains a week in
the City of Mt. Shasta.
The major noise sources associated with train operations in the City of Mt.
Shasta are the locomotive engines and warning horns. There are a total of
seven at-grade railroad crossings within the City of Mt. Shasta. Five are located
along the Union Pacific line. Two crossings are on Nixon Street, and there are
crossings at Alma Street, Lake Street and Ream Avenue. All five UPRR crossings
are gated. There are two at-grade crossings for the McCloud Railway Company
line: one for Everitt Memorial Highway and one for North Mt. Shasta Boulevard.
Noise Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                 7-9
Table 7-7-1
Roadway Noise Contour Data
Seg.                                                        Existing*           Future*
 No.                        Description                   60        65       60        65
                                                          dB        dB       dB        dB
Interstate 5:
  1     South of S.R. 89                                 990       459      1238      575
  2     S.R. 89 to Lake Street                           986       458      1234      573
  3     Lake Street to N. Mt. Shasta Interchange         999       464      1250      580
  4     N. Mt. Shasta Interchange to Abrams Lake Road   1037       481      1298      602
  5     North of Abrams Lake Road                       1021       474      1277      593
State Route 89:
  6     South of Interstate 5                            263       122      330       153
Mt. Shasta Boulevard:
  7     Spring Hill Dr. to Nixon Road                     63        29       87        40
  8     Nixon Rd. to Alma Street                          61        29       79        37
  9     Alma St. to Lake Street                           64        30       77        36
 10     Lake St. to Chestnut Street                       67        31       78        36
 11     Chestnut St. to McCloud Avenue                    78        36       94        44
 12     McCloud Ave. to Old McCloud Road                  71        33       84        39
 13     South of Old McCloud Road                         63        29       76        35
Alma Street:
       Street:
 14     East of Pine Street                               60        28       72        33
 15     West of Pine Street                               42        19       50        23
Pine Street:
 16     North of Alma Street                              59        27       66        31
 17     South of Alma Street                              55        26       57        26
Morgan Way:
 18     South of W. Lake Street                           36        17       42        20
W Lake Street:
 19     East of Morgan Way                                81        38       90        42
 20     West of Morgan Way                                81        38       89        41
Rockfellow Drive:
 21     East of Everitt Memorial Hwy                      25        12       31        14
 22     West of Everitt Memorial Hwy                      44        20       50        23
Everitt Memorial Hwy
                                                                        Noise Element
                                7-10                  City of Mt. Shasta General Plan
   Table 7- 7-1
   Roadway Noise Contour Data
    Seg.                                                                  Existing*      Future*
    No.                          Description                             60        65  60      65
                                                                         dB        dB  dB      dB
     23     North of Rockfellow Drive                                    57        27  70      32
   N. Washington Dr.
     24     South of Rockfellow Drive                                    49        23  59      27
   Ream Ave.
     25     East of Old Stage Coach Road                                 25        11  28      13
     26     West of Old Stage Coach Road                                 14         7  14        7
   Old Stage Coach Rd.
     27     North of Ream Avenue                                         21        10  25      11
     28     South of Ream Avenue                                         24        11  30      14
   Chestnut St.
     29     East of Mt. Shasta Boulevard                                 21        10  26      12
     30     West of Mt. Shasta Boulevard                                 15         7  15        7
   McCloud Ave.
     31     East of Mt. Shasta Boulevard                                 41        19  49      23
   Old McCloud Rd.
     32     East of Mt. Shasta Boulevard                                 22        10  23      11
     33     West of Mt. Shasta Boulevard                                 21        10  21      10
     •    Distance (in feet) from center of roadway to Ldn contours. “Existing” conditions are
          for the year 2006 and “Future” conditions are projected for the year 2026.
      Source: FHWA-RD-77-108 with inputs from kdAnderson Transportation and Caltrans.
Noise Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                         7-11


                                                                                                                                                                          LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CITY LIMITS
                                           I-5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PLANNING AREA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     60 Ldn Noise Contour Line
                                                                                                                                                                                 I-5                                 FREEWAY
                                      NO
                                         RTH
                                             OL
                                                D   ST                     KE
                                                                      LA
                                                     AG  ER      MS                   IN
                                                           D ABRA                 SPR
                                                                                     GH
                                                                                       ILL
                                                                                                   IV
                                                                                                 DR
                                                                                                             E
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Y
                                                                                                                  I-5
                                                                                                                                                                                   EVERITT MEMORIAL HW
                                                                                                                                                SKI VILL AGE DR
                                                                                                  PINE GROVE DR
                                                                                      LASSEN LANE                                                                                                      ROCKFELLOW DR
                                                                                                                                               CH
                                                                                                                                                     ES
                                                                                       H                                                                 TN
                                                                                    RT                                                                    UT                     ET
                                                                                 NO        O
                                                                                                                                                PI
                                                                                                                                                  NE          ST             RE
                                                                                                                                                                           ST
                                                                                                                                                                                       WASHINGTON STREET
                                                                                            LD
                                                                                                 ST                                                      ST
                                                                                                   AG
                                                                                                      E           RD
                                                                                                                                                     E
                                                                                                                                               LAK
                                                                                                                                                I-5                       M T.
                                                                                                                                                               REAM AVE
                                                                                                                                                                            SH
                                                                                                                               BARR
                                                                                                                                                                                 A
                                                                                                                                                                                   ST
                                                                                                                        W. A .
                                                                                                                                                                                             A
                                                                                                                              RD                                                                  B LV D
                                                                                                                                                 L       VD
                                                                                                                                               EB                            I-5
                                                                                                                                           LAK                                                                          HWY 89
                                                                                                                                                                         LD
                                                                                                                                                                       HO
                                                                                                                                       OU
                                                                                                                                                                   SOUT
                                                                                                                                           Y
                                                                                                                                      KI
                                                                                                                              S IS
                                                                                                                                                                                 ST
                                                                                                                                                                                   AG                            A
                                                                                Lake Siskiyou                                                                                         E               RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ELE
                                                                                                                                                                                                           AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             I-5
     N
    * Note: Noise contours based on
    projected traffic for 2026
    Source: Ballard, 2006
0            .5          1
                             MILES                                                                                                                                                                                               FIGURE 7-2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                INTERSTATE 5 AND STATE ROUTE
                                                                                                        7-12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         89 NOISE CONTOURS

Both McCloud Railway crossings are “passive” and are equipped with flashing
lights and bells but no gates.
Noise from UPRR trains have an impact on the sound environment in the City of
Mt. Shasta, especially in the vicinity of the tracks. When a train is passing,
normal conversation can be difficult in buildings with open windows and without
adequate noise insulation near the tracks. Noise level measurements have been
conducted to determine the contribution of UPRR railroad operations to the
noise environment. Noise levels were measured to determine typical sound
exposure levels (SEL). The results of the railroad noise measurements for the
UPRR line are shown in Table 7-           7-2.
  Table 7-2
  Union Pacific Railroad Noise Measurement Results
      Measurement                                                   Noise Level (dB) @100 feet
         Location               # of Daily Trains
                                                                  Mean SEL                  Lmax
   Near Intersection of                   18                       102.5                   75 - 110
  I-5 and UPRR Tracks
Measurements taken August 14-15, 2006. Bollard Acoustical Consultants, Inc.
For the purposes of the General Plan Noise Element, it is useful to estimate the
generalized distances of the 60 and 65 dB Ldn noise contours for each of the
railroad tracks within the City. Table 7-          7-3 indicates the approximate width of the
noise contours associated with the two railroad operations within the City. Figure
7-3 illustrates the general 60 dB Ldn noise contours associated with the two
railroad tracks.
  Table 7-3
  Approximate Distance to Railroad Noise Contours
                                                                  Distance to Ldn Contour (feet)
          Train                Ldn dB, 100 feet
                                                                   60 dB                    65 dB
                                   from tracks
      Union Pacific                     72.1                         631                     293
         Railroad
    McCloud Railway                     51.9                          30                      14
            Co.
Source: Bollard Acoustical Consultants, Inc., 2006, City of Mt. Shasta General Plan, 1993.
The Safety Element of this general plan discusses street-rail crossings from the
perspective of public safety. The issue is also very much related to noise
concerns because nearly all warning devices at the crossings involve loud
warning signals. A warning provided by a train’s horn is required as a train
approaches both at-grade crossings with active warning devices and crossings
with “passive” warning measures. The impacts of noise from train horns as trains
Noise
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                   7-13

approach street crossings has raised two particular issues concerning public
safety and related noise impacts to neighborhoods around the crossings. These
issues are 1) the alternative use of “wayside horns”, and 2) the establishment of
“quiet zones”.
As noted in the Safety Element, locomotives typically sound their horns at least
15 seconds before the locomotive enters a public highway at-grade crossing.
The intent is to sound the horn loud enough and timely for a vehicle on the
street approaching the crossing to hear the horn. With the objective of the
warning having a sound level of 95 dB(A) at the “motorist decision-making
point” 50 feet in advance of the grade crossing, the Federal Railway
Administration (FRA) has determined that 108 dB(A) is the optimal sound level
for locomotive horns (Federal Railroad Administration, 2005). A horn sound
level of 110 dB(A) is the maximum and 96 dB(A) is the minimum sound level.
However, such a warning exposes a considerable segment of the local
community near the tracks to the sound of the horn, in addition to motorists and
pedestrians, as intended, who may be approaching the crossing.
Wayside horns have been proposed in some communities as one alternative to
the use of locomotive horns at some crossings. A wayside horn is a stationary
horn mounted at a grade crossing and is aimed up and down the street on
which vehicles would be approaching the crossing. Wayside horns may be used
in lieu of a locomotive horn at highway-rail grade crossings equipped with an
active warning system consisting of, at a minimum, flashing lights and gates.
The FRA has determined that a wayside horn set to 92 dB(A) (as measured 100
feet from the centerline of the railroad track) would provide an audible warning
comparable to a properly sounded locomotive horn (FRA, 2005). In terms of
noise impacts, the advantage of the wayside horn is that the warning is focused
more directly toward the motorists and pedestrians approaching the crossing
with less imposing noise impacts, as occurs with locomotive horns, on residential
and commercial districts along the tracks near the crossing.
The second issue concerning public safety and noise related to railroad grade
crossings is the issue of establishing “quiet zones”. A quiet zone is a section of
track approaching a railroad grade crossing in which trains do not need to and,
in fact, are prohibited from sounding their horns. The train horns are rendered
unnecessary only when other safety measures approved by the FRA provide an
acceptable level of safety with the absence of locomotive horns. An FRA rule
effective in June 2005 provides an opportunity for localities to establish quiet
zones (i.e., Final Rule on the Use of Locomotive Horns at Highway-Rail Grade
Crossings). To qualify for creation of a quiet zone, communities must equip
proposed grade crossings with adequate safety measures to overcome the
decrease in safety that would result from silencing the train horns. Quantifiable
calculations must be made of the current “risk index” of the crossing with use of
locomotive horns and the expected risk index without the horns but with
supplementary safety measures.
Noise
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan        7-14

    N                                                                                                                                                       LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                          CITY LIMITS
                                                                                                                                                                          PLANNING AREA
                                                                                                                                                                          60 dBLdn Noise Contour Line
                                                                                                                                                      I-5                 FREEWAY
                                   DR
                                        IVE
                                                                                                                                     Y
                                                                                                                                     EVERITT MEMORIAL HW
                                                                                         SKI VILL AGE DR
                                    PINE GROVE DR
                                                                                            loud           Rail Road
                                                                                        McC
                                                         I-5
                            LASSEN LANE                                                                                                                ROCKFELLOW DR
                                                                       PI
                                                                             NE
                                                                                  ST
                                                                                                                        M T.
                          H                                                                   U
                        RT                                                                                                       ET
                                                                                                        ST
                      NO                                                                                                        E
                             OL                                                                                              TR
                                                                                                                                       WASHINGTON STREET
                               D                                                                                            S
                                                                                                     UT
                                   ST
                                     AG
                                        E
                                                                                                  TN
                                                    RD
                                                                                                          cific Rail Road
                                                                                              E
                                                                                   LAK
                                                                                                ES n Pa
                                                                                              CH nio
                                                                                       I-5
                                                                                                                 REAM AVE
                                                                                                                                SH
                                                                      BARR
                                                                                                                                 A
                                                                                                                                    ST
                                                               W. A .
                                                                                                                                             A
                                                                     RD
                                                                                                         I-5
                                                                                                                                                  B LV D
                                                                                                               L   VD
                                                                                                         EB
                                                                                                     LAK
                                                                                                  OU
                                                                                                                                                                                Note: Noise Contours not to scale.
                                                                                                 I   Y
                                                                                             ISK
                                                                                                                                                                       McCloud contour line is approximately 30
                                                                                         S                                                                       feet from railroad tracks, Union Pacific contour
    Source: Ballard, 2006                                                                                                                                              line is approximately 631 feet from tracks.
                                                                                                                                                                      A
                                                                                                                                                             AZ
0                .5 Lake Siskiyou
                                1                                                                                                                               EL
                                                                                                                                                                  E          FIGURE 7-3
                                          MILES
                                                                             7-15                                                                              RAILROAD NOISE CONTOURS

The FRA has outlined a list of Supplementary Safety Measures (SSMs) and Alternative
Safety Measures (ASMs) that would be available to local jurisdictions that wish to reduce
noise impacts in their communities. As provided in the Final Rule, communities have the
sole discretion to designate a quiet zone if the recognized SSMs are used. Alternatively,
a community may implement ASMs at some or all of the crossings within a quiet zone
upon demonstrating the effectiveness of these measures to provide the acceptable level
of public safety. The additional safety measures, which must meet federal specifications,
usually must be constructed at the community’s expense.
As a variation of a “quiet zone”, communities may create “partial quiet zones”.
Such zones restrict locomotive horns sounding between the hours of 10 p.m.
and 7 a.m. Outside of that time period, trains would use their horns as
otherwise required for public safety.
The Safety Element expresses goals for maintaining public safety, but it also
states that the City should look into reducing the impacts of noise related to
railroad crossings. The Safety Element includes Goal SF-    SF-7: “Maintain adequate
levels of public safety at street-rail grade crossings while, when possible,
reducing noise impacts involved with warning systems”. It follows this goal with
Policy SF-
         SF-7.1: “The City will consider the feasibility and means for modifying
warning and control systems at selected street-rail grade crossings to reduce
related noise impacts, provided that adequate public safety is provided.” The
related implementation measure is Implementation Measure SF-            SF-7.1(a):
                                                                           7.1(a) “The
City will consider the feasibility of establishing “quiet zones” and/or the use of
wayside horns to reduce train horn noise impacts pursuant to the criteria of the
Federal Railroad Administration. Determination to proceed with implementation
will be based on the expected adequacy of public safety and cost feasibility.”
E. Other Noise Sources
Mercy Medical Center in Mt. Shasta maintains a helipad on the hospital
grounds. The hospital, however, is not a base station for a helicopter stationed
on site. The closest base station for a medical helicopter is at the Weed Airport.
Therefore, flights to and from Mercy Medical Center are less frequent than they
would be if the site was being used as a base station. Flights are generally
limited to the delivery or transport of emergency patients. The helipad is also
occasionally used by the California Highway Patrol and during mountain rescue
operations. No particular concerns have been noted regarding noise generated
by typical use of the medical center helipad. (Greg Lippert, Senior Director of
Support Services, Mercy Medical Center, personal communication, May 11,
2006.)
Noise Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan          7-16

             Community Noise Survey:
             To quantify existing noise levels in the quieter parts of the City of Mt. Shasta, a
             community noise survey was performed at six locations that are removed from
             major noise sources. Two of the six locations were monitored over a continuous
             24-hour period, while the other six locations were each monitored for 15-minute
             periods during daytime hours. The community noise survey noise measurement
             locations are shown on Figure 7-4. The results of the community noise survey
             are provided in Table 7-4 and are shown graphically on Figures               Figures 7-  7-5 and 7-
                                                                                                               7 - 6.
Table 7-
      7-4
Community Noise Survey
                                                                   Measured Sound Level, dBA
Site               Location                                 Average (Leq)                    Maximum (Lmax)
 A    808 Mormon Way                              44(Day), 43 (Night)                   60(Day), 75 (Night)
 B    Crossing of I-5 and UPRR                         68 (Day), 71(Night)              95(Day),108 (Night)
 C    Everitt Memorial Hwy. and                                    47                                  61
      Stellar Way
 D    McCloud Avenue and Eagle                                     44                                  63
      Nest Road
 E    Wyehka Way                                                   40                                  56
 F    North end of Spring Hill Drive                               45                                  56
             Source: Bollard Acoustical Consultants, Inc., August 11, 2006. See Figure 7.4 for locations.
             F. Criteria for Acceptable Noise Exposure
             1. Background
             The State Office of Planning and Research (OPR) Noise Element Guidelines
             include recommended exterior and interior noise level standards for local
             jurisdictions to identify and prevent the creation of incompatible land uses due
             to noise. The OPR guidelines contain a land use compatibility table that
             describes the compatibility of different land uses with a range of environmental
             noise levels in terms of Ldn. A noise environment of 60 dB Ldn or less is
             considered to be normally acceptable for residential uses according to those
             guidelines.
             The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) also offers guidelines for
             community noise exposure in the publication “Information on the Levels of
             Environmental Noise Requisite to Protect Public Health and Welfare with an
             Adequate Margin of Safety”. These guidelines consider occupational noise
             exposure as well as noise exposure in the home. The “Levels Document”
             recognizes an exterior noise level of 55 dB Ldn as a goal to protect the public
                                                                                                          Noise Element
                                                               7-17                    City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                                                                                                                                                                            LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                               CITY LIMITS
                                                                                                                                                                                                               PLANNING AREA
                                                                                                                                                          #                 : Continuous Hourly Measurement Site
                                      I-5
                                                                                                                                                          #                 : Short-Term Noise Measurement Site
                                 NO
                                    RTH
                                        OL
                                           D   ST                     KE
                                                                                       F
                                                                 LA
                                                AG  ER      MS                   IN
                                                      D ABRA                 SPR
                                                                                GH
                                                                                  ILL
                                                                                              IV
                                                                                            DR
                                                                                                        E
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Y
                                                                                                             I-5
                                                                                                                                                                              EVERITT MEMORIAL HW
                                                                                                                                           SKI VILL AGE DR
                                                                                             PINE GROVE DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                               C
                                                      E
                                                                                 LASSEN LANE                                                                                                     ROCKFELLOW DR
                                                                                                                                          CH
                                                                                                                                                ES
                                                                                  H                                                                 TN
                                                                               RT                                                                    UT                     ET
                                                                            NO                                                             PI                           RE
                                                                                      O                                                      NE          ST
                                                                                                                                                                      ST                                  A                 D
                                                                                                                                                                                 WASHINGTON STREET
                                                                                       LD
                                                                                            ST                                                      ST
                                                                                              AG
                                                                                                 E           RD
                                                                                                                                                E
                                                                                                                                          LAK
                                                                                                                                           I-5                       M T.
                                                                                                                                                          REAM AVE
                                                                                                                                                                       SH
                                                                                                                          BARR
                                                                                                                                                                            A
                                                                                                                                                                              ST
                                                                                                                   W. A .
                                                                                                                                                                                        A
                                                                                                                         RD                                                                 B LV D
                                                                                                                                                    VD
                                                                                                                                                                              B
                                                                                                                                            L
                                                                                                                                          EB                            I-5
                                                                                                                                      LAK                                                                        HWY 89
                                                                                                                                                                    LD
                                                                                                                                                                  HO
                                                                                                                                  OU
                                                                                                                                                              SOUT
                                                                                                                                      Y
                                                                                                                                 KI
                                                                                                                         S IS
                                                                                                                                                                            ST
                                                                                                                                                                              AG                           A
                                                                           Lake Siskiyou                                                                                         E              RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ELE
                                                                                                                                                                                                     AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      I-5
    N
    Source: Bollard, 2006
0          .5        1
                         MILES                                                                                                                                                                                        FIGURE 7-4
                                                                                                         7-18                                                                                        COMMUNITY NOISE SURVEY SITES

            Sound Level, dBA
              80
              75
              70
              65
              60
              55
              50
              45
              40
              35
              30
                 12:00         4:00 8:00               12:00            4:00        8:00         11:00
                  AM           AM   AM                  PM              PM           PM           PM
                                              Hour of Day
                                         Average (Leq)      Maximum (Lmax)
                       Ldn: 49  dB
Source: Bollard, 2006                                                                                FIGURE 7-5
                                                                             24HR CONTINUOUS NOISE MONITORING
                                                  7-19                                    AT 808 MORMON WAY
                                                                                      FRIDAY, AUGUST 11, 2006

              Sound Level, dBA
                 110
                 100
                  90
                  80
                  70
                  60
                  50
                    12:00         4:00 8:00               12:00             4:00             8:00        11:00
                      AM          AM   AM                  PM               PM               PM           PM
                                                 Hour of Day
                                            Average (Leq)      Maximum (Lmax)
                          Ldn: 77 dB
Source: Bollard, 2006
                                                                                                          FIGURE 7-6
                                                 7-20
                                                                                 24 HR CONTINUOUS NOISE MONITORING
                                                                  AT I-5 AND UNION PACIFIC RAILROAD, NORTH OF SR 89
                                                                                            FRIDAY, AUGUST 11, 2006

from hearing loss, activity interference, sleep disturbance and annoyance. EPA
notes, however, that this level is not a regulatory goal, but is a level defined by a
negotiated scientific consensus without concern for economic and technological
feasibility or the needs and desires of any particular community. EPA and other
federal agencies have suggested land use compatibility guidelines indicating
that residential noise exposures of 55 to 65 dB Ldn are acceptable.
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has also prepared a “Model
Community Noise Control Ordinance”, using Leq as the means of defining
allowable residential noise level limits. The EPA model contains no specific
recommendations for local noise level standards, but reports a range of Leq
values as adopted by various local jurisdictions. The mean daytime residential
noise standard reported by the EPA is 57 dBA (Leq), and the mean nighttime
residential noise standard is 52 dBA (Leq).
Other state laws and regulations regarding noise control are directed towards
aircraft, motor vehicles and noise in general. The California Vehicle Code sets
noise emission standards for new vehicles including autos, trucks, motorcycles
and off-road vehicles. Performance standards also apply to all vehicles operated
on public streets and roadways. Section 216 of the California Streets and
Highways Code regulates traffic noise received at schools near freeways.
2. General Plan Objectives and Programs: Noise
Goal NZ-NZ-1:        Protect City residents from the harmful and annoying effects of
                     exposure to excessive noise.
Policy NZ-
        NZ-1.1:      Enforce standards for noise exposure from proposed and
                     existing non-transportation noise sources. The General Plan
                     Noise Standards for the City of Mt. Shasta for new uses
                     affected by non-transportation noise sources are shown on
                     Table 7-5. The standards of Table 7-5 shall be applied to both
                     new noise-sensitive land uses and new noise-generating uses,
                     with the responsibility for noise attenuation placed on the new
                     use. For example, if a developer proposes construction of a
                     new apartment complex near an existing industry, the
                     developer would be responsible for including appropriate
                     noise attenuation in the project design to achieve compliance
                     with the standards of Table 7-5 at the new apartments.
                     Conversely, if a new industry was proposed near an existing
                     apartment complex, the industry would be responsible for
                     including appropriate noise attenuation in the project design
                     to achieve compliance with the Table 7-5 standards at the
                     existing apartment building.
Noise Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan          7-21

               Implementation Measures:
               NZ-1.1(a): Enact a noise control ordinance.
               NZ-1.1(b): When noise levels due to non-transportation noise
                           sources exceed acceptable noise level standards as
                           indicated in Table 7-5, noise mitigation measures
                           shall be required to comply with the standards.
               NZ-1.1(c): Noise created by new proposed non-transportation
                           noise sources shall not exceed the noise level
                           standards indicated in Table 7-5 at the property line.
Policy NZ-
       NZ-1.2:    Review impacts more closely when a project is potentially a
                 high noise generator.
                 Implementation Measure:
                 NZ-1.2(a): Proposed non-residential land uses that are likely
                             to produce noise levels exceeding the acceptable
                             noise standards at existing or planned noise-
                             sensitive uses shall require an acoustical analysis
                             as part of the application review process to ensure
                             that methods of achieving noise standards are
                             included in project design.
Policy NZ-
       NZ-1.3:    Emergency service and agriculture uses shall be allowed to
                 continue or be initiated even if noise standards are exceeded.
               Implementation Measure:
                 NZ-1.3(a): Noise sources associated with agricultural
                             operations (on lands zoned for such uses) or
                             emergency equipment are exempt from noise
                             standards.
Policy NZ-
       NZ-1.4:    Enforce General Plan noise standards for noise exposure from
                 proposed and existing transportation noise sources. The
                 General Plan Noise Standards for the City of Mt. Shasta for
                 new uses affected by transportation noise sources are shown
                 on Table 7-6. Where the noise level standards of Table 7-6
                 are expected to be exceeded at proposed new uses that would
                 be affected by traffic or railroad noise, appropriate noise
                 mitigation measures shall be included in the project design to
                 reduce projected noise levels to comply with the standards of
                 Table 7-6.
                                                                          Noise Element
                                     7-22               City of Mt. Shasta General Plan
                   Implementation
                   Implementation Measures:
                     NZ-1.4(a): Evaluate transportation noise sources of proposed
                                 projects according to the noise level standards
                                 shown in Table 7-6.
                     NZ-1.4(b): Using acceptable acoustical engineering and
                                 construction standards, incorporate design features
                                 to reduce traffic noise to achieve the noise
                                 standards shown in Table 7-6.
                     NZ-1.4(c): Noise created by new transportation noise sources,
                                 including roadway improvements, shall be
                                 mitigated to comply with the noise level standards
                                 shown in Table 7-6.
                     NZ-1.4(d): Actively enforce the California Vehicle Code
                                 sections relating to adequate vehicle mufflers and
                                 modified exhaust systems.
Policy NZ-
        NZ-1.5:      Actively work to reduce noise generated by City equipment.
                     Implementation Measure:
                     NZ-1.5(a): When purchasing new equipment, the City shall
                                 acquire equipment and vehicles that comply with
                                 noise level performance standards based upon the
                                 best feasible noise reduction technology.
Policy NZ-
        NZ-1.6:      The City Development Code shall include procedures to
                     ensure that required noise review and mitigation measures are
                     implemented in the project review and building permit
                     processes.
                     Implementation Measure:
                     NZ-1.6(a): Proposed noise-sensitive land uses in areas
                                 exposed to existing or projected exterior noise
                                 levels, which exceed acceptable noise standards,
                                 shall require an acoustical analysis as part of the
                                 environmental review process so that noise
                                 mitigation may be included in the project design.
                                 When an acoustical analysis is required by the City
                                 to assess compliance with the City’s Noise Element
                                 standards, the analysis shall follow the guidelines
                                 of Table 7-7.
Noise Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan          7-23

Policy NZ-
       NZ-1.7:  Noise attenuation measures required to achieve acceptable
               noise standards shall emphasize site planning and project
               design.
               Implementation Measures:
               NZ-1.7(a): Use creative concepts and accepted acoustical
                          engineering standards to achieve acceptable noise
                          standards.
               NZ-1.7(b): The use of noise barriers, such as soundwalls, shall
                          be considered a supplemental means of achieving
                          the noise standards after all practical design-
                          related noise mitigation measures have been
                          integrated into the project. When soundwalls and
                          noise barriers are proposed, the City will consider
                          the visual impacts in addition to their effectiveness
                          in attenuating noise.
Policy NZ-
       NZ-1.8:  Monitor compliance with noise standards.
               Implementation Measures:
               NZ-1.8(a): Develop and employ procedures to monitor
                          compliance with the standards of the Noise
                          Element after completion of projects where noise
                          mitigation measures were required.
               NZ-1.8(b): Building design shall be reviewed to enforce the
                          State Noise Insulation Standards (California Code
                          of Regulations, Title 24) and Chapter 35 of the
                          Uniform Building Code (UBC).
               NZ-1.8(c): Noise associated with construction activity between
                          the hours of 7 a.m. and 5 p.m. shall be exempt
                          from the standards cited in Table 7-5.
                          Construction activity outside of this period may
                          exceed the cited standards if an exemption is
                          granted by the City to cover special circumstances.
                                                                      Noise Element
                                 7-24               City of Mt. Shasta General Plan
Table 7-  7-5
Noise Standards for New Uses Affected by Non-                Non-Transportation Noise
                                                Outdoor Activity Area -
             New Land Use                                     Leq                       Interior – Leq
                                                Daytime            Nighttime             Day & Night           Notes
All Residential                                     50                  45                      35            1, 2, 7
Transient Lodging                                   55                  ---                     40               3
Hospitals & Nursing Homes                           50                  45                      35               4
Theaters & Auditoriums                              ---                 ---                     35
Churches, Meeting Halls,                            55                  ---                     40
Schools, Libraries, etc.
Office Buildings                                    55                  ---                     45              5, 6
Commercial Buildings                                55                  ---                     45              5, 6
Playgrounds, Parks, etc.                            65                  65                       ---             6
Industry                                            65                  65                      50               5
Notes:
1. Outdoor activity areas for single-family residential uses are defined as back yards. For large parcels or residences
with no clearly defined outdoor activity area, the standard shall be applicable within a 100 foot radius of the
residence.
2. For multi-family residential uses, the exterior noise level standard shall be applied at the common outdoor
recreation area, such as at pools, play areas or tennis courts.
3. Outdoor activity areas of transient lodging facilities include swimming pool and picnic areas, and are not
commonly used during nighttime hours.
4. Hospitals are often noise-generating uses. The exterior noise level standards for hospitals are applicable only at
clearly identified areas designated for outdoor relaxation by either hospital staff or patients.
5. Only the exterior spaces of these uses designated for employee or customer relaxation have any degree of
sensitivity to noise.
6. The outdoor activity areas of office, commercial and park uses are not typically utilized during nighttime hours.
7. It may not be possible to achieve compliance with this standard at residential uses located immediately adjacent to
loading dock areas of commercial uses while trucks are unloading. The daytime and nighttime noise level standards
applicable to loading docks shall be 55 and 50 dB Leq, respectively.
General: The Table 5 standards shall be reduced by 5 dB for sounds consisting primarily of speech or music, and for
recurring impulsive sounds. If the existing ambient noise level exceeds the standards of Table 7-5, then the noise level
standards shall be increased at 5 dB increments to encompass the ambient.
Noise Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                      7-25

Table 7-  7-6
Noise Standards for New Uses Affected by Traffic and Railroad Noise
            New Land Use                       Outdoor Activity            Interior - Ldn/Peak               Notes
                                                    Area - Ldn                   Hour Leq1
All Residential                                        60-65                          45                    2, 3, 4
Transient Lodging                                        65                           45                        5
Hospitals & Nursing Homes                                60                           45                        6
Theaters & Auditoriums                                    ---                         35
Churches, Meeting Halls,                                 60                           40
Schools, Libraries, etc.
Office Buildings                                         65                           45                        7
Commercial Buildings                                     65                           50                        7
Playgrounds, Parks, etc.                                 70                           ---
Industry                                                 65                           50                        7
Notes:
1. For traffic noise within the City, Ldn and peak-hour Leq values are estimated to be approximately similar. Interior
noise level standards are applied within noise-sensitive areas of the various land uses, with windows and doors in the
closed positions.
2. Outdoor activity areas for single-family residential uses are defined as back yards. For large parcels or residences
with no clearly defined outdoor activity area, the standard shall be applicable within a 100-foot radius of the
residence.
3. For multi-family residential uses, the exterior noise level standard shall be applied at the common outdoor recreation
area, such as at pools, play areas or tennis courts.
4. Where it is not possible to reduce noise in outdoor activity areas to 60 dB Ldn or less using a practical application of
the best-available noise reduction measures, an exterior noise level of up to 65 dB Ldn may be allowed provided that
available exterior noise level reduction measures have been implemented and interior noise levels are in compliance
with this table.
5. Outdoor activity areas of transient lodging facilities include swimming pool and picnic areas.
6. Hospitals are often noise-generating uses. The exterior noise level standards for hospitals are applicable only at
clearly identified areas designated for outdoor relaxation by either hospital staff or patients.
7. Only the exterior spaces of these uses designated for employee or customer relaxation have any degree of sensitivity
to noise.
                                                                                                      Noise Element
                                                          7-26                      City of Mt. Shasta General Plan
Table 7-7-7
Acoustical
Acoustical Analysis Standards
An acoustical analysis prepared pursuant to this Noise Element shall:
     A. Be the responsibility of the applicant.
     B. Be prepared by qualified persons experienced in the fields of
         environmental noise assessment and architectural acoustics.
     C. Include representative noise level measurements with sufficient
         sampling periods and locations to adequately describe local conditions
         and the predominant noise sources.
     D. Estimate existing and projected noise levels in terms of the City’s
         standards and compare those levels to the adopted policies of the
         Noise Element.
     E. Recommend appropriate mitigation to achieve compliance with the
         adopted policies and standards of the Noise Element. Where the noise
         source in question consists of intermittent single events, the report must
         address the effects of maximum noise levels in sleeping rooms in terms
         of possible sleep disturbance.
     F. Estimate interior and exterior noise exposure after the prescribed
         mitigation measures have been implemented.
     G. Describe a post-project assessment program that could be used to
         evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed mitigation measures.
3. Noise Mitigation Options
In considering proposals for projects that involve the generation of excessive
noise, or the exposure of noise-sensitive uses in areas subject to high noise
levels, mitigation measures are often needed to achieve desirable noise level
standards. Noise problems can usually be considered as being composed of
three basic elements: the noise source, a transmission path, and a receiver. The
appropriate acoustical treatment for a given project should consider the nature
of the noise source and the sensitivity of the receiver. The problem should be
defined in terms of appropriate criteria (Ldn, Leq, or Lmax), the location of a
sensitive receiver (inside or outside), and when the problem occurs (daytime or
nighttime). Noise control techniques can then be selected to provide an
acceptable noise environment for the receiving property while remaining
consistent with local aesthetic standards and practical structural and economic
Noise Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan         7-27

limits. Fundamental noise control techniques and mitigation options are
discussed below:
Use of Setbacks
Noise exposure may be reduced by increasing the distance between the noise
source and receiving use. Setback areas can take the form of open space,
frontage roads, recreational areas, storage yards, etc. The available noise
attenuation from this technique is limited by the characteristics of the noise
source, but is generally about 4 to 6 dB per doubling of distance from the
source.
Use of Barriers
Shielding by barriers can be obtained by placing walls, berms or other
structures, such as buildings, between the noise source and the receiver. The
effectiveness of a barrier depends upon blocking line-of-sight between the
source and receiver, and is improved with increasing the distance the sound
must travel to pass over the barrier as compared to a straight line from source to
receiver. The difference between the distance over a barrier and a straight line
between source and receiver is called the "path length difference," and is the
basis for calculating barrier noise reduction.
Barrier effectiveness depends upon the relative heights of the source, barrier and
receiver. In general, barriers are most effective when placed close to either the
receiver or the source. An intermediate barrier location yields a smaller path-
length-difference for a given increase in barrier height than does a location
closer to either source or receiver.
For maximum effectiveness, barriers must be continuous and relatively airtight
along their length and height. To ensure that sound transmission through the
barrier is insignificant, barrier mass should be about 4 lbs./square foot,
although a lesser mass may be acceptable if the barrier material provides
sufficient transmission loss. Satisfaction of the above criteria requires substantial
and well-fitted barrier materials, placed to intercept line of sight to all significant
noise sources. Earth, in the form of berms or the face of a depressed area, is
also an effective barrier material.
The attenuation provided by a barrier depends upon the frequency content of
the source. Generally, higher frequencies are attenuated (reduced) more readily
than lower frequencies. This results because a given barrier height is relatively
large compared to the shorter wavelengths of high frequency sounds, while
relatively small compared to the longer wavelengths of the frequency sounds.
The effective center frequency for traffic noise is usually considered to be 550
Hz. Railroad engines, cars and horns emit noise with differing frequency content,
so the effectiveness of a barrier will vary for each of these sources. Frequency
analyses are necessary to properly calculate barrier effectiveness for noise from
sources other than highway traffic.
                                                                            Noise Element
                                       7-28               City of Mt. Shasta General Plan
There are practical limits to the noise reduction provided by barriers. For
highway traffic noise, a 5 to 10 dB noise reduction may often be reasonably
attained. A 15 dB noise reduction is sometimes possible, but a 20 dB noise
reduction is extremely difficult to achieve. Barriers usually are provided in the
form of walls, berms, or berm/wall combinations. The use of an earth berm in
lieu of a solid wall may provide up to 3 dB additional attenuation over that
attained by a solid wall alone, due to the absorption provided by the earth.
Berm/wall combinations offer slightly better acoustical performance than solid
walls, and are often preferred for aesthetic reasons.
Site Design
Buildings can be placed on a project site to shield other structures or areas, to
remove them from noise-impacted areas, and to prevent an increase in noise
level caused by reflections. The use of one building to shield another can
significantly reduce overall project noise control costs, particularly if the
shielding structure is insensitive to noise. As an example, carports or garages
can be used to form or complement a barrier shielding adjacent dwellings or an
outdoor activity area. Similarly, one residential unit can be placed to shield
another so that noise reduction measures are needed for only the building
closest to the noise source. Placement of outdoor activity areas within the
shielded portion of a building complex, such as a central courtyard, can be an
effective method of providing a quiet retreat in an otherwise noisy environment.
Patios or balconies should be placed on the side of a building opposite the
noise source, and "wing walls" can be added to buildings or patios to help shield
sensitive uses.
Another option in site design is the placement of relatively insensitive land uses,
such as commercial or storage areas, between the noise source and a more
sensitive portion of the project. Examples include development of commercial
buildings along a busy arterial to block noise affecting a residential area, or
providing recreational vehicle storage or travel trailer parking along the noise-
impacted edge of a mobile home park. If existing topography or development
adjacent to the project site provides some shielding, as in the case of an existing
berm, knoll or building, sensitive structures or activity areas may be placed
behind those features to reduce noise control costs.
Site design should also guard against the creation of reflecting surfaces that may
increase onsite noise levels. For example, two buildings placed at an angle
facing a noise source may cause noise levels within that angle to increase by up
to 3 dB. The open end of "U"-shaped buildings should point away from noise
sources for the same reason. Landscaping walls or noise barriers located within
a development may inadvertently reflect noise back to a noise-sensitive area
unless carefully located. Avoidance of these problems while attaining an
aesthetic site design requires close coordination between local agencies, the
project engineer and architect, and the noise consultant.
Noise Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan        7-29
Building Design
When structures have been located to provide maximum noise reduction by
barriers or site design, noise reduction measures may still be required to achieve
an acceptable interior noise environment. The cost of such measures may be
reduced by placement of interior dwelling unit features. For example, bedrooms,
living rooms, family rooms and other noise-sensitive portions of a dwelling can
be located on the side of the unit farthest from the noise source.
Bathrooms, closets, stairwells and food preparation areas are relatively
insensitive to exterior noise sources, and can be placed on the noisy side of a
unit. When such techniques are employed, noise reduction requirements for the
building facade can be significantly reduced, although the architect must take
care to isolate the noise impacted areas by the use of partitions or doors. In
some cases, external building facades can influence reflected noise levels
affecting adjacent buildings. This is primarily a problem where high-rise
buildings are proposed. The effect is most evident in urban areas where an
"urban canyon" may be created. Bell-shaped or irregular building facades and
attention to the orientation of the building can reduce this effect.
Noise Reduction
       Reduction by Building Facades
When interior noise levels are of concern in a noisy environment, noise
reduction may be obtained through acoustical design of building facades.
Standard residential construction practices provide 10-15 dB noise reduction for
building facades with open windows, and approximately 25 dB noise reduction
when windows are closed. Thus a 25 dB exterior-to-interior noise reduction can
be obtained by the requirement that building design include adequate
ventilation systems. This allows windows on a noise-impacted facade to remain
closed under any weather condition.
Where greater noise reduction is required, acoustical treatment of the building
facade is necessary. Reduction of relative window area is the most effective
control technique, followed by providing acoustical glazing (thicker glass or
increased air space between panes) in low air infiltration rate frames, use of
fixed (non-movable) acoustical glazing or the elimination of windows. Exterior
roll-up shades over windows may also be used to reduce noise.
Noise transmitted through walls can be reduced by increasing wall mass (using
stucco or brick in lieu of wood siding), isolating wall members by the use of
double or staggered stud walls, or mounting interior walls on resilient channels.
Noise control for exterior doorways is provided by reducing door area, using
solid-core doors, and by acoustically sealing door perimeters with suitable
gaskets. Roof treatments may include the use of plywood sheathing under
roofing materials.
Whichever noise control techniques are employed, it is essential that attention
be given to installation of weather stripping and caulking of joints. Openings for
attic or subfloor ventilation may also require acoustical treatment.
                                                                           Noise Element
                                      7-30               City of Mt. Shasta General Plan
Design of acoustical treatment for building facades should be based upon
analysis of the level and frequency content of the noise source. The transmission
loss of each building component should be defined and the composite noise
reduction for the complete facade calculated to account for absorption in the
receiving room. A one-third octave band analysis is a definitive method of
calculating the A-weighted noise reduction of a facade.
A common measure of transmission loss is the “Sound Transmission Class”
(STC). STC ratings are not directly comparable to A-weighted noise reduction
and must be corrected for the spectral content of the noise source. Requirements
for transmission loss analyses are outlined by Title 24 of the California Code of
Regulations.
Use of Vegetation
Trees and other vegetation are often thought to provide significant noise
attenuation. However, approximately 100 feet of dense foliage (so that no visual
path extends through the foliage) is required to achieve even a 5 dB attenuation
of traffic noise. Thus, the use of vegetation as a noise barrier should not be
considered a practical method of noise control unless large tracts of dense
foliage are part of the existing landscape.
Vegetation can be used to acoustically "soften" intervening ground between a
noise source and receiver, increasing ground absorption of sound and thus
increasing the attenuation of sound with distance. Planting of trees and shrubs is
also of aesthetic and psychological value and may reduce adverse public
reaction to a noise source by removing the source from view, even though noise
levels will be largely unaffected. It should be noted, however, that trees planted
on the top of a noise control berm can actually slightly degrade the acoustical
performance of the barrier. This effect can occur when high frequency sounds
are diffracted (bent) by foliage and directed downward over a barrier.
In summary, the effects of vegetation upon noise transmission are minor and are
primarily limited to increased absorption of high frequency sounds and to
providing aesthetic benefits that may reduce adverse public reaction to the noise
source.
Noise Element
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan         7-31

REFERENCES:
California, State of. Governor’s Office of Planning and Research. General Plan
Guidelines, 2003.
City of Mt. Shasta, General Plan Noise Element, 1993.
Federal Railroad Administration, Final Rule on the Use of Locomotive Horns at
Highway-Rail Grade Crossings, Federal Register, Vol. 70, No. 80, April 27,
2005.
Lippert, Greg. Senior Director of Support Services, Mercy Medical Center,
personal communication, May 11, 2006.
                                                                        Noise Element
                                    7-32              City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

     City of Mt. Shasta
       2014-2019 Housing Element
                         Adopted October 13, 2014
                 Certified by HCD October 21, 2014
                              Prepared by:
October 11, 2013                                 1
This page is intentionally left blank
2014-2019 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                  Prepared by:
                                 Mintier Harnish
                      Adopted October 13, 2014
              Certified by HCD October 21, 2014
This page is intentionally left blank
8.       Housing Element
TABLE OF CONTENTS
A. Introduction .................................................................................................................................................... 8-1
         1. Contents of the Housing Element .............................................................................................. 8-1
         2. General Plan Consistency ........................................................................................................... 8-1
         3. Public Participation ...................................................................................................................... 8-2
         4. Analysis of the Previous Housing Element ................................................................................ 8-4
B. Housing Plan ................................................................................................................................................... 8-5
         1. Goals, Policies and Programs ..................................................................................................... 8-5
         2. Quantified Objectives................................................................................................................ 8-17
C. Housing Needs Assessment............................................................................................................................8-18
         1. Population and Employment Trends ....................................................................................... 8-19
         2. Employment ................................................................................................................................. 8-22
         3. Household Characteristics ........................................................................................................ 8-24
         4. Housing Conditions ..................................................................................................................... 8-32
         5. Special Housing Needs Analyses ............................................................................................. 8-39
D. Housing Resources and Opportunities ...........................................................................................................8-51
         1. Existing Affordable Housing ...................................................................................................... 8-51
         2. At Risk Housing ............................................................................................................................. 8-53
         3. Regional Housing Needs Allocation........................................................................................ 8-56
         4. Vacant Land Inventory .............................................................................................................. 8-57
         5. Environmental Constraints......................................................................................................... 8-61
         6. Funding Resources ...................................................................................................................... 8-61
E. Housing Constraints .......................................................................................................................................8-65
         1. Governmental Constraints ........................................................................................................ 8-66
         2. Non-Governmental Constraints ............................................................................................... 8-87
Appendices................................................................................................................................................................... 8-89
F. APPENDIX 8-A: HOUSING IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS SUMMARY - 2009-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT ........8-91
G. APPENDIX 8-B: VACANT LAND INVENTORY .................................................................................................. 8-111
H. APPENDIX 8-C: LOCATION OF PARCELS IDENTIFIED IN VACANT LAND INVENTORY ...................................... 8-131
I. APPENDIX 8-D: FUNDING SOURCES .............................................................................................................. 8-137
J. APPENDIX 8-E: GLOSSARY ............................................................................................................................ 8-140
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                                                                              8-i

LIST OF TABLES
Table 8-1 Quantified Objectives .............................................................................................................. 8-17
Table 8-2 Population Growth ................................................................................................................... 8-19
Table 8-3 Population Projections ............................................................................................................. 8-20
Table 8-4 Population by Race/Ethnicity ................................................................................................... 8-20
Table 8-5 Population by Age .................................................................................................................... 8-21
Table 8-6 Labor Force .............................................................................................................................. 8-22
Table 8-7 Largest Employers .................................................................................................................... 8-22
Table 8-8 Fastest Growing Occupations .................................................................................................. 8-23
Table 8-9 Income Distribution ................................................................................................................. 8-24
Table 8-10 Households By Income Groups .............................................................................................. 8-25
Table 8-11 State Income Limits, Siskiyou County .................................................................................... 8-26
Table 8-12 Population Below Poverty Level ............................................................................................ 8-27
Table 8-13 Housing Units by Tenure ........................................................................................................ 8-28
Table 8-14 Occupancy Status ................................................................................................................... 8-28
Table 8-15 Housing Cost as a Percentage of Household Income ............................................................ 8-30
Table 8-16 Housing Unit Types ................................................................................................................ 8-31
Table 8-17 Building Permit Statistics ....................................................................................................... 8-31
Table 8-18 Age of Housing ....................................................................................................................... 8-32
Table 8-19 Summary of Housing Condition Survey ................................................................................. 8-33
Table 8-20 Housing Unit Size ................................................................................................................... 8-34
Table 8-21 Household Size by Tenure ...................................................................................................... 8-35
Table 8-22 Overcrowded Housing ........................................................................................................... 8-36
Table 8-23 Ability to Pay by Household Size Based on HUD Income Limits ............................................ 8-37
Table 8-24 Homes for Sale ....................................................................................................................... 8-38
Table 8-25 Apartment and House Rentals ............................................................................................... 8-39
Table 8-26 Persons with Disabilities by Age Group ................................................................................. 8-41
Table 8-27 Senior Population ................................................................................................................... 8-44
Table 8-28 Senior Households by Tenure ................................................................................................ 8-45
Table 8-29 Care Facilities for Seniors and/or Disabled Persons .............................................................. 8-45
Table 8-30 Large Households by Tenure.................................................................................................. 8-46
Table 8-31 Household Size ....................................................................................................................... 8-46
Table 8-32 Household Size for Owner/Renter Occupied Housing Units ................................................. 8-47
Table 8-33 Single-Parent Households ...................................................................................................... 8-48
Table 8-34 Homelessness Services........................................................................................................... 8-50
Table 8-35 Assisted Multifamily Units ..................................................................................................... 8-52
Table 8-36 Potential Rent Subsidies ........................................................................................................ 8-54
Table 8-37 Replacement Costs................................................................................................................. 8-54
Table 8-38 Qualified Entities .................................................................................................................... 8-55
Table 8-39 Income Levels and RHNA ....................................................................................................... 8-57
Table 8-40 Potential Residential Units by Zone District .......................................................................... 8-59
Table 8-41 Estimated Residential Capacity Compared to RHNA by Income ........................................... 8-60
Table 8-42 House Heating Fuel ................................................................................................................ 8-65
                                                                 2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-ii                                                                                                      City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

Table 8-43 Residential Land Use Designations ........................................................................................ 8-66
Table 8-44 Residential Zone Districts and Development Standards ........................................................ 8-68
Table 8-45 Housing Types Permitted by Zoning District .......................................................................... 8-70
Table 8-46 Constraints on Housing for Persons with Disabilities ............................................................ 8-77
Table 8-47 Planning Processing Times ..................................................................................................... 8-79
Table 8-48 Connection and Impact Fees.................................................................................................. 8-84
Table 8-49 Planning Permit Fees.............................................................................................................. 8-85
Table 8-A Housing Implementation Programs Summary: 2005 Housing Element .................................. 8-91
Table 8-B Vacant Parcels with General Plan and Zoning Use Designations........................................... 8-112
Table 8-C Funding Sources ..................................................................................................................... 8-137
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 8-1 Median List Prices ................................................................................................................... 8-38
Figure 8-2 Mortgage Rates....................................................................................................................... 8-87
Figure 8-3 Vacant Land Inventory Residential and Commercial Zones ................................................. 8-133
Figure 8-4 Land Inventory – Other Zones .............................................................................................. 8-135
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                                                    8-iii

This page is intentionally left blank.
                                       2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-iv                                                            City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

A. INTRODUCTION
1. Contents of the Housing Element
The Housing Element of the General Plan is a comprehensive statement by the City of
Mt. Shasta of its current and future housing needs and proposed actions to facilitate the
provision of housing to meet those needs at all income levels. The policies and
programs contained in this Element are an expression of the statewide housing priority
to allow for the “attainment of decent housing and a suitable living environment for
every Californian,” as well as a reflection of the unique concerns of the community. The
purpose of the Housing Element is to establish specific goals, policies, and objectives
relative to the provision of housing, and to adopt an action plan toward this end. In
addition, the Element identifies and analyzes housing needs and resources and
constraints to meeting those needs.
The Housing Element is to provide clear policy and direction for making decisions
pertaining to zoning, subdivision approval, housing allocations, and capital
improvements. State law (Government Code Sections 65580 through 65589) mandates
the contents of the Housing Element. By law, the Housing Element must contain:
            An assessment of housing needs and an inventory of resources and
             constraints relevant to meeting those needs;
            A statement of the community’s goals, policies, and quantified objectives
             relevant to the maintenance, improvement, and development of housing;
             and
            An action plan that sets forth a five-year schedule of actions that the local
             government is undertaking or intends to undertake to implement the policies
             and achieve the goals and objectives of the Housing Element.
The Housing Element must also identify adequate residential sites available for a variety
of housing types for all income levels; assist in developing adequate housing to meet
the needs of very low-, low-, and moderate-income households; address governmental
constraints to housing maintenance, improvement, and development; conserve and
improve the condition of the existing affordable housing stock; and promote housing
opportunities for all persons.
Even though the focus of the Housing Element is on lower- and moderate-income
households, the Element must also address the housing needs and policy issues for the
entire community and be consistent with the adopted policies of the rest of the
General Plan.
2. General Plan Consistency
This Housing Element is a stand-alone document intended to replace the City’s previous
Housing Element adopted in 2009. It is intended to become an integral part of the City’s
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                         8-1

existing General Plan. Chapter, section, objective, and program numbering in this
Housing Element conform to that of the Mt. Shasta General Plan (2008).
The California Government Code requires internal consistency among the various
elements of a general plan. Section 65300.5 of the Government Code states that the
general plan and the parts and elements thereof shall comprise an integrated and
internally consistent and compatible statement of policies for the adopting agency.
Section 65302 of the Government Code requires cities and counties to amend the
safety and conservation element of the general plan to include analysis and policies
regarding flood hazard and flood management information. The Federal Emergency
Management Agency has not mapped floodplains in the Mt. Shasta planning area,
with the exception of the shore of Lake Siskiyou and a narrow fringe area along the
Sacramento River. This area is outside the City limits and will not constraint development
within the city.
The City has reviewed the other draft elements of the general plan and has determined
that this element is consistent. The City will maintain this consistency as future general
plan amendments are processed by evaluating proposed amendments for consistency
with all elements of the general plan.
3. Public Participation
As part of the Housing Element update process, the City implemented the State’s
public participation requirements in Housing Element Law, set forth in Government
Code Section 65583(c)(7), that jurisdictions “…shall make a diligent effort to achieve
participation of all economic segments of the community in the development of the
housing element.”
The Housing Element was developed through the combined efforts of City staff, the
Planning Commission, the City Council and the City’s consultant. Public input was
solicited during a public workshop on April 8, 2014 and a Planning Commission meeting
on April 15, 2014. This input was incorporated into the Housing Element where
applicable. An email announcement was sent out to a number of special interest
groups, as listed below. The City also published a public notice in the newspaper and
posted a flyer at City Hall. Despite the City’s efforts to invite the public to attend the
workshop, only three people attended the Community Workshop. Turn out for the
Planning Commission meeting was minimal. In an effort to allow all economic segments
of the community (including lower income groups) to comment on the Draft Housing
Element, the City placed review copies on the City’s website, at City Hall, and at the
public library. The City held a study session with the City Council on May 12, 2014, at
which the City Council authorized staff to submit the draft Housing Element to HCD for
their review.
                                          2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-2                                                                City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

Special interests groups that were notified during the Housing Element update process
were:
            Siskiyou County Public Health and Community Development
            Siskiyou County Economic Development Council
            Siskiyou County Domestic Violence & Crisis Center
            Siskiyou Home Health Services
            Siskiyou Habitat for Humanity
            Siskiyou County Special Education Office
            Siskiyou Opportunity Center
            Siskiyou County Board of Realtors
            Golden Umbrella
            Karuk Tribal Commission
            Great Northern Corporation
            Yreka Senior Program
            Far Northern Regional Developmental Disabilities Center
            PSA 2 Area Agency on Aging
            Mt. Shasta Senior Citizens Nutrition Program
            Remi Vista
            Mt. Shasta Tomorrow
            St. Anthony’s Catholic Church
            American Red Cross
The following is a summary of public input received during the public meetings. The
comments listed below were identified by workshop participants. These comments are
from workshop participants and do not necessarily represent the opinions of City of Mt.
Shasta staff or decision makers. The following list is not arranged in any particular order
of importance or sequence:
            The homeless population needs shelter.
            The City has started a Welcome Program to help transient homeless
             individuals find the services they need in Mt. Shasta.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                         8-3

        People are spending too much money for housing, leaving less money for
         food and other necessities.
        There are many single residents, not necessarily seniors yet, that are looking
         for more reflective times. They want a quiet, but not isolated, place to live
         that offers a value-based lifestyle within a quality environment.
        Rents are increasing in the city and apartments are not well maintained.
        There are polarities in the community, which makes it difficult for some people
         to find rental units.
        There are issues with short-term vacation rentals in the city.
        The biggest barriers to affordable housing are the lack of funding (limited
         State and Federal funds), the trouble getting financing, and the slow housing
         market in the area.
        There are approximately 30 to 60 people that receive meals through
         homeless services.
        The impact fee structure can act as a barrier to affordable housing, but the
         City needs to balance infrastructure maintenance needs with development
         needs.
        The Area Agency on Aging (out of Yreka) deals with the growing population
         of baby boomers who are often living on fixed incomes. Mt. Shasta is an
         attractive retirement community for this age group.
        There is a need for more affordable elderly housing.
        Seniors living in Mt. Shasta still earn a modest income, but a large percentage
         of the income goes to housing, as opposed to other expenditures.
4. Analysis of the Previous Housing Element
An important aspect of the Housing Element is an evaluation of achievements of the
implementation of programs included in the previously adopted Housing Element. The
evaluation provides valuable information on the extent to which programs have been
successful in achieving stated objectives and addressing local needs, and the extent to
which these programs continue to be relevant in addressing current and future housing
needs in Mt. Shasta. The evaluation also provides the basis for recommended
modifications to programs and the establishment of new objectives in the Housing
Element. Appendix 8-A, Housing Implementation Programs Summary, contains a
summary of the City’s objectives and programs for the past planning period (2009-
2014).
                                             2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-4                                                                   City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

B. HOUSING PLAN
5. Goals, Policies and Programs
The following section sets forth the City’s Goals and Policies for the five-year planning
period of this Housing Element (2014-2019), and outlines the implementation programs
the City proposes to undertake or otherwise support to implement those policies and
achieve the goals of the Housing Element.
Goal HO-1        ADEQUATE SUPPLY OF HOUSING. Provide an adequate supply of sound,
                 affordable housing for existing and future residents of Mt. Shasta.
Policy HO-1.1 The City shall encourage and facilitate the construction of housing to
                   meet the City’s share of regional housing needs during the planning
                   period of at least 45 new housing units according to the following
                   income levels: 6 units for extremely low income, 5 units for very low
                   income, 7 units for low income, 8 units for moderate income, and 19 units
                   for above moderate income.
Policy HO-1.2 The City shall review the General Plan and zoning map regularly to
                   ensure the availability of suitable land to accommodate a variety of
                   housing types that can accommodate a five-year projection of growth.
                 Implementation Measures:
                 HO-1.2.1       Every year, as part of the annual Housing Element review,
                                the City shall review the vacant land inventory with the
                                objective of ensuring the City can accommodate a variety
                                of housing types. If a deficiency is found, the City shall take
                                steps to change the General Plan and zoning as needed to
                                increase the amount of available land. The City shall make
                                the inventory available to the public, especially the
                                development community, for their information and use.
                                Timing: At annual review
                                Responsibility: Planning Commission
                                Funding: General Fund
Policy HO-1.3 The City shall maintain compliance with Housing Element law and
                   consistency between the Housing Element and all other General Plan
                   Elements.
                 Implementation Measures:
                 HO-1.3.1       The City shall track and review changes in housing law to
                                determine possible need for revisions in related General Plan
                                policies and programs.
                                Timing: Every five years upon revision of the Housing Element.
                                Next review to be conducted in 2019.
                                Responsibility: Planning Commission
                                Funding: General Fund
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                8-5

Policy HO-1.4 The City shall provide adequate opportunities for persons from all
              economic segments of the community to participate in the
              development of the Housing Element.
             Implementation Measures:
             HO 1.4.1      In order to increase public input and support of the City’s
                           housing programs, the City shall encourage the participation
                           of groups interested in housing in the annual Planning
                           Commission review of the Housing Element. This will occur
                           through public notice and normal contact and solicitation
                           of participation with local agencies and interest groups.
                           Timing: At annual review
                           Responsibility: Planning Commission
                           Funding: General Fund
Policy HO-1.5 With all due consideration to financial constraints, and consistent with
              other General Plan policies, the City shall encourage, participate, and
              cooperate in extension of City services to currently unserved and
              underserved areas, including direct financial participation when
              deemed appropriate by the City Council.
             Implementation Measures:
             HO-1.5.1      Subject to availability of funding, the City shall work with
                           developers of housing located outside existing sewer and/or
                           water service areas, or in areas where existing systems are at
                           or near capacity, to develop or improve essential utility
                           systems to facilitate housing development. City assistance
                           may involve direct participation in improvements or
                           cooperation in the formation of assessment districts or other
                           means of financing necessary improvements.
                           Timing: As opportunities are recognized.
                           Responsibility: City Manager
                           Funding: To be determined.
             HO-1.5.2      The City shall continue to develop and implement plans to
                           expand domestic water and sewage collection and
                           treatment systems such that planned development over the
                           General Plan 20-year timeframe can be accommodated.
                           Timing: Continually
                           Responsibility: City Manager
                           Funding: General Fund
                                          2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-6                                                                City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

Goal HO-2        ADDRESS CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING PRODUCTION. Minimize the impact of
                 governmental constraints on the maintenance, improvement, and
                 development of housing.
Policy HO-2.1 The City shall avoid policy changes that would present new unnecessary
                   constraints to meeting housing goals.
Policy HO-2.2 Prior to adoption of any policy or regulation which could significantly
                   impede the development of housing, the Planning Commission and City
                   Council will consider the adverse effects of the policy or regulation on
                   the City’s ability to provide housing, and minimize adverse effects to the
                   degree feasible.
Policy HO-2.3 Where public health, safety, and welfare is not compromised, the City
                   shall avoid imposing planning and other permitting decisions that would
                   result in the conversion of affordable housing to other uses.
Policy HO-2.4 The City shall not place any condition of approval that lowers the
                   proposed density of a residential project if the project otherwise
                   conforms to the General Plan, zoning, and/or development policies in
                   effect, unless the findings required by Government Code Section 65589.5
                   are made.
Policy HO-2.5 The City shall strive to ensure that City development standards, fees,
                   and/or processing requirements are not a constraint to the development
                   of affordable housing.
                 Implementation Measures:
                 HO-2.5.1        The City shall review building and development
                                 requirements and standards, connection fees, and permit
                                 fees, and modify, as feasible, those standards and fees
                                 deemed to be unnecessary, excessive, or that create
                                 unusual constraints on affordability and housing availability.
                                 Timing: Bi-annual review starting 2016.
                                 Responsibility: Building Department, Planning Department,
                                 and City Manager
                                 Funding: General Fund
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                              8-7

             HO-2.5.2     The City shall modify the Zoning Code to ensure consistency
                          with State law and internal consistency related to
                          regulations for specific residential land uses, including
                          manufactured homes, group homes, and emergency
                          shelters. Modifications shall include but shall not be limited
                          to:
                                  explicitly allowing group homes of six or fewer as a
                                     permitted use in all zones where single family units
                                     are permitted;
                                  Adding transitional housing and supportive
                                     housing as permitted uses in the R-L and R-1/B-1
                                     zones;
                                    Permitting manufactured homes on permanent
                                     foundations in all zones where single family units
                                     are permitted; and
                                    Clarifying provisions related to the zones where
                                     emergency shelters are permitted by right and
                                     adopting a locational restriction of no more than
                                     300 feet from other emergency shelters.
                          Timing: Review and update Zoning Code in 2016.
                          Responsibility: Planning Department
                          Funding: General Fund
Goal HO-3    AFFORDABLE HOUSING. Encourage the development of housing
             affordable to extremely low, very low, low, and moderate income
             households.
Policy HO-3.1 The City shall encourage housing suitable to a variety of income levels
              and household sizes and types.
                                         2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-8                                                               City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                 Implementation Measures:
                 HO-3.1.1       The City shall encourage and support plans that include
                                extremely low, very low, and low income housing in areas
                                appropriate to the needs and desires of the population it
                                would house, and at the same time be convenient to public
                                services including bus service and public transit programs.
                                The term “encourage and support”, as used herein, may
                                include, but is not limited to:
                                    Give priority to processing of affordable housing
                                       projects, taking them out of submittal sequence if
                                       necessary to receive an early hearing date;
                                    Allow phasing of infrastructure whenever possible at
                                       time of project review;
                                    Provide density bonus or other concessions to
                                       qualifying projects in accordance with Government
                                       Code 65915;
                                    Facilitate the provision of public transportation services
                                       to serve residential areas, including services for people
                                       with handicaps and the installation of bus stops at safe
                                       and convenient locations; and
                                    Any other action on the part of the City which will help
                                       to keep development costs to a minimum.
                                Timing: As residential project applications are considered.
                                Responsibility: Planning Commission
                                Funding: General Fund
                 HO-3.1.2       The City shall encourage developers of large residential
                                subdivisions (i.e., 50 or more units) to provide some
                                affordable housing. At a minimum, this may entail
                                encouraging developers to incorporate duplexes, triplexes,
                                townhouses, or other affordable housing products or
                                recommend the overlay of the Planned Development (P-D)
                                zone district to provide development flexibility for clustering,
                                mixed use, and condominium development.
                                Timing: As residential development proposals of 50 or more
                                units are submitted.
                                Responsibility: Planning Department, Planning Commission,
                                City Council
                                Funding: Private development
Policy HO-3.2 The City shall grant density bonuses to qualifying affordable and senior
                   housing development pursuant to Government Code Section 65915, as
                   codified in Section 18.20.120 of the City of Mt. Shasta Municipal Code.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                               8-9

Policy HO-3.3 The City shall continue to allow and encourage residential uses within
              the Central Business District (CBD) on second floors and above in
              commercial structures as a means to provide additional affordable and
              convenient housing.
Policy HO-3.4 Pursue public and private resources available to promote diverse
              housing opportunities, and particularly to assist in the creation and
              retention of affordable housing for extremely low, very low, low and
              moderate income levels.
             Implementation Measures:
             HO-3.4.1      The City will assist private and non-profit organizations in the
                           development of extremely low-, very low-, low- and
                           moderate-income housing where such development does
                           not conflict with other policies and provisions of the General
                           Plan and City ordinances. Assistance will include:
                           maintenance of relationships with funding and facilitating
                           agencies and organizations; site identification; and local,
                           state, federal permit assistance.
                           Timing: Annual progress review; annual meeting with local
                           housing advocates regarding coordination and assistance;
                           and upon application submittal.
                           Responsibility: City Manager
                           Funding: General Fund
             HO-3.4.2      The City shall encourage, coordinate with and support
                           agencies and organizations operating rental and mortgage
                           subsidy and self-help housing programs. The City will refer
                           persons interested in developing low-cost housing to
                           appropriate government and non-profit organizations for
                           assistance. Those provisions of the City’s ordinance which
                           support affordable housing (e.g., second dwellings, group
                           housing, density bonuses), will be made available to the
                           public in the form of “an affordable housing information
                           brochure”. This brochure will include information from the
                           Housing Needs Study completed for the City in July 2005.
                           Timing: Continuous coordination, as necessary, and
                           completion of the brochure in 2016.
                           Responsibility: City Manager, Planning and Building
                           Departments
                           Funding: General Fund
                                          2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-10                                                               City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                 HO-3.4.3       To support the development of housing affordable to
                                extremely low-income households, the City shall continue to
                                seek and pursue state and federal funds annually, or as
                                funding becomes available; and grant priority to projects
                                that include units affordable to extremely low-income
                                households.
                                Timing: Seek funding annually to assist extremely low-income
                                households.
                                Responsibility: City Manager
                                Funding: General Fund
Policy HO-3.5 Minimize the adverse effects of new mitigation fees, sewer fees and
                   drainage fees on the provision of housing for low- and moderate-income
                   persons.
                 Implementation Measures:
                 HO-3.5.1       At the time of adoption of any new mitigation fees, the City
                                shall consider the housing needs of low- and moderate-
                                income households. Provisions shall be included for potential
                                fee reductions or other cost reductions for projects where 25
                                percent or more of the housing would be dedicated to low-
                                and moderate-income persons when a covenant is signed
                                assuring continued use by low- and moderate-income
                                households.
                                Timing: Continually
                                Responsibility: City Council
                                Funding: General Fund
                 HO-3.5.2       The City will continue to review its planning, permitting and
                                environmental review programs to identify potential
                                constraints to housing development and means by which
                                those constraints may be reduced.
                                Timing: Annually
                                Responsibility: City Manager
                                Funding: General Fund
                 HO-3.5.3       Pursuant to Government Code Section 65589.7, the City will
                                develop specific procedures to grant priority sewer and
                                water service to those residential developments that include
                                units affordable to lower income households.
                                Timing: 2015
                                Responsibility: City Manager
                                Funding: General Fund
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                             8-11

             HO-3.5.4       The City will monitor the Development of new single family
                            and multifamily housing by qualified developers and
                            determine whether the City’s development impact fees and
                            conditional use permit requirements create an unjustified
                            constraint to affordable housing development.
                            Timing: Annually
                            Responsibility: City Council
                            Funding: General Fund
Goal HO-4    HOUSING AND NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION. Initiate all reasonable
             efforts to preserve, conserve, and enhance the quality of existing dwelling
             units and residential neighborhoods to ensure full utilization of the City’s
             existing housing resources for as long as physically and economically
             feasible.
Policy HO-4.1 The City shall support housing rehabilitation and encourage housing
               maintenance in order to avoid future need for significant rehabilitation
               or replacement.)
             Implementation Measures:
             HO-4.1.1       The City shall continue to support efforts of non-profit
                            organizations, such as the Great Northern Corporation, who
                            undertake rehabilitation programs and apply for State and
                            Federal funds for rehabilitation programs.
                            Timing: Ongoing
                            Responsibility: City Manager
                            Funding: General Fund
             HO-4.1.2       The City shall use the code enforcement program as a
                            means of keeping track of the condition of the housing
                            stock. This, along with periodic review by Planning
                            Commission and City Council of residential areas needing
                            improvements, could identify needed code enforcement
                            action, necessary improvements to City infrastructure,
                            and/or the opportunity to obtain financing for
                            improvements.
                            Timing: Continually
                            Responsibility: City Manager
                            Funding: General Fund
                                            2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-12                                                                 City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                 HO-4.1.3       As information becomes available, the City shall notify or
                                cooperate in notification of owners of homes in need of
                                rehabilitation or weatherization about programs that could
                                help meet rehabilitation needs. The City shall continue to
                                offer free guidance and technical assistance through the
                                Building Department to homeowners who wish to repair and
                                improve existing housing. The City will encourage and, as
                                appropriate, participate in the activities of other agencies
                                promoting homeowner maintenance and improvement self-
                                help skills.
                                Timing: On-going as opportunities are recognized.
                                Responsibility: City Manager
                                Funding: General Fund
Policy HO-4.2 The City shall conserve existing housing wherever possible. (Source: 2009-
                   2014 Housing Element, Policy HO-6)
                 Implementation Measures:
                 HO-4.2.1       The City shall maintain a list of non-profit organizations
                                interested in the retention and construction of affordable
                                housing and entities qualified and interested in participating
                                in the offer of Opportunity to Purchase and Right of First
                                Refusal, and meet with and assist organizations desiring to
                                maintain affordable housing in the city. The City shall also
                                respond to the property owner on any Federal or State
                                notices including Notice of Intent or Opt-Out Notices on
                                local projects.
                                Timing: As needed upon receipt of notices.
                                Responsibility: Planning Department
                                Funding: General Fund
                 HO-4.2.2       The City shall continue to monitor “at-risk” subsidized housing
                                when subsidies are within 10 years of expiring (California
                                Government Code Section 65583). The City shall publicize
                                existing State and Federal notice requirements to nonprofit
                                developers and property owners of at-risk housing. The City
                                shall also assist in the search for gap funding for “at risk”
                                projects that may decide to pay off existing assisted loans
                                during the course of the planning period, including but not
                                limited to CDBG and California Housing Finance Agency
                                funds.
                                Timing: As needed upon receipt of notices.
                                Responsibility: City Manager
                                Funding: General Fund
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                               8-13

             HO-4.2.3       The City shall consider adopting a condominium conversion
                            ordinance that would limit the ability to convert from rental
                            units to condominium units, taking into account the impact
                            of the conversion on the availability of rental units. City staff
                            shall conduct an analysis of the potential impacts of
                            condominium conversions on the availability of rental
                            housing, study options for a condominium conversion
                            ordinance, and present the analysis and options to the City
                            Council to consider adoption of an ordinance.
                            Timing: Ordinance to be considered in 2016
                            Responsibility: Planning Department , City Manager
                            Funding: General Fund
Goal HO-5    SPECIAL NEEDS HOUSING. Encourage construction of new, or dedication
             of existing, housing units to meet identified special needs of the
             community.
Policy HO-5.1 The City shall encourage programs that will address the needs for
              housing and programs for senior citizens, large households, disabled
              persons, single-parent families, extremely low- income residents, and the
              homeless.
             Implementation Measures:
             HO 5.1.1       The City shall partner with area social services agencies and
                            non-profit organizations to assess the need for supportive
                            housing types for seniors, people with disabilities (including
                            developmental disabilities), extremely low-income residents,
                            and the homeless, and identify funding sources to develop
                            needed services in the city.
                            Timing: Continually
                            Responsibility: City Manager
                            Funding: General Fund
             HO-5.1.2       The City shall support the development of low-cost child
                            care facilities and job training programs in the city to
                            encourage female householders to enter the job market.
                            The City shall meet with the child care council on an annual
                            basis to review possible childcare needs of the community.
                            Timing: Annually
                            Responsibility: Planning Department
                            Funding: General Fund
                                            2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-14                                                                 City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

Policy HO-5.2 The City shall actively enforce handicapped-related provisions as
                   specified in the Uniform Building Code, Title 24 of the California Code of
                   Regulations, the Disabled Americans Act, and the Municipal Code.
Policy HO-5.3 The City shall give high priority to the building permit processing and
                   inspections for individuals with disabilities, including developmental
                   disabilities.
Policy HO-5.4 The City shall support activities of existing agencies and organizations in
                   meeting the needs of the homeless.
                 Implementation Measures:
                 HO-5.4.1        The City shall support agencies and organizations serving the
                                 homeless by annually updating referral information on local
                                 homeless agencies.
                                 Timing: Annually
                                 Responsibility: City Manager
                                 Funding: General Fund
                 HO-5.4.2        The City shall assist appropriate public and/or non-profit
                                 entities as feasible to develop a shelter for homeless persons
                                 in the city by pursuing grant opportunities and providing
                                 technical assistance in grant applications for State and
                                 Federal funding.
                                 Timing: When requested
                                 Responsibility: City Manager
                                 Funding: CDBG, ESG, or other grant funds
Policy HO-5.5 During the review of discretionary permits for group housing, homeless
                   shelters, transitional housing, and other special-needs groups, when such
                   housing is not otherwise allowed in specific zoning districts by right, the
                   City shall keep standards as minimal as possible as a means to maintain
                   affordability to the extent practical without significantly impacting
                   nearby neighborhoods.
Goal HO-6        SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT AND ENERGY CONSERVATION. Pursue
                 sustainable development and energy efficiency for new development
                 and existing housing stock.
Policy HO-6.1 The City shall promote the use of energy conservation measures in all
                   housing, including very low, low, and moderate income housing, through
                   the use of public and private weatherization programs.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                              8-15

             Implementation Measures:
             HO-6.1.1      The City shall support Pacific Power and Great Northern
                           Corporation’s energy audit and weatherization programs,
                           and provide referrals and participate in informing
                           households that would potentially benefit from these
                           programs as appropriate. The City shall facilitate the
                           weatherization of an average of 10 homes per year during
                           the planning period by providing information on currently
                           available weatherization and energy conservation programs
                           to residents of the City. The City shall have information
                           available for the public at the front counter at City Hall and
                           will distribute related information when appropriate,
                           including distribution through the mail.
                           Timing: Ongoing
                           Responsibility: Building Department
                           Funding: Private and government funds
             HO-6.1.2      The City shall continue to enforce State requirements,
                           including Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, for
                           energy conservation in new residential projects and
                           encourage residential developers to employ additional
                           energy conservation measures for the siting of buildings,
                           landscaping, and solar access through development
                           standards contained in the Zoning Ordinance, Building
                           Code, and Specific Plans, as appropriate.
                           Timing: Continually
                           Responsibility: Planning Department, Building Department
                           Funding: General Fund
Goal HO-7    FAIR HOUSING OPPORTUNITY. Equal access to housing for all persons in the
             community without regard to race, religion, disability, sex, sexual
             orientation, marital status, ancestry, national origin, or color.
Policy HO-7.1 The City shall ensure that all persons, regardless of race, sex, cultural
              origin, age, marital status, or physical handicaps, are provided equal
              access to housing within the community without discrimination.
             Implementation Measures:
             HO-7.1.1      The City shall support designated regulatory agencies in the
                           prevention and correction of any reported discrimination in
                           housing.
                           Timing: Continually
                           Responsibility: City Manager
                           Funding: General Fund
                                            2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-16                                                                 City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                 HO-7.1.2        City staff shall refer all complaints regarding housing
                                 discrimination of any kind to the State Department of Fair
                                 Employment and Housing. The City shall monitor such
                                 complaints by checking with the affected agency and the
                                 complainant, and consider the need for future action if a
                                 trend develops, or if the complaint is not resolved.
                                 Timing: Continually as complaints are received.
                                 Responsibility: City Manager
                                 Funding: General Fund
                 HO-7.1.3        The City shall provide information concerning discrimination
                                 compliant procedures to the public at social service centers,
                                 the senior center, City Hall, the library, housing projects
                                 participating in HUD Section 8 Programs, and other semi-
                                 public places. The information will provide locations and
                                 phone numbers of agencies to contact for assistance. This
                                 outreach effort will be made to include groups likely to
                                 experience discrimination in housing including minority,
                                 elderly, handicapped, and lower-income households.
                                 Timing: Continually
                                 Responsibility: City Manager
                                 Funding: General Fund
6. Quantified Objectives
Table 8-1 summarizes the City’s quantified objectives for the 2014 through 2019 Housing
Element planning period. These objectives represent a reasonable expectation of the
maximum number of new housing units that may be developed and conserved and
the households that will be assisted over the next planning period based on the policies
and programs in this document.
                                               TABLE 8-1
                                      QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES
                                            City of Mt. Shasta
                                                2014-2019
                                Extremely       Very                           Above
                                                           Low   Moderate                 Total
                                   Low          Low                           Moderate
     New Construction                7            7         10        9           25        58
     Rehabilitation                  3            3          3        0            0         9
     Preservation                    0           14         14        0            0        28
     Housing Choice
                                     6            3          3        0            0        12
     Vouchers
     Totals                         16           27         30        9           25       107
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                 8-17

C. HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
The Housing Needs Assessment provides a demographic and housing profile of the city.
This assessment also provides other important information to support the goals, policies,
and programs of the Housing Element to meet the needs of current and future
residents.
The Decennial Census, completed every 10 years, is an important source of information
for the Housing Needs Assessment, as is the 2008-2012 American Community Survey
Data. It provides the most reliable and in-depth data for demographic characteristics
of a locality. The State Department of Finance (DOF) also provides valuable data that is
more current. Whenever possible, DOF data and other local sources were used in the
Housing Needs Assessment. Definitions of various U.S. Census Bureau terms used
throughout this document are provided in Appendix 8-E for clarification.
The Housing Needs Assessment focuses on demographic information, such as
population trends, ethnicity, age, household composition, income, employment,
housing characteristics, general housing needs by income, and housing needs for
special segments of the population. It outlines the characteristics of the community,
and identifies those characteristics that may have significant impacts on housing needs
in the community.
                                          2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-18                                                               City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

7. Population and Employment Trends
Population Change
As seen in Table 8-2, over the past 10 years, from 2003 to 2013, the population of the
City of Mt. Shasta has decreased by 8.3 percent, from 3,664 in 2003 to 3,360 in 2013. The
trend of a declining population is fairly common for rural Siskiyou County, where a
shortage of economic opportunities deters growth.
                                                               TABLE 8-2
                                                    POPULATION GROWTH
                                                           City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                 1990-2013
                            Year                                Population                         Percent Change
                            1990                                     3,460                                  2.00%
                            2000                                     3,621                                  0.47%
                            2001                                     3,661                                  0.11%
                            2002                                     3,658                                (0.08%)
                            2003                                     3,664                                  0.16%
                            2004                                     3,675                                  0.29%
                            2005                                     3,676                                  0.02%
                            2006                                     3,655                                (1.10%)
                            2007                                     3,616                                (1.06%)
                            2008                                     3,602                                (0.38%)
                            2009                                     3,435                                (4.63%)
                            2010                                     3,394                                (1.19%)
                            2011                                     3,376                                (0.53%)
                            2012                                     3,367                                (0.27%)
                            2013                                     3,360                                (0.21%)
             Note: Negative population growth is shown in parenthesis.
              Source: State of California, Department of Finance, E-5 City/County Population and Housing Estimates, May 2013,
                         and Table E-4, November 2012.
Population Projections
Population projections for the City of Mt. Shasta are not currently available. The
Department of Finance (DOF) provides projections for all counties through 2050. Table
8-3 shows the expected population for the entire Siskiyou County, including both the
incorporated and unincorporated portions of the County from 2010 to 2050. Based on
DOF projections, the County is expected to experience an annual growth rate of
approximately 0.32 percent. Based on the City’s historic growth rate and the current
economic downturn, it is unlikely that the city’s future growth rate will approach that
projected for the County. From 2003 to 2013, the population declined at an average
rate of 0.83 percent per year. However, the City’s General Plan projects an annual
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                               8-19

 growth rate of 0.63 percent over the next 20 years. It should be noted this percent rate
 has been used to project the city’s growth to 2050.
                                                                     TABLE 8-3
                                                      POPULATION PROJECTIONS
                                                                City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                      2010-2050
                                                                   2010             2020           2030        2040           2050
                Siskiyou County1                                  44,893          46,369         48,883       51,854         52,130
                City of Mt Shasta2                                 3,831           4,131          4,368        4,643          4,935
               1
                 Projections are for both the incorporated and unincorporated portions of the County.
               2
                 Growth rates of 0.63 percent was used based on the General Plan, however, the city has experienced negative population
               growth in recent years.
                Source: State of California, Department of Finance, P-3 Report, January 2013.
 Population by Race and Ethnicity
 Table 8-4 illustrates population growth within the city between 2000 and 2010 by racial
 and ethnic categories. Although the city is slowly becoming more diverse, the
 population continues to be made up primarily of white residents. For example,
 approximately 91 percent of all residents in the city identified themselves as white at the
 time of the 2000 Census, while the second largest group, Hispanic comprised only 4.7
 percent of the population at that time. In the 2010 census, 87.7 percent of residents
 identified as white, and the second largest group, Hispanic, had increased to 8.2
 percent. Between 2000 and 2010, the largest percentage population growth has been
 in the population of two or more races, followed by Asian and African American.
                                                                     TABLE 8-4
                                                 POPULATION BY RACE/ETHNICITY
                                                                 City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                       2000-2010
                                                                     2000                             2010                  Percent Change
                      Race
                                                          Number           Percent           Number        Percent              2000-2010
White                                                       3,240            91.0%             3,041        89.6%                   (6.1%)
Hispanic or Latino                                           171              4.7%              277          8.2%                    62.0%
African American                                              28              0.8%               61          1.8%                  117.9%
American Indian/ Alaska Native                                13              0.4%               19          0.6%                    46.2%
Asian                                                         18              0.5%               56          1.6%                  211.1%
Native Hawaiian/ Pacific                                      40              1.1%                2            0.1                 (95.0%)
Islander
Some other race                                               78              2.2%               51            1.5                 (34.6%)
Two or More Races                                             33              0.9%              164            4.8                 397.0%
Total                                                       3,621            100%              3,394        100%                    (6.3%)
Notes: Percentages may not add up to 100 percent due to rounding. Negative growth is shown in parenthesis.
 Source: 2000, 2010 Decennial Census Summary File 3, U.S. Census Bureau, Tables P6, P7.
                                                                         2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
 8-20                                                                                                      City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

Population by Age Group
The distribution of Mt. Shasta’s population by age group is shown in Table 8-5. The
distribution for most age groups has not changed significantly since 2000, although the
total population has decreased by about six percent. The number of residents aged less
than five, from 15 to 24, from 35 to 44, and from 45 to 54 all decreased by about 30
percent. The number of residents 25 to 34 or 55 to 64 increased by more than 60
percent. A possible explanation for this change is that younger residents are leaving the
city in search of job opportunities. The number of residents 65 and older increased
slightly.
                                                                 TABLE 8-5
                                                       POPULATION BY AGE
                                                            City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                  2000-2010
                                    2000                                          2010
   Age
                                           Percent of                                  Percent of Percent Change
  (years)            Number                                        Number
                                               Total                                     Total
<5                       224                   6.2%                   154                 4.5%        (31.3%)
5-14                     376                  10.4%                   396                11.7%          5.3%
15-24                    535                  14.8%                   384                11.3%        (28.2%)
25-34                    228                   6.3%                   373                11.0%         63.6%
35-44                    525                  14.5%                   359                10.6%        (31.6%)
45-54                    736                  20.3%                   525                15.5%        (28.7%)
55-64                    333                   9.2%                   584                17.2%         75.4%
65+                      609                  16.8%                   619                18.2%          1.6%
Total                  3,621                  100%                   3,394               100%          (6.3%)
Note: Percentages may not add up to 100 percent due to rounding.
Source: 2000, 2010 Decennial Census Summary File 3, U.S. Census Bureau, Table P8.
8.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                 8-21

9. Employment
Labor Force and Unemployment
The most recent labor force data for the city was provided by the California
Employment Development Department (EDD). Labor force is the sum of employment
and unemployment, excluding people in the armed forces. Table 8-6 shows that
approximately 91 percent of the labor force in the city is employed. The unemployment
rate is 9.2 percent, which is higher than the rate in the State but lower than that of
nearby cities Weed and Yreka and Siskiyou County as a whole.
                                                                  TABLE 8-6
                                                                LABOR FORCE
                        Cities of Mt. Shasta, Weed, Yreka, Siskiyou County, and California
                                                                      2014
                                                          City of
                                                                        City of           City of           Siskiyou
                                                             Mt.                                                         California
                                                                        Weed              Yreka              County
                                                          Shasta
  Labor Force                                              1,700        1,130              2,980             17,790     18,610,000
  Employment                                               1,550         860               2,570             15,060     17,113,000
  Unemployment Number                                        160         270                410               2,730      1,497,000
  Unemployment Rate                                         9.2%        23.6%             13.6%               15.3%         8.0%
  Source: California Employment Development Department, March 2014. California Data is seasonally adjusted.
             http://www.calmis.ca.gov/file/lfmonth/siskisub.xls
Largest Employers
The largest employers in Siskiyou County are listed in Table 8-7. Although not all these
employers are located in Mt. Shasta, residents often leave the city limits to go to work.
Mercy Medical Center is the largest employer in Mt. Shasta.
                                                                  TABLE 8-7
                                                         LARGEST EMPLOYERS
                                                                Siskiyou County
                                                                      2014
                               100-249 Employees                                      250-499 Employees
                   College of the Siskiyous                                Fairchild Medical Center
                   Siskiyou County Sheriff                                 Mercy Medical Center
                   Mt. Shasta Resort                                       Union Pacific Railroad
                   U.S. Forest Service                                     --
                   Siskiyou Lake LLC                                       --
                   Wal-Mart                                                --
                   Source: Economic Development Department, Labor Market Information, Siskiyou County, 2014.
                                                                     2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-22                                                                                                   City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

Fastest Growing Occupations
The region’s fastest growing occupations are listed in Table 8-8. This information is only
available for the Northern Mountains Region (Lassen, Modoc, Nevada, Plumas, Sierra,
Siskiyou, and Trinity Counties), but is applicable as Mt. Shasta residents work both inside
and outside of the city. It is anticipated that the fastest growing occupation in the
Northern Mountains Region is in the area of health and personal care. However, this
occupation earns the lowest median hourly wage. According to the Department of
Housing and Community Development, the 2014 median income for Siskiyou County is
$57,900, which equals $27.85 per hour. Of the five fastest growing occupations, only
one has a median hourly wage that would result in the median income (i.e.,
management analyst).
                                                             TABLE 8-8
                                          FASTEST GROWING OCCUPATIONS
                                                          City of Mt. Shasta
                                                              2010-2020
                                                Median                 Employment      Employment Change
                                                  Hourly         Estimated   Projected
                                                  Wage                                 Number     Percent
                                                                    2010        2020
 Home Health Aides                                 $9.71             240         320      80       33.3%
 Heating, AC, and
 Refrigeration Mechanics                          $18.54             200         260      60       30.0%
 and Installers
 Personal Care Aides                              $10.88             900       1,150     250       27.8%
 Fitness Trainers and Aerobics
                                                  $20.46             340         430      90       26.5%
 Instructors
 Management Analysts                              $28.84             200         250      50       25.0%
  Source: California Employment Development Department, November 2013.
10.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                         8-23

11. Household Characteristics
Households
According to the 2010 U.S. Census Bureau, the number of households in Mt. Shasta is
1,664, of which 811 (48.7 percent) are family households. There are 853 non-family
households, 719 (43.2 percent) of which are householder living alone.
Household Income and Poverty
Table 8-9 lists the income distributions for households in the city of Mt. Shasta in 1990,
2000, and 2012. Accounting for inflation, the median income increased by about $7,000
between 1990 and 2012.
                                                                TABLE 8-9
                                                     INCOME DISTRIBUTION
                                                            City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                 1990-2012
                                                 1990                           2000                        2012
                                     Number                            Number                      Number
    Annual Income                        of              Percent           of        Percent          of         Percent
                                    Househol             of Total     Househol       of Total     Househol       of Total
                                         ds                                ds                         ds
Less than $15,000                       580               38.8%           463         27.8%          332          20.2%
$15,000 to $24,999                      328               22.0%           345         20.7%          173          10.6%
$25,000 to $34,999                      197               13.2%           227         13.6%          177          10.8%
$35,000 to $49,999                      190               12.7%           177         10.6%          207          12.6%
$50,000 to $74,999                      158               10.6%           262         15.7%          353          21.6%
$75,000 to $99,999                       29                1.9%            53          3.2%          108           6.6%
$100,000 to $149,999                     12                0.8%            67          4.0%          238          14.5%
$150,000 or more                          0                0.0%            70          4.2%           49           3.0%
Total                                  1,494              100%           1,664        100%          1,637         100%
Median Income                                 $20,054                         $26,500                     $42,538
Median Income in                              $35,228                         $35,332                     $42,538
2012 Dollars
Note: Percentages may not add up to 100 percent due to rounding
Source: 1990, 2000 U.S. Census Summary File 3 and 2012 ACS data.
                                                                  2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-24                                                                                       City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

   Table 8-10 illustrates the number of households in Mt. Shasta in each income group
   based on the 2006-2010 ACS. The Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy
   (CHAS), which was developed by the Department of Housing and Urban Development
   (HUD) to assist jurisdictions in writing their consolidated plans, has special tabulation
   data based on the 2006-2010 ACS. According to this data, there were 130 owner-
   occupied households and 460 renter-occupied households earning less than 50
   percent of the Median Family Income (MFI) in the city in 2010. Of these, 60 owner-
   occupied households and 250 renter-occupied households fell into the extremely low-
   income category, earning less than 30 percent of the MFI.
   An additional 8 percent of households earn incomes that fall into the moderate-income
   category and the remaining 47 percent of households fall into the above moderate-
   income category.
                                                                       TABLE 8-10
                                                  HOUSEHOLDS BY INCOME GROUPS
                                                                    City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                              2010
                                                                  Number            Percent of          Number     Percent of Number
                                                                 of Owner             Owner            of Renter     Renter    of Total
         Income Group                          Income
                                                                 Househol            Househol          Househol     Househol  Househol
                                                                       ds                ds                ds          ds         ds
Extremely Low
                                              Less than
(Below 30% of Median                                                   60              19.4%              250        80.6%       310
                                               $17,350
Income)
Very Low
                                              $17,350 –
(30–50% of Median                                                      70              25.0%              210        75.0%       280
                                               $28,950
Income)
Low
                                              $28,950 –
(50–80% of Median                                                     120              63.2%               70        36.8%       190
                                               $46,300
Income)
Moderate
                                              $46,300 –
(80–100*% of Median                                                    50              37.0%               85        63.0%       135
                                               $57,900
Income)
Above Moderate
                                               $57,900
(Over 100*% of Median                                                 570               70.8              235        29.2%       805
                                               or more
Income)
Total Households                                                      870              50.6%              850         49.4      1,720
 Notes: Percentages may not add up to 100 percent due to rounding. Income limits based on a four-person household.
 *HCD calculates income limits differently. The limit for above-moderate income is 120% of median income.
 Source: 2006-2010 CHAS data.
   2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
   City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                                8-25

Income Limits and Poverty
The State of California publishes annual income limits for each county that are used to
determine eligibility for assisted housing programs within that county, including Mt.
Shasta residents. The California Health and Safety Code requires that the State limits for
the low, very-low, and extremely-low income categories will be the same as those in the
equivalent levels established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) for its Section 8 program. The income limits by household size are
shown in Table 8-11.
                                                               TABLE 8-11
                                      STATE INCOME LIMITS, SISKIYOU COUNTY
                                                           City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                     2014
     Income                                                  Number of Persons in Household
    Category                    1              2             3              4           5       6           7         8
Extremely Low              $12,150         $13,900      $15,650        $17,350       $18,750 $20,150     $21,550   $22,950
Very Low                   $20,300         $23,200      $26,100        $28,950       $31,300 $33,600     $35,900   $38,250
Lower                      $32,450         $37,050      $41,700        $46,300       $50,050 $53,750     $57,450   $61,150
Median                     $40,550         $46,300      $52,100        $57,900       $62,550 $67,150     $71,800   $76,450
Moderate                   $48,650         $55,600      $62,550        $69,500       $75,050 $80,600     $86,200   $91,750
 Source: California Department of Housing and Community Development, February, 2014.
                                                                  2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-26                                                                                         City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

Table 8-12 shows the poverty rates by age group in the city as well as for single-mother
families. The poverty rate is the percentage of people in a given group that live below
the poverty level out of the total population of that given group in the city. Because the
American Community Survey has such a high margin of error for very small populations,
two years are given as reference. The City’s overall poverty rate is between 10.3 and
12.1 percent. The population with the highest percentage of people in poverty is
children younger than 18 years. Female-headed single parent households experience
the most poverty in families, ranging from 27.3 to 31.1 percent.
                                                                    TABLE 8-12
                                          POPULATION BELOW POVERTY LEVEL
                                                               City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                  2011 and 2012
                                                                             2011                                         2012
                  Population                                  Number                                             Number
                                                                Below                   Percent                    Below       Percent
                                                              Poverty                                             Poverty
  Children < 18 years                                              96                     12.7%                      79         12.1%
  Adults (18-64)                                                  210                     10.2%                     220         10.3%
  Elderly (65+)                                                    41                      7.4%                      56         11.4%
  Total Population Below Poverty                                  347                     10.3%                     355         10.6%
  Level
  Male-headed Single-Parent                                        26                     21.6%                      28         15.5%
  Family
  Female-headed Single-Parent                                      63                     27.3%                      38         31.1%
  Family
  Two Parent Families                                               0                       0%                       13          3.7%
  Total Families Below Poverty Line                                89                     25.3%                      79         12.1%
  Note: Percentages reflect the proportion of the total segment of the population that is below the poverty level.
  Source: 2007-2011 and 2008-2012 ACS data
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                                        8-27

Occupancy and Tenure
Table 8-13 and Table 8-14 illustrate the tenure and occupancy of housing in Mt. Shasta.
The most recent tenure information comes from the 2010 Census. According to this
information, the majority of households are renter occupied (53.1 percent).
                                                          TABLE 8-13
                                            HOUSING UNITS BY TENURE
                                                       City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                 2010
                             Tenure                                       Number                      Percent
        Owner Occupied                                                       781                       46.9%
        Renter Occupied                                                      883                       53.1%
        Total Occupied Housing Units                                        1,664                      100%
        Note: Percentages may not add up to 100 percent due to rounding
         Source: 2010 U.S. Census.
Occupancy information is available from the Census Bureau for 2000 and 2010. The
number of housing units increased by 5 percent between 2000 and 2010. The vacancy
rate rose sharply to 12.2 percent in 2012.
                                                          TABLE 8-14
                                                 OCCUPANCY STATUS
                                                       City of Mt. Shasta
                                                             2000-2010
                                    Occupancy                           2000                 2010
                            Total Occupied                        1,669     92.8%       1,664   87.8%
                            (Households)
                            Total Vacant                           129       7.2%         231   12.2%
                            Total Housing Units                   1,798      100%       1,895   100%
                             Note: Percentages may not add up to 100 percent due to rounding
                             Source: 2000 and 2010 U.S. Census.
                                                                2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-28                                                                                           City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

Overpayment
Definitions of housing affordability can vary, but in general a household should pay no
more than 30 percent of its monthly income on housing costs. Households that pay
more than this are considered “cost-burdened” and households that pay more than 50
percent are considered “severely cost-burdened.” Measuring the number of people
paying more than this percentage helps define an area’s affordability problem. Table
8-15 illustrates the extent of overpayment in Mt. Shasta. As seen in the table, more
renters (46.7 percent) than owners (33.3 percent) are affected by overpayment. As
expected, lower income households tend to pay a higher percentage of their income
towards housing for both owners and renters.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                     8-29

                                               TABLE 8-15
                       HOUSING COST AS A PERCENTAGE OF HOUSEHOLD INCOME
                                            City of Mt. Shasta
                                                   2010
                                                  Overpayment                  Severe Overpayment
    Housing Income                Total    (> 30% income on housing)        (> 50% income on housing)
           Range                Households
                                              Number           Percent         Number           Percent
Owner Households                   870          290             33.3%             120            13.8%
Extremely Low
                                    60           60            100.0%              30            50.0%
Income (<=30% AMI)
Very Low Income
                                    70           40             57.1%              40            57.1%
(>30% to <=50% AMI)
Low Income (>50%
                                   120           70             58.3%              25            20.8%
to <=80% AMI)
Moderate Income
and above                          620          120             19.4%              25             4.0%
 (>80% AMI)
Renter Households                  845          395             46.7%             225            26.6%
Extremely Low
                                   250          160             64.0%             150            60.0%
Income (<=30% AMI)
Very Low Income
                                   210          140             66.7%              60            28.6%
(>30% to <=50% AMI)
Low Income (>50%
                                    70           60             85.7%              15            21.4%
to <=80% AMI)
Moderate Income
and above                           85           35             41.2%               0             0.0%
 (>80% AMI)
All Households                    1,720         695             40.4%             355            20.6%
Extremely Low
                                   310          225             72.6%             185            59.7%
Income (<=30% AMI)
Very Low Income
                                   280          180             64.3%             100            35.7%
(>30% to <=50% AMI)
Low Income (>50%
                                   190          135             71.1%              45            23.7%
to <=80% AMI)
Moderate Income
and above                          940          155             16.5%              25             2.7%
 (>80% AMI)
 Source: 2006-2010 HUD CHAS Data
                                                  2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-30                                                                       City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

Housing Composition
The composition of housing units in Mt. Shasta is mostly single family. Table 8-16 displays
the estimated number of each type of housing unit for 1990, 2000, and 2013 as reported
by the State Department of Finance.
                                                                 TABLE 8-16
                                                        HOUSING UNIT TYPES
                                                               City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                    1990-2013
                                            1990                                 2000                     2013
                                Number            Percent             Number          Percent      Number      Percent
                                                                  Single family
        Detached                  1,059               64%              1,144            64%         1,196         63%
        Attached                    37                 2%                 89             5%           37           2%
                                                                   Multifamily
        2-4 units                  228                14%                247            14%          400          21%
        5 or more                  264                16%                245            14%          233          12%
        Mobile                      75                 5%                 73             4%           29           2%
        Homes
        Total Units               1,663             100%               1,798           100%         1,895        100%
        Note: Percentages may not add up to 100 percent due to rounding
        Source: California Department of Finance, E-5 report, 1990, 2000, and 2013.
The actual number of units that were issued building permits for new construction
between 2004 and 2008 were 27 single family, 16 multifamily, and 11 senior housing
units. Yet from 2009 to January 2014, only 10 building permits were issued. Building
permit statistics are shown in Table 8-17.
                                                                  TABLE 8-17
                                                  BUILDING PERMIT STATISTICS
                                                               City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                    2009-2014
                               Number of
        Year                                         Average Valuation                            Structure Type
                                  Permits
        2009                         2                        $133,875              Single Family
        2010                         2                        $145,000              Single Family
        2011                         4                        $366,425              3 Single Family 1 Commercial/Residential
        2012                         0                             0                N/A
        2013                         3                        $192,544              Single Family
Source: City Staff, January 2014.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                        8-31

12. Housing Conditions
Age of Housing
Housing Element law requires an estimate of substandard housing in the community.
Determining the percentage of units built prior to 1960 provides an estimate of major
rehabilitation or replacement need. One can also assume that homes built prior to 1980
may require some form of rehabilitation. Table 8-18 indicates that approximately 27.8
percent of the units in the city were constructed prior to 1960 and 24.9 percent of units
were constructed between 1960 and 1980. Therefore, based upon age alone, it would
appear that approximately 52.7 percent of homes in the city may require rehabilitation
or replacement depending on the level of maintenance these units have received.
                                                           TABLE 8-18
                                                     AGE OF HOUSING
                                                       City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                  2012
                        Year Built                                    Number                    Percent
         Built 1939 or earlier                                            226                    11.3%
         Built 1940 to 1949                                               156                     7.8%
         Built 1950 to 1959                                               174                     8.7%
         Built 1960 to 1969                                               101                     5.0%
         Built 1970 to 1979                                               399                    19.9%
         Built 1980 to 1989                                               499                    24.9%
         Built 1990 to 1999                                               198                     9.9%
         Built 2000 to 2009                                               236                    11.8%
         Built 2010 or later                                               12                     0.6%
         Total                                                           2,001                   100%
         Note: Percentages may not add up to 100 percent due to rounding
         Source: 2008-2012 ACS.
                                                                2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-32                                                                                     City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

Rehabilitation Needs
The City’s 2003 Housing Condition Survey (Table 8-19), funded by the State of California
Community Block Grant Program (CDBG), classified 41 percent as deteriorating and in
need of rehabilitation and 3.9 percent as dilapidated and in need of demolition and
replacement. The survey did not include mobile home parks and was performed as a
“windshield survey,” meaning that the observations were made from a moving vehicle.
Inclusion of the mobile home parks and a closer inspection would be expected to result
in an increase in the number of units requiring rehabilitation or replacement.
                                                             TABLE 8-19
                                SUMMARY OF HOUSING CONDITION SURVEY
                                                          City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                  2003
                Housing Condition                          Number of Units   Percent of Total Units
             Sound                                              756 units           58.6%
             Minor                                              285 units           22.0%
             Moderate                                           166 units           12.8%
             Substantial                                         32 units            2.4%
             Dilapidated                                         51 units            3.9%
             Total surveyed                                    1,290 units          99.7%
             Source: Mt. Shasta Housing Condition Survey, 2003
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                     8-33

 Housing Unit Size
 Table 8-20 illustrates the size of housing units by tenure in the city in 2012. The City’s
 owner housing stock contains a large proportion of three bedroom units, or
 approximately 64 percent, but only 19 percent of three bedroom units for renters. The
 City has no four bedroom units available for renters.
                                                                TABLE 8-20
                                                         HOUSING UNIT SIZE
                                                             City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                    2012
                                                          Owner Occupied         Renter Occupied                Total
           Number of Bedrooms
                                                          Number      Percent    Number     Percent      Number     Percent
No bedrooms                                                   17        2.2%         28       3.3%          45         2.7%
1 bedroom                                                      0        0.0%        209      24.3%         209        12.8%
2 bedrooms                                                   159       20.5%        547      53.1%         616        37.6%
3 bedrooms                                                   494       63.7%        167      19.4%         661        40.4%
4 bedrooms                                                    90       11.6%         0        0.0%          90         5.5%
5 or more bedroom                                             16        2.1%         0        0.0%          16         1.0%
Total                                                        776       100%         861      100%         1,672       100%
Note: Percentages may not add up to 100 percent due to rounding
Source: 2008-2012 ACS.
                                                                   2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
 8-34                                                                                       City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

Household size by tenure is shown in Table 8-21. In 2000 and 2010, the majority of both
owner and renter occupied households were inhabited by two residents, although the
proportion of two person owner households decreased. Between 2000 and 2010, the
number of six person owner and renter occupied households increased. Smaller renter
households greatly increased.
                                                             TABLE 8-21
                                             HOUSEHOLD SIZE BY TENURE
                                                         City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                2000-2010
               Persons per
                                                           2000                   2010
               Household
        Owner occupied
        1-person                                244                  28.8%%  263       33.7%
        2-person                                364                  43.0%%  305       39.1%
        3-person                                124                   14.6%  103       13.2%
        4-person                                 72                    8.5%   68        8.7%
        5-person                                 34                    4.1%   21        2.7%
        6-person                                  8                    0.9%   13        1.7%
        7-or-more                                 0                     0%     8        1.0%
        Total Owner                             846                   100%   781       100%
        Renter Occupied
        1-person                                395                   47.8%  456       51.6%
        2-person                                223                   27.0%  217       24.6%
        3-person                                 91                   11.0%  110       12.5%
        4-person                                 70                    8.5%   74        8.4%
        5-person                                 31                    3.8%   17        1.9%
        6-person                                  8                    1.0%    7        0.8%
        7-or-more                                 8                    1.0%    2        0.2%
        Total Renter                            826                   100%   883       100%
        Total                                  1,672                  100%  1,664      100%
        Note: Percentages may not add up to 100 percent due to rounding
        Source: 2000 and 2010 U.S. Census, summary file 3 Table H17.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                              8-35

Overcrowded Housing
The U.S. Census Bureau defines overcrowding as more than 1.01 persons per room.
Severe overcrowding occurs when there are more than 1.5 persons per room. Table 8-
22 illustrates the number and percentage of units in the city according to occupants
per room. For owner occupied housing units, 5.2 percent are overcrowded and 3.4
percent of all renter occupied units are overcrowded.
                                                              TABLE 8-22
                                                 OVERCROWDED HOUSING
                                                          City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                    2012
                                                           Owner             Owner          Renter          Renter
                                                         Number             Percent        Number          Percent
      Occupied total:                                         776             100%           861             100%
      0.50 or less occupants per
      room                                                    626            80.7%           608            70.60%
      0.51 to 1.00 occupants per
      room                                                    110            14.2%           224            26.00%
      1.01 to 1.50 occupants per
      room                                                     23             3.0%            29             3.40%
      1.51 to 2.00 occupants per
      room                                                     17             2.2%             0             0.00%
      2.01 or more occupants per
      room                                                      0             0.0%             0             0.00%
      Note: Percentages may not add up to 100 percent due to rounding.
       Source: 2008-2012 ACS.
Housing Cost
Table 8-23 summarizes the 2014 HCD-defined household income limits for extremely low,
very low-, low-, median, and moderate-income households in Siskiyou County by the
number of persons in the household (up to a six person household) and shows maximum
affordable monthly rents and maximum affordable purchase prices for homes.
Households earning the 2014 area median income for a family of four in the County
($57,900) could afford to spend up to $17,376 a year or $1,448 a month on housing
without being considered “overpaying.” For renters, this is a straightforward calculation,
but homeownership costs are less transparent.
A household can typically qualify to purchase a home that is 2.5 to 3.0 times the annual
income of that household, depending on the down payment, the level of other long-
term obligations (such as a car loan), and interest rates. In practice, the interaction of
these factors allows some households to qualify for homes priced at more than three
times their annual income, while other households may be limited to purchasing homes
no more than two times their annual incomes. These factors—interest rates, insurance,
and taxes—are held constant in the table below in order to determine maximum
affordable rent and purchase price for households of each income category.
                                                                   2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-36                                                                                        City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                                                                      TABLE 8-23
                   ABILITY TO PAY BY HOUSEHOLD SIZE BASED ON HUD INCOME LIMITS
                                                                   Siskiyou County
                                                                             2014
                       Extremely Low-Income Households at 30% of 2013 Median Family Income
Number of Persons                                              1                   2                  3               4                 5               6
Income Level                                               $12,150           $13,900              $15,650        $17,350           $18,750          $20,150
Max. Monthly Gross Rent (1)                                  $304               $348                $391           $434              $469             $504
Max. Purchase Price (2)                                    $49,077           $56,146              $63,214        $70,081           $75,736          $81,391
                          Very Low-Income Households at 50% of 2013 Median Family Income
Number of Persons                                              1                   2                  3               4                 5               6
Income Level                                               $20,250           $23,150              $26,050        $28,950           $31,250          $33,600
Max. Monthly Gross Rent (1)                                  $506               $579                $651           $724              $781             $840
Max. Purchase Price (2)                                    $81,795           $93,509             $105,223       $116,936          $126,227         $135,719
        Low-Income Households at 70% of Median Family Income for Sale and 60% of MFI for Rental
Number of Persons                                              1                   2                  3               4                 5               6
Income Level For Sale (70% MFI)                            $28,350           $32,400              $36,500        $40,550           $43,750          $47,000
Income Level For Rental (60% MFI)                          $24,300           $27,800              $31,250        $34,750           $37,500          $40,300
Max. Monthly Gross Rent (1)                                  $608               $695                $781           $869              $938            $1,008
Max. Purchase Price (2)                                   $114,513          $130,872             $147,433       $163,792          $176,717         $189,845
                           Median-Income Households at 100% of 2013 Median Family Income
Number of Persons                                              1                   2                  3               4                 5               6
Income Level                                               $40,550           $46,300              $52,100        $57,900           $62,550          $67,150
Max. Monthly Gross Rent (1)                                 $1,014            $1,158               $1,303         $1,448            $1,564           $1,679
Max. Purchase Price (2)                                   $163,792          $187,018             $210,445       $233,873          $252,656         $271,236
                         Moderate-Income Households at 110% of 2013 Median Family Income
Number of Persons                                              1                   2                  3               4                 5               6
Income Level                                               $44,600           $50,950              $57,300        $63,700           $68,800          $73,900
Max. Monthly Gross
                                                            $1,301            $1,486               $1,671         $1,858            $2,007           $2,155
Rent/Payments (1)
Max. Purchase Price (2)                                   $210,176          $240,100             $270,024       $300,184          $324,218         $348,251
1
  Assumes that 30 percent of income is available for either: monthly rent, including utilities; or mortgage payment, taxes, mortgage insurance, and homeowners
insurance.
2
  Assumes 96.5 percent loan at 4.5 percent annual interest rate and 30-year term; assumes taxes, mortgage insurance, and homeowners’ insurance account for
21 percent of total monthly payments.
3
  2014 State Area Median Income for Siskiyou County $57,900
 Source: California Department of Housing and Community Development, 2014, http://www.hcd.ca.gov/hpd/hrc/rep/state/inc2k13.pdf; Mintier Harnish, 2014.
    2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
    City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                                                   8-37

Table 8-24 provides a list of homes for sale in Mt. Shasta in April 2014. Most of the houses
available were three bedroom units priced between $128,500 and $895,000.
                                                           TABLE 8-24
                                                        HOMES FOR SALE
                                                         City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                 2014
                             Units             Average                                   Average
   Bedrooms                                                      Price Range                            Median Price
                         Available         Square Feet                                     Price
          1                    2                  859       $189,000 - $225,000          $207,000          $207,000
          2                    6                  970       $110,000 - $249,000          $175,343          $178,450
          3                   26                 1,810      $128,500 - $895,000          $299,600          $251,000
          4                    4                 2,842      $389,000 – $474,000          $426,875          $422,000
          5                    4                 3,464      $340,000 - $895,000          $699,750          $782,000
   Source: www.trulia.com
The following chart shows historical list prices for homes in Mt. Shasta (October 2008 to
February 2014), from zillow.com. The prices show a slow decline from 2008 to a low point
in 2012 with a recent upward trend. The average listing price for homes for sale in the
City in July 2009 was $387,000 (Coldwell Banker Properties). The average listing price for
homes in April 2014 was $327,848 (zillow.com). Comparing this average listing price to
the maximum affordable prices in Table 8-23 shows that the average home prices are
out of reach for lower-income households, and would not be affordable to even a
moderate income four-person household, which could afford to pay $300,184 for a
home.
                                                            FIGURE 8-1
                                                       MEDIAN LIST PRICES
                                                         City of Mt. Shasta
                                                             2008-2014
              $500,000
              $450,000
              $400,000
              $350,000
              $300,000
              $250,000
              $200,000
              $150,000
              $100,000
                $50,000
                         $0
                                                      Median List Prices in Mount Shasta
           Source: zillow.com, accessed April 2014.
                                                                2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-38                                                                                      City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

Rental Housing Costs
Table 8-25 shows the available apartments and houses for rent in the City of Mt. Shasta
and surrounding communities during a survey taken in April 2014. A total of 12 single
family and multifamily units were available for rent and were renting for $499 to $900.
One bedroom apartments were listed from $499 to $675, two-bedroom units from $675
to $878, and three-bedroom units from $750 to $900. There were no four-bedroom units
advertised inside the city at the time of this survey. According to the 2008-2012
American Community Survey, the rental vacancy rate is 5.2 percent. However, it is
difficult to determine the true vacancy rate within the city as many rentals are not
advertised. Rentals in Mt. Shasta were similar to those in Weed/Lake Shastina and
Dunsmuir (except for two bedroom apartments), and slightly higher than those in
McCloud. Because there were not many rentals available in nearby cities, it is difficult to
estimate relative prices.
                                                          TABLE 8-25
                                              APARTMENT AND HOUSE RENTALS
                                                        City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                2014
                                                        Number of Bedrooms             Number of
            Community
                                                   1                2          3        Listings
     Mt. Shasta                             $499 - $675       $675-$878    $750-$900       12
     Weed/Lake                              $450 - $550       $550 - $583  $750 - $850      8
     Shastina
     Dunsmuir                                $450-$650         $550-$850   $650 - $800     16
     Gazelle                                      --1              --1        --1           0
     McCloud                                $325 - $500           $650          1           3
     1
       Indicates none available at time of survey
      Source: Craigslist, April 2014.
Mobile Housing Costs
The Department of Finance 2013 Estimate of Population and Housing shows a total of 29
occupied mobile homes in the City of Mt. Shasta, which represents 1.5 percent of the
total housing stock. A survey of mobile home parks in the City of Mt. Shasta in April 2014
yielded the following results. There were 42 spaces available for rent within four mobile
homes parks from $250 (Chateau Shasta Mobile Home Park) to $396 (Shadow Mountain
Mobile Home Park).
13. Special Housing Needs Analyses
Housing Element law requires the consideration of the housing needs of “special needs”
persons and households. Certain groups have greater difficulty finding decent,
affordable housing due to their special circumstances. Special circumstances may be
related to one’s employment and income, age, family characteristics, or disabilities. As
a result, certain segments of Mt. Shasta’s population may experience a higher
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                  8-39

prevalence of overpayment, overcrowding, housing cost burden, or other housing
problems.
State Housing Element law identifies the following “special needs” groups: elderly
households; disabled persons, including those with developmental disabilities; large
households; female-headed households; families and persons in need of emergency
shelter; and agricultural workers.
Persons with Disabilities
Physical, mental, and/or developmental disabilities may prevent a person from working,
may restrict one’s mobility, or make it difficult to care for oneself. Disabled persons often
have special housing needs related to their potentially limited income-earning
capacity, a lack of accessible and affordable housing, and the higher health costs
associated with their disability. Some residents suffer from disabilities that require living in
a supportive or institutional setting. Disabilities are defined by the American Community
Survey as mental, physical, or health conditions that last over six months. The Census
tracks the following disabilities:
           Sensory disability: Conditions that include blindness, deafness, or a severe
            vision or hearing impairment.
           Physical disability: Conditions that substantially limit one or more basic
            physical activities such as walking, climbing stairs, reaching, lifting, or carrying.
           Mental disability: Because of a physical, mental, or emotional condition, a
            person has difficulty learning, remembering, or concentrating.
           Self-care disability: Because of a physical, mental, or emotional condition, a
            person has difficulty dressing, bathing, or getting around inside the home.
           Go-outside-home disability: Because of a physical, mental, or emotional
            condition, a person has difficulty going outside the home alone to shop or
            visit a doctor's office.
           Employment disability: Because of a physical, mental, or emotional condition,
            a person has difficulty working at a job or business.
Table 8-26 illustrates the population of persons with disabilities who may require housing
with special features such as wheelchair ramps, special doorbells, roll-in showers, high-
set toilets, or other adaptive devices or medical equipment. The majority of the
population with disabilities is in the adult group (aged 18 to 64). Most of the disabilities in
this group (8.9 percent) are cognitive, followed by sensory and then ambulatory. Table
8-29 lists care facilities for seniors and disabled persons within the City. In February 2007,
the Laurel Crest Manor Residential care facility closed and a replacement care facility
has not been identified. The City has a clear shortage of residential care facilities. This
poses a problem as the community ages and requires a variety of senior living options
including assisted living and retirement communities.
                                              2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-40                                                                   City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                                                                TABLE 8-26
                                  PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES BY AGE GROUP
                                             City of Mt. Shasta and Siskiyou County
                                                                   2012
                                                                       Mt. Shasta           Siskiyou County
                                                                 Number        Percent Number          Percent
Total Population 5-17 years                                        536           100%    6,792          100%
Population 5-17 years with disability                               10           1.9%     504            7.4%
Sensory (Hearing/Vision)                                             0            0%       49            0.7%
Ambulatory                                                           0            0%       25            0.4%
Cognitive                                                           10           1.9%     419            6.2%
Self-care                                                            0            0%       93            1.4%
Independent Living                                                   0            0%       --              --
Total Population 18-64 years                                      2,200          100%   26,335          100%
Population 18-64 years with disability                             340          15.5%    4,447          16.9%
Sensory (Hearing/Vision)                                           151           6.9%    1,563           5.9%
Ambulatory                                                         142           6.5%    2,179           8.3%
Cognitive                                                          195           8.9%    2,199           8.4%
Self-care                                                           95           4.3%     817            3.1%
Independent Living                                                 115           3.2%    1,738           6.6%
Total Population 65 years and older                                490           100%    8,845          100%
Population 65 and older with a disability                          207          42.2%    3,667          41.5%
Sensory (Hearing/Vision)                                           166          33.9%    2,374          26.9%
Ambulatory                                                         146          29.8%    2,435          27.5%
Cognitive                                                          106          21.6%    1,016          11.5%
Self-care                                                          100          20.4%     821            9.3%
Independent Living                                                 135          27.6%    1,346          15.2%
Total Population over 5 years                                     3,344          100%   44,361          100%
Total Population over 5 years with a                               557          16.7%    8,651          19.5%
disability
Note: Percentages may not add up to 100 percent due to rounding.
 Source: 2008-2012 ACS.
Persons with Developmental Disabilities
SB 812, which took effect in January 2011, amended State housing element law to
require an evaluation of the special housing needs of persons with developmental
disabilities. A "developmental disability" is defined as a disability that originates before
an individual becomes 18 years old, continues or can be expected to continue
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                               8-41

indefinitely, and constitutes a substantial disability for that individual. This includes
Mental Retardation, Cerebral Palsy, Epilepsy, and Autism.
According to the California Department of Developmental Services, as of April 2014,
there were a total of 47 residents served in Mt. Shasta. Of the total, 12 percent of
disabled persons were under the age of 17.
Many developmentally-disabled persons are able to live and work independently.
However, more severely disabled individuals require a group living environment with
supervision, or an institutional environment with medical attention and physical therapy.
Because developmental disabilities exist before adulthood, the first housing issue for the
developmentally disabled is the transition from living with a parent/guardian as a child
to an appropriate level of independence as an adult. Most developmentally-disabled
individuals lived at home (32 residents); 10 residents resided in independent living or
supported living; and less than ten developmentally-disabled Mt. Shasta residents
receiving services lived in a community care facility.
State and Federal Requirements
In response to the serious lack of accessible housing in the United States, the Fair
Housing Act requires that all ground floor dwelling units in buildings of four or more units
without elevators and all dwelling units in elevator buildings of four or more units include
the following basic features of accessible and adaptive design:
          Public and common areas must be accessible to persons with disabilities; and
          Doors and hallways must be wide enough for wheelchairs.
          All units must have:
          An accessible route into and through the unit;
          Accessible light switches,     electrical    outlets,   thermostats       and   other
           environmental controls;
          Reinforced bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars; and
          Kitchens and bathrooms that can be used by people in wheelchairs.
The Fair Housing requirements are included in California’s Title 24 regulations, which are
enforced by the City through its building codes, building plan review, and site
inspections.
In the case of persons with a physical or mental disability (including hearing, mobility
and visual impairments, chronic alcoholism, chronic mental illness, AIDS, AIDS Related
Complex, and mental retardation) that substantially limits one or more major life
activities, landlords may not:
                                           2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-42                                                                City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

            Refuse to let tenants make reasonable modifications to their dwelling or
             common use areas, at their expense, if necessary for the disabled person to
             use the housing; or
            Refuse to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or
             services if necessary for the disabled person to use the housing.
Besides the construction of new accessible housing, the needs of individuals with
limitations can sometimes be met by simply retrofitting existing housing to transform
conventional units into suitable housing. This is perhaps the least costly way in which to
provide housing specifically for individuals with special limitations.
Senior Population
Elderly households, sometimes referred to as senior households, typically have special
housing needs due to three primary concerns – income, housing and health care costs,
and physical disabilities. Elders are defined by HCD as persons who are 65 years of age
or older; however, it should be noted that some housing programs define seniors as age
55 and over. This section will include data on both elderly groups and seniors age 55
and older. According to the 2008-2012 American Community Survey, 515 city residents
were ages 65 and older (about 15.2 percent of the total population).
As citizens get older, their housing needs change. Special housing needs of the elderly
include smaller and more efficient housing to minimize maintenance and barrier-free
designs to accommodate restricted functions.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                       8-43

Table 8-27 illustrates the population of residents aged 55 and older in 1990, 2000, and
2012. According to the 2010 United States Census, 18.2 percent of residents of Mt.
Shasta are 65 years and over, compared to 19.6 percent of residents of Siskiyou County
overall. The proportion of retirement age residents (55-64) increased between 1990 and
2000 as the first groups of baby boomers reached retirement age and continued to
greatly increase through 2012. This may indicate a need for a variety of senior living
options including assisted living and retirement communities. In 2012, 213 seniors over 65
lived in family households and 25 in non-family households. A total of 202 seniors over 65
lived alone. As demonstrated by the information in Table 8-27, at least 56 (11.4 percent)
seniors over 65 live below the poverty level. Senior citizens have indicated that housing
is generally available, but that ever-increasing costs versus their fixed income makes
affordable housing more and more difficult to obtain and/or retain.
                                                           TABLE 8-27
                                                  SENIOR POPULATION
                                                        City of Mt. Shasta
                                                             1990-2010
                                              1990                              2000                    2010
          Age Group
                                  Number             Percent            Number        Percent   Number      Percent
        55 to 64 years               256               31.5%              333           37.4%      584       48.5%
        65 to 74 years               301               37.1%              237           26.6%      343       28.5%
        75 and over                  254               31.3%              320           36.0%      276       22.9%
        Total Seniors                811                100%              890           100%      1,203      100%
        Note: Percentages may not add up to 100 percent due to rounding
         Source: 1990 2000 and 2010 U.S. Census, summary file 3, Table P13and Table P8.
                                                                2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-44                                                                                          City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

Table 8-28 illustrates the tenure of senior households in the city. The majority of senior
households own their homes. The age group with the highest ownership rate of 27.7
percent is the 55 to 64 age group. Most of the renter households are also headed by
someone aged 55 to 64 years or older (18.1 percent).
                                                                   TABLE 8-28
                                            SENIOR HOUSEHOLDS BY TENURE
                                                              City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                         2010
                                                                                            2010
                                                                             Number                   Percent
                                                              Owner Occupied
                                   55 to 64 years                                234                   27.7%
                                   65 to 74 years                                132                   15.7%
                                   75 years and older                            125                   14.8%
                                                              Renter Occupied
                                   55 to 64 years                                153                   18.1%
                                   65 to 74 years                                130                   15.4%
                                   75 years and older                             69                     8.2%
                                   Total Senior                                  843                    100%
                                   Households
                                   Note: Percentages may not add up to 100 percent due to rounding
                                   Source: 2010 U.S. Census, summary file 3. Table H14.
Table 8-29 describes the care facilities available for seniors or disabled persons. There
are a total of 111 units available.
                                                                   TABLE 8-29
                    CARE FACILITIES FOR SENIORS AND/OR DISABLED PERSONS
                                                              City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                         2014
                                                                                                                         Capacity
                       Facility Name                                                    Address
                                                                                                                         (persons)1
     Rockfellow House                                               185 Rockfellow Drive, Mt. Shasta                         6
     Eskaton President G. Washington                                1020 Kingston Road Mt. Shasta                           73
     Shasta Manor I and II                                          1198 Kingston Road, Mt. Shasta                          22
     President Grover Cleveland Manor                               1020 Kingston Road, Mt. Shasta                          10
     1
       Capacity assumes one person per unit, though these facilities permit two persons per unit in the case of couples.
      Source: www.retirenet.com, April 2014, and communication with facility staff.
Large Households
A large household is one with five or more members. Large households are considered
a special needs group because they require larger homes, but do not necessarily make
enough money to afford many of the larger homes available. Those homes are often
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                                     8-45

luxury homes out of the range of affordability for lower income households. Thus, a large
household may struggle to find suitable affordable housing.
The number of large households in the city is shown in Table 8-30. There are more owner
occupied large households. Although the City has a small percentage of large
households, they represent an important housing need since there is a limited supply of
large affordable rental units in the city.1
                                                         TABLE 8-30
                                       LARGE HOUSEHOLDS BY TENURE
                                                       City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                 2010
                                                                                          2010
                         5 persons                                                21           30.9%
                         6 persons                                                13           19.1%
                         7 or more persons                                         8           11.8%
                         Owner Total                                              42           61.7%
                         5 persons                                                17           25.0%
                         6 persons                                                 7           10.1%
                         7 or more persons                                         2            2.9%
                         Renter Total                                             26           38.2%
                         Total Large Households                                   68           100%
                         Note: Percentages may not add up to 100 percent due to rounding.
                          Source: 2010 U.S. Census, summary file 3, Tables H16 and H17.
Household sizes have been decreasing in Mt. Shasta. As shown in Table 8-31, from 1990
to 2000, the average household size decreased from 2.29 to 2.14. By 2010 the
household size had decreased further to 2.02.
                                                         TABLE 8-31
                                                     HOUSEHOLD SIZE
                                                       City of Mt. Shasta
                                                            1990-2010
                                                                                   Persons
                                                                                                  Household Size
            Year              Population                 Households                  per
                                                                                                Percent Change
                                                                                Household
           1990                    3,460                       1,511                 2.29               NA
           2000                    3,621                       1,669                 2.14              -6.6%
           2010                    3,358                       1,664                 2.02              -5.6%
           Source: 1990, 2000, and 2010 U.S. Census, summary file 1, Tables DP-1.
1 Housing Development Opportunity: City of Mt. Shasta, Bay Area Economics, July 2005, page 4.
                                                               2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-46                                                                                           City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

Table 8-32 shows the number of persons per unit for occupied units by tenure. The
number of persons per unit is decreasing for both renter and owner units. There are
generally more persons per unit in an owner occupied housing unit.
                                                           TABLE 8-32
             HOUSEHOLD SIZE FOR OWNER/RENTER OCCUPIED HOUSING UNITS
                                                        City of Mt. Shasta
                                                             1990-2010
                                                                                     Owner
                           Renter Occupied               Persons per                            Persons per
             Year                                                                   Occupied
                             Housing Units                Renter Unit                           Owner Unit
                                                                                   Housing Unit
             1990                    756                       2.05                   755           2.48
             2000                    830                       1.98                   839           2.30
             2010                    883                       1.88                   781           2.18
            Source: 1990, 2000, and 2010 U.S. Census, summary file 1, Tables DP-1.
Farmworkers
Farmworkers are defined as those households whose wage-earners make their living
through seasonal agricultural work and who move with the seasons to different farming
communities, or those who find tree planting jobs and who also move throughout the
forested regions on a seasonal basis.
The agricultural area in which the city of Mt. Shasta is centered is primarily a ranching
area with little need for seasonal farm workers. According to representatives of the
Modoc Siskiyou Community Action Agency, silvicultural workers are mostly found in
those Siskiyou County communities that are closer to planting sites. The nearest
community employing seasonal farmworkers is Macdoel, which is 52 miles northeast of
Mt. Shasta. This is the closest area where intensive farming of strawberry and potato
crops occurs. Intensive farming of this nature does not occur anywhere near Mt. Shasta.
Soils in the Mt. Shasta area are considered to be too heavy for regular tillage, so they
are used almost entirely for hay and pasture. Consequently, there is little need for
seasonal or transient farmworker housing in Mt. Shasta. Summer forest related
employment does increase but is typically filled by local high school and college
students who work mainly on tree planting and brush clearing projects. Most of the
forest related jobs are year-round jobs such as loggers, log truck drivers, and those
employed within the remaining mills. Log harvesting like ranching, is a year round
business, which some limited slowdown in winter months. These jobs are fairly
permanent and draw from the local labor force. Permanent farmworkers are paid
wages similar to other skilled and semi-skilled workers in the region and need not be
considered separately.
In accordance with Health and Safety Code Sections 17021.5 and 17021.6, housing for
farmworkers can be accommodated in the R-3 zone district under the category of
“multiple-family dwellings”, a group of attached dwelling units of four or more within
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                             8-47

one unit”, which requires the processing and issuance of a Conditional Use Permit.
Standards for a “rooming or boarding house” are similar to apartments, except that
parking is provided at a ratio of 1.5 spaces for each guest room. The city does not have
an agricultural zoning district.
Female-Headed Households
Single-parent households, and those headed by single females in particular, experience
the full range of housing problems. These problems include: affordability, since the
individuals are often on public assistance; overcrowding, because the individuals often
cannot afford units large enough to accommodate their families; insufficient housing
choices; and sometimes, discrimination. The City of Mt. Shasta recognizes these
problems and has included policies and programs to address affordability,
overcrowding, and discrimination for all segments of the population.
Table 8-33 illustrates the number of households that are headed by single parents.
Single-parent households comprise approximately 16.4 percent of all households in the
city. Of this 16.4 percent, female-headed households comprise 69.3 percent while
male-headed households represent 30.7 percent of single-parent households.
                                                            TABLE 8-33
                                         SINGLE-PARENT HOUSEHOLDS
                                                        City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                  2010
                                                                            Percent of
                                                                                            Percent of Total
                                                      Households          Single-parent
                                                                                               Households
                                                                           Households
         Female-Headed Single-                              190               69.3%               11.4%
         Parent Households
         Male-Headed Single-                                 84               30.7%                5.0%
         Parent Households
         Total Single-Parent                                274               100%                16.4%
         Households
         Total City Households                             1,664                --                100%
         Note: Percentages may not add up to 100 percent due to rounding
          Source: 2010 U.S. Census, summary file 3. Table QT-P34, H19.
Housing needs of lower-income single-parent households can be more acute than
those of other lower-income households. Both male and female headed single-parent
households are subject to child day care costs in order to allow the household head to
work. Many single-parent households are in poverty. Table 8-11 shows the number of
single-parent households living in poverty. Female headed single-parent households
experience the highest level of poverty.
                                                                2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-48                                                                                     City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

Homelessness
A person or family is considered homeless if they lack a fixed and regular night-time
residence, or have a primary night-time residence that is a supervised, publicly-
operated shelter designated for providing temporary living accommodations.
Homelessness is also characterized by a person residing in a public or private place not
designated for, or ordinarily used as a regular sleeping accommodation for human
beings. 2
According to Siskiyou County, there are no official estimates of the county’s homeless
population. However, they stated that it is rather unusual to encounter homeless
persons in the county during the colder months. Most of the homeless population is
comprised of fair weather transients. Communities situated adjacent to the I-5 and
Union Pacific Railroad corridors typically see the highest volume of transients, with the
more isolated communities seeing relatively few. Even those communities with the
greatest number of transients have relatively few homeless when compared to
California’s more urbanized areas. For instance, the Police Chief for the City of Yreka,
the largest city in the county, recently estimated that the city has five to ten homeless
residents with another five or so transients passing through at any given time. However,
the Chief also indicated that the resident homeless population moves indoors to one of
the two homeless shelters in the county during the colder months and transients are
relatively rare once the temperatures drop.
According to the prior housing element, the City has not had a large presence of
homeless residents in the past. A recent inquiry (April 2014) with the City of Mt. Shasta
Police Department indicates that this is still the case. According to the Police
Department, an estimated 17 transients passed through the city during the last year;
however most of these individuals did not remain in the area and were not referred to a
local agency. The Police Department noted that transients are more common during
the summer months.
A resident at the community meeting stated that approximately 30 to 60 people
receive meals through homeless services.
Services for homeless individuals and families are available in the city and elsewhere in
the county. Services for homeless individuals and families are primarily available in
Yreka, although a few of the smaller communities also provide services. Table 8-34
shows the programs in the city and surrounding area that offer assistance. Contacts
with these agencies indicate that the needs of homeless persons are adequately met
by existing programs.
2 Federal Definition of a homeless person per the McKinney Act (1987).
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                      8-49

                                                     TABLE 8-34
                                               HOMELESSNESS SERVICES
                                                   Siskiyou County
                                                          2014
                         Agency Name                       Address               City                    Services
Great Northern Corporation                           780 S. Davis Ave.       Weed           10, 11, 22
Mt. Shasta Christian Ministerial Assoc.              N/A 926-2847            Mt. Shasta     10, 11, 13, 22
St. Anthony’s Catholic Church Hall                   507 Pine St.            Mt. Shasta     13
Siskiyou County Domestic Violence & Crisis           118 Ranch Ln.           Yreka          1, 6, 9, 10, 12
Center
Siskiyou County Human Services                       818 South Main St.      Yreka          5, 22
Lane Street Effort                                   417 Lane St.            Yreka          11
Barker’s Board and Care                              200 S. 4th St.          Montague       11
Northern Valley Catholic Social Services             1515 S. Oregon St.      Yreka          1, 5, 13
Siskiyou County Behavioral Health Dept.              2060 Campus Dr.         Yreka          1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 17, 20, 22, 23, 24
California Department of Rehabilitation              1288 S. Main St.        Yreka          15
Workforce Connection                                 310 Boles St.           Weed           15
Siskiyou Training and Employment Prog.               310 Boles St.           Weed           15
Yreka Family Resource Center                         201 S. Broadway         Yreka          2, 12, 13
                                                     St.
WIC                                                  1217 S. Main St.        Yreka          13
Salvation Army                                       501 N. Main St.         Yreka          12, 13
Veteran’s Administration                             311 Lane St.            Yreka          11, 18
Greenhorn Grange                                     300 Ranch Ln.           Yreka          13
St. Joseph’s Catholic Church Hall                    314 Fourth St.          Yreka          13
Yreka Dream Center Food Closet                       900 North St.           Yreka          13
Yreka Food Pantry                                    N/A                     Yreka          13
                                                    Service Codes
(1) Adult Counseling                                                (13) Food or Clothing Referral
(2) Anger Management Classes                                        (14) Housing Referral
(3) Shower Facility                                                 (15) Job Training
(4) WIA Services                                                    (16) Medical Assistance
(5) Counseling, Education, & Prevention                             (17) Treatment & Housing of Mentally Ill
(6) Crisis Intervention                                             (18) Veteran’s Assistance
(7) Drug & Alcohol Treatment                                        (19) Winter Shelter (during cold periods only)
(8) Provides Interpreters                                           (20) Independent Living Skills Training
(9) Emergency Assistance For Battered Women                         (21) Advocacy (Individual, Systems, Legal)
(10) Emergency Housing for Women & Children                         (22) Food Stamps, CalWorks, General Relief
(11) Emergency Housing For Men                                      (23) Day Treatment
(12) Emergency, Transportation (i.e. bus ticket)                    (24) Workshops
 Source: Siskiyou County Housing Element, 2014
                                                         2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
       8-50                                                                          City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

D. HOUSING RESOURCES AND OPPORTUNITIES
This section analyzes the resources available for the development, rehabilitation, and
preservation of housing in Mt. Shasta. This analysis includes an evaluation of the
availability of land resources for future housing development, the City’s ability to satisfy
its share of the region’s future housing needs, the financial resources available to
support housing activities, and the administrative resources available to assist in
implementing the City’s housing programs and policies.
14. Existing Affordable Housing
An affordable rental housing development is a development where all or a portion of
the housing units must be rented at affordable levels to extremely low-, very low-,
and/or low-income households. The units are made affordable for an extended period
of time by subsidy contracts, deed restrictions, and/or development agreements. When
the contracts, deed restrictions, and development agreements expire, the units can be
rented at market rates to any household. State housing element law requires an
analysis of the affordable housing developments to determine if there are any
affordable units that are at risk of being converted to market rate units. The “at-risk”
analysis must cover a period of 10 years.
As shown in Table 8-35, the City of Mt. Shasta currently has eight affordable multifamily
projects containing of 169 assisted units. There are currently 109 housing units in six
properties in Mt. Shasta that are at-risk of converting to market rate within the next 10
years from the Housing Element due date (i.e., between 2014 and 2024). The risk of
conversion for five of the properties is minimal because the properties are owned by
non-profit organizations. The exception is Alder Garden, the owner of which is profit-
motivated and is therefore at a greater risk of converting to market-rate.
HUD currently provides “project based” subsidies in Mt. Shasta through its Section 8
program and USDA Rural Development provides subsidies through its Section 515
program. The remaining project receives indirect government subsidy through
participation in the LIHTC program administered by HUD. LIHTC properties were funded
with tax credits in the 1990s and were required by Federal Law to remain affordable for
30 years. However, California law generally requires a 55-year extended use period for
nine percent tax credit projects. Also, four percent tax credit recipients frequently
access significant boosts to their basis limits by agreeing to 55-year extended use
restrictions. Although not a direct Federal subsidy, LIHTC provides tax incentives for the
utilization of private equity in the development of affordable housing.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                        8-51

                                                                                                       TABLE 8-35
                                                                                    ASSISTED MULTIFAMILY UNITS
                                                                                                   City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                                                            2014
                                                    Household                                     Affordabilit    Expiration   Total    Assiste    Ownershi
      Development Name                                                      Program                                                                                 Assessment of Risk
                                                         Type                                         y Start       Date       Units    d Units        p
Alder Gardens                                                                                                                                       Limited
                                                        Family             HUD-LMSA               06/01/1995     08/31/2017      28        28                             At risk
700 Pine Street                                                                                                                                    Dividend
Alta Vista Manor                                                                                                                                                         Low risk
                                                        Senior            LIHTC/USDA              06/04/1986     06/04/2006      44        43     Non-Profit
625 Marjorie Street                                                                                                                                             (Owned by Non-Profit)
President George
                                                                            HUD-202/
Washington Manor I                                      Senior                                    05/07/1981     12/31/2032      39        38     Non-Profit            Not at risk
                                                                               8 NC
1020 Kingston Street
President George
                                                                            HUD-20/
Washington Manor II                                     Senior                                    09/23/1985     05/31/2033      24        22     Non-Profit            Not at risk
                                                                               8 NC
1020 Kingston Road.
President Grover Cleveland
Manor I                                                Senior/                 HUD-                                                                                      Low risk
                                                                                                  03/01/1998     02/28/2015      10        10     Non-Profit
                                                     Disabled              PRAC/202                                                                             (Owned by Non-Profit)
1020 Kingston Road
Rockfellow House                                                           HUD- 202/                                                                                     Low risk
                                                     Disabled                                     05/13/1988     05/12/2014       6         6     Non-Profit
185 Rockfellow Drive                                                           8 NC                                                                             (Owned by Non-Profit)
Shasta Manor                                           Senior/                 HUD-                                                                                      Low risk
                                                                                                  06/30/2001     04/30/2014      11        11     Non-Profit
1198 Kingston Road                                   Disabled              PRAC/202                                                                             (Owned by Non-Profit)
Shasta Manor II                                        Senior/                 HUD-                                                                                      Low risk
                                                                                                  04/30/2007     02/28/2015      11        11     Non-Profit
1020 Kingston Road                                   Disabled              PRAC/811                                                                             (Owned by Non-Profit)
Total                                                       --                    --                     --           --        173       169          --                   --
Total Units At-Risk                                         --                    --                     --           --                  109          --                   --
Source: Housing Policy and Preservation Associate, California Housing Partnership, obtained April 7, 2014.
                                                                                                                             2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
     8-52                                                                                                                                              City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

15. At Risk Housing
Cost of Preservation versus Replacement
There are many options to preserving units including providing financial incentives to
project owners to extend low-income use restrictions, purchasing affordable housing
units by a non-profit or public agency, or providing local subsidies to offset the
difference between the affordable and market rate. Scenarios for preservation will
depend on the type of project at risk.
Acquisition and Rehabilitation
Actual acquisition costs depend on several variables such as condition, size, location,
existing financing and availability of financing (government and market). Costs used in
this analysis are from the Siskiyou County Housing Element. The following are estimated
per unit preservation costs for Siskiyou County based on previous projects completed by
the Community Housing Improvement Program (CHIP) elsewhere in the north state. The
approximate cost per unit for acquisition and soft costs is $18,782, and $40,421 for
rehabilitation. Therefore, the total cost to preserve a low-income housing unit by
rehabilitation in the county is an estimated $59,203 and the total cost of preserving all
109 at-risk units is about $6.5 million.
Local Rental Subsidy
Tenant-based subsidies could be used to preserve the affordability of housing. The level
of subsidy required to preserve at-risk affordable housing through rent subsidies is
estimated to equal the Fair Market Rent for a unit minus the housing cost affordable to
a lower-income household.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                     8-53

Table 8-36 estimates the rent subsidies required to preserve the housing affordability of
the units. Based on the estimates and assumptions shown in the table, an estimated
$83,244 annually would be required to preserve the current at-risk inventory of 109 units.
The subsidy for 10 years would be about $832,000, while a subsidy for 30 years would be
about $2.5 million.
                                                             TABLE 8-36
                                                POTENTIAL RENT SUBSIDIES
                                                          City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                 2014
                                                                                 1 BR            2 BR
                          Per Unit Affordable Rent                                                            Total
                                                                              (1 person)      (3 person)
     A         Low Income (60% AMI)                                              $608            $781
     B         Very Low Income (50% AMI)                                         $506            $651
     C         Average (A & B)                                                   $557            $716
               Per Unit Voucher Payment (2014 Fair Market
     D
               Rent)                                                             $618            $789
     E         Monthly Per Unit Subsidy (D–C)                                     $61             $73
     F         Annual Subsidy/Unit (E * 12)                                      $732            $876
               Total “At Risk” Units                                               85              13          98
               Total Annual Subsidy                                            $62,220         $11,388       $73,608
     Source: HUD Fair Market Rent, 2014; Mintier Harnish, 2014.
Replacement Cost
Mt. Shasta can also consider the cost of replacing the units with new construction.
Construction cost estimates include all hard and soft costs associated with construction
in addition to per unit land costs. The analysis assumes the replacement units are
comparable in size and rent levels to the most recent construction of the 11-unit Shasta
Manor senior complex. Table 8-37 summarizes the estimated replacement costs per
unit. It is estimated that it will cost about $13.4 million dollars to replace all 109 units.
                                                              TABLE 8-37
                                                     REPLACEMENT COSTS
                                                          City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                 2014
                                                  Shasta Manor Senior
                    Type of Cost                                                    Per Unit Cost Estimate
                                                   Complex (11 units)
             Land                                          $206,935                        $18,812
             Improvements                                 $1,153,620                      $104,875
             Total Cost                                   $1,360,555                      $123,687
             Cost to Preserve 109 At-Risk Units                                          $13,481,883
              Source: City of Mt. Shasta, 2014.
                                                                2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-54                                                                                      City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

Based on the analysis, it would appear that providing a rental subsidy is the most
affordable option for preserving the at-risk units. However, there is no funding available
to provide this subsidy. A more feasible option would be to acquire and rehabilitate the
units.
Qualified Entities
California Government Code Section 65863.10 requires that owners of Federally-assisted
properties provide notices of intent to convert their properties to market rate 12 months
and six months prior to the expiration of their contract, opt-outs, or prepayment. Owners
must provide notices of intent to public agencies, including HCD and the local public
housing authority, as well as to all impacted tenant households. The six-month notice
must include specific information on the owner’s plans, timetables, and reasons for
termination. Under Government Code Section 65863.11, owners of Federally-assisted
projects must provide a Notice of Opportunity to Submit an Offer to Purchase to
Qualified Entities, non-profit or for-profit organizations that agree to preserve the long-
term affordability if they should acquire at-risk projects, at least one year before the sale
or expiration of use restrictions. Qualified Entities have first right of refusal for acquiring
at-risk units. The California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD)
keeps a current list of all of the qualified entities across the State. The qualified entities
that HCD lists for Siskiyou County are found in Table 8-38.
                                                            TABLE 8-38
                                                      QUALIFIED ENTITIES
                                                          Siskiyou County
                                                                   2014
                                   Organization                                      City     Phone Number
        Christian Church Homes of Northern California,
        Inc.                                                                     Oakland    (510) 632-6714
        Eskaton Properties, Inc.                                                 Carmichael (916) 334-0810
        Northern Valley Catholic Social Service                                  Redding    (530) 241-0552
        Rural Communities Housing Development
        Corp.                                                                    Ukiah      (707) 463-1975
         Source: California Department of Housing and Community Development, 2014.
Resources for Preservation
Housing Authority
The State of California does not own or operate public housing; public housing is
administered directly through local public housing authorities. However, for those
jurisdictions that do not have a local public housing authority, the Department of
Housing and Community Development has a Housing Assistance Program that
administers the Section 8 program in those counties.
The Federal Section 8 program provides rental assistance to very low-income
households in need of affordable housing. The Section 8 program assists a very low-
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                            8-55

income household by paying the difference between 30 percent of the gross
household income and the cost of rent. Section 8 is structured as vouchers; this allows
the voucher recipients to choose housing that may cost above the fair market rent as
long as the recipients pay for the additional cost.
The Shasta County Housing Authority operates the Section 8 program serving the
counties of Modoc, Shasta, Siskiyou, and Trinity. The Housing Authority assists 17
households in Mt. Shasta through its rental assistance programs, and there are currently
3,169 applicants on the waiting list in all four counties. The large majority of Section 8
recipients are low-income families and low-income elderly and disabled single persons;
these population types also possess the most urgent special housing needs.
16. Regional Housing Needs Allocation
State Housing Element law requires that a local jurisdiction accommodate a share of
the region’s projected housing needs for the planning period. This share, called the
Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA), is important because State law mandates
that jurisdictions provide sufficient land to accommodate a variety of housing
opportunities for all economic segments of the community. Compliance with this
requirement is measured by the jurisdiction’s ability to provide adequate land to
accommodate the RHNA. The Siskiyou County Public Health and Community
Development Department is responsible for allocating the RHNA to individual
jurisdictions within the county.
The RHNA is distributed by income category and covers a planning period from January
1, 2014, to June 30, 2019.3
3Non-Council-of-Government    local governments including Mt. Shasta are on a five-year housing
element planning period. These jurisdictions’ sixth cycle housing element planning period can be
extended to an eight-year planning period if their Metropolitan Planning Organizations/or
Regional Transportation Planning Agencies elect shifting from a five-year to a four-year RTP
update by December 26, 2014, and meet requirements as specified in Government Code
Sections 65080 (b)(2)(M) and 65588 (e)(3)(c).
                                              2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-56                                                                   City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

The City of Mt. Shasta’s share of the 2014-2019 RHNA is 45 units, distributed among
income categories as shown in Table 8-39.
                                                                  TABLE 8-39
                                                       INCOME LEVELS AND RHNA
                                                              City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                       2014
         Income Level                               Percent of AMI                        Number of Units                       Percent
Extremely Low-Income1                       Up to 30 percent of AMI                                   6                           13.3%
Very Low-Income                             Up to 50 percent of AMI                                   5                           11.1%
Low-Income                                  51 to 80 percent of AMI                                   7                           16.1%
Moderate-Income                             81 to 120 percent of AMI                                  8                           17.7%
Above Moderate-                             More than 120 percent of                                 19                            42%
Income                                      AMI
Total                                                                                                45                           100%
Based on the requirements of AB 2634 (Statutes of 2006), each jurisdiction must also address the projected need of extremely low-income (ELI)
households, defined as households earning less than 30 percent of the median income. The projected extremely low-income need can be assumed as 50
percent of the total need for the very low-income households.
 Source: Siskiyou County Public Health and Community Development Department, 2014.
17. Vacant Land Inventory
This section provides an inventory of the vacant land that is suitable and available
within the city of Mt. Shasta for residential development. It compares this inventory to
the City’s RHNA for all income categories. In addition to this assessment, this section
considers the availability of sites to accommodate a variety of housing types suitable
for households with a range of income levels and housing needs. Finally this section
discusses the adequacy of infrastructure for residential development during the Housing
Element planning period.
Inventory Assumptions
All sites were inventoried based on allowed densities. The city has opted to rely on the
state-defined default density standard of 15 units per acre to demonstrate that it has
adequate sites to accommodate the lower-income share of the RHNA. If the maximum
allowed density was over the default density standard of 15 units per acre, the site was
inventoried for lower income. This includes sites zoned at R-3, C-1, and C-2 as shown in
Table 8-43. Sites zoned to allow 10 units per acre (i.e. R-2) were inventoried as moderate
income units. The high density residential zone can be developed as apartments,
townhouses, or condominiums, which are typically more affordable housing. The
medium density residential designation provides for single or multifamily homes,
including conventional duplex, triplex, planned unit development, and other attached
housing configurations. This type of housing tends to be affordable to households with
moderate income. All other zones, which allow lower densities, were inventoried far
above moderate income units.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                                            8-57

Based on recent development activity in the City, a net density of 75 percent of the
maximum density was assumed for the multifamily zoned parcels and single family
zoned parcels. An example of a recent multifamily project that was developed or
approved in the City was the Shasta Manor senior housing residential project. Eleven
units were developed on 1.04 acres; for a maximum density of approximately 10 units
per acre and a 55 percent buildout. There are very few large single family residential
subdivisions approved in the City of Mount Shasta with which to estimate buildout
densities. The most recent single family residential subdivision that was approved in the
City of Mt. Shasta was the Tanner Subdivision. Nine units were developed on 1.6 acres;
for a maximum density of 5.6 units per acre. Another project, the Moss Mountain
Meadows Subdivision, which is situated on a level parcel with a slope of less than 5
percent was approved for 42 units on 10 acres (including roads), for a maximum density
of 4.2 dwelling units per acre and a 70 percent buildout.
Summary of Vacant Sites
Appendix 8-B lists the available vacant land in the city that is appropriate to meet its
share of the regional housing needs. The capacity on the parcels listed in Appendix 8-B
is summarized in Table 8-40, below.
Development potential of a site was determined by availability of utilities and the
realistic buildout density. In most cases the Zoning and General Plan Land Use
Designations are consistent; however, where they differ, the capacity on the site is
based on the more restrictive density.
Affordable housing is permitted in all residential zones. However, most affordable
projects will occur in the R-3 zone since it permits higher densities and fits projects that
are supported by government assistance.
As noted in Table 8-40, housing is permitted in a variety of zone districts. However, to
calculate the RHNA capacity, only zones where housing was permitted “by right” were
used. There are a total of 53 acres of R-3 zoned land with an estimated capacity for 804
units; 9.52 acres of R-2 zoned land, with an estimated capacity for 73 units; and 200.19
acres of R-1 zoned land with an estimated capacity for 905 units. This totals 262.9 acres
or an estimated 1,782 units. These units are used to calculate the RHNA capacity. The
parcels are shown in Figure 8-3.
In addition to the units allowed by right, which are counted against the RHNA, units are
conditionally permitted in commercial districts as part of a mixed-use development. The
densities allowed in these zones meet the default density standard for lower income
housing (i.e., at least 15 units per acre). This includes 44 acres of C-1 zoned land with an
estimated capacity for 668 units and 77 acres of C-2 with an estimated yield of 1,158.
An estimated total of 1,826 units could be built on land zoned for commercial use.
These parcels are also shown in Figure 8-3. However, due to the requirement of special
permitting, these units are not calculated in the RHNA capacity.
                                             2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-58                                                                  City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

No units are assigned in E-C, U, and P-D zoning designation. Some limited residential
uses are allowed in these districts with a conditional use permit, but these units are not
calculated in the RHNA capacity. There are 126 acres of P-D zoned land, 294 acres of E-
C, and 166 acres of unclassified.
These parcels are shown in Figure 8-4. In total, there are 971.95 vacant acres.
                                                                      TABLE 8-40
                                 POTENTIAL RESIDENTIAL UNITS BY ZONE DISTRICT
                                                                  City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                           2014
                                                   Maximum                                      Realistic         Units
                                  Vacant                                 Inventoried                                     Conditional
            Zone                                    Potential                                   Units Per      Permitted
                                    Acres                               Income Level                                       Units
                                                      Density                                      Acre         By Right
                                                     Residential Units Permitted By Right
 R-1                               200.19                  6                Above                   4.5           905        --
                                                                          Moderate
                                                                           Income
 R-2                                  9.52                10              Moderate                  7.5            73        --
                                                                           Income
 R-3                                53.19                 20           Lower Income                  15           804        --
 Total Residential                  262.9                 --                    --                    --         1,7821      --
                                                      Conditional Use Permit Required
 C-1                                44.50                 20           Lower Income                  15             --      668
 C-2                                77.01                 20           Lower Income                  15             --     1,158
 Total                             121.51                 --                    --                    --            --     1,826
 Commercial
                                     Other Zoning Designations Permitting Residential Units
 E-C                               294.63                 --                    --                    0             --       --
 P-D                               126.57                 --                    --                    0             --       --
 U                                 166.34                  0                    --                    0             --       --
 Total for all                     971.95                 --                    --                    --         1,782     1,824
 Vacant Land
 Note: These totals reflect the development potential of each vacant parcel scaled down to 75 percent density.
 1
   Only units permitted by right are included in the estimated capacity.
  Source: City of Mount Shasta, Mintier Harnish 2014
Appendix 8-C shows the location of the vacant parcels by zone. Refer to Appendix-B
for a detailed listing of the sites identified in the maps.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                                 8-59

Table 8-41 displays the availability of residentially zoned vacant parcels compared to
the RHNA. As shown in the table, the city has more than enough land zoned for
residential development to meet the 2014-2019 RHNA for all income categories.
                                                                 TABLE 8-41
          ESTIMATED RESIDENTIAL CAPACITY COMPARED TO RHNA BY INCOME
                                                             City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                        2014
                                                                                                          Above
                                                 Lower                  Moderate
                                                                                                       Moderate                Total Units
                                            Income Units              Income Units
                                                                                                     Income Units
  RHNA                                              18                          8                             19                   45
  Residential Capacity                             804                         73                            905                 1,782
  Surplus Capacity1                                786                         65                            886                 1,737
  1
    The surplus capacity is the difference between the residential capacity included in the sites inventory and the RHNA
   Source: HCD, Mintier Harnish.
Water and Sewer Infrastructure
Public sewer and water service is readily available within 100 feet of most of the vacant
lands identified in Table 8-B in Appendix 8-B. Certain portions of the City (Alma Street)
are constrained by limitations in the capacity of various elements of the community’s
infrastructure, primarily the City’s wastewater collection system.
The City water supply has a capacity for 3.8 million gallons per day (average spring
production with wells). During the summer months of 2008, the average water demand
by the City was 2.9 MGD (June 3.19 MGD, July 2.98 MGD, August 2.54). The wastewater
treatment plant has increased its capacity from 0.75 to 0.80 MGD which is sufficient to
handle an additional 434 household equivalents (0.75 – 0.80 = 100,000 divided by 230
equals 434)4. The average daily demand is 230 gallons per day per person. Pace Civil
completed a Wastewater Treatment Plant Capacity Evaluation report in 2003. The
report concluded that the plant was currently operating at 80 percent capacity. For
the treatment plant to reach its existing design capacity, improvements would need to
be made, some of which include upgrading of wastewater collector and interceptor
lines. The City has completed the majority of the Stage 1 improvements (as
recommended by Pace Civil, Inc., October 2003) to the existing wastewater treatment
plant to increase the capacity to 0.80 MGD. The City will continue with the remaining
Stage 1 and Stage 2 improvements by 2025. The City capacity after the Stage 2
improvements are completed will be 0.90 MGD. This could be adequate to handle the
City’s general plan projected growth and the City’s Regional Housing Needs for the
planning period.
4
  Rod Bryan, Public Works Director, June 29, 2009.
                                                                           2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-60                                                                                                               City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

Conclusion
Due to the availability of vacant, residentially zoned property, it is unnecessary for the
City to consider the rezoning of vacant non-residentially zoned land or the
redevelopment of properties in order to generate adequate sites for new housing
development. The sites identified in Table 8-B can support the development of housing
in excess of the City’s share of the 2014-2019 regional housing needs as estimated by
HCD. Therefore, it can be conclusively stated that the City had adequate appropriately
zoned sites, with supporting public services and utilities, to accommodate its housing
needs over the current planning period.
18. Environmental Constraints
The vacant land inventory accounts for physical, environmental, access and utility
constraints, inconsistencies between the zoning and general plan designations, and/or
parcel sizes that are too small to develop without boundary line adjustments or mergers
with adjacent parcels. Further conflicts could result from wetland or topographic
constraints reducing the “potential unit” yields noted on this table. The development
potential of each vacant parcel has been scaled down based on applicable
constraints and the likely average density that is typically achievable, regardless of the
density allowed by zoning. Although a site by site investigation of each vacant parcel
has not occurred, based on general knowledge of the larger multiple family sites (those
likely to be used for affordable housing), neither wetlands or topographic constraints
exist. Constraints affecting density yield are reflected in the projected realistic capacity
identified in Appendix 8-B.
Flood Hazards/Wetlands
The Federal Emergency Management Agency has not mapped floodplains in the Mt.
Shasta planning area, with the exception of the shore of Lake Siskiyou and a narrow
fringe area along the Sacramento River. This area is outside the city limits and will not
constraint development within the city. The City can easily accommodate the RHNA
projections without development in areas having constraints due to flood hazards
and/or wetlands.
19. Funding Resources
There are different types of funding available to the City and local nonprofit
organizations to help provide for the availability of housing affordable to low- and
moderate-income persons. Appendix 8-D lists the grant and loan options the City or
other agencies can apply for to fund housing services for residents of Mt. Shasta. There
are programs to help fund the development of multifamily rental housing, supportive
housing, homeless shelters and transitional housing, first time homebuyer and
rehabilitation programs, second mortgages, and self-help housing. The City is currently
conducting a citywide income survey in order to establish eligibility for Community
Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds. The Jefferson Economic Development Institute
sometimes receives CDBG funds, which has been used to serve Mt. Shasta residents in
the past.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                         8-61

Energy Conservation
During the winter months, utility costs are significant in the city, particularly for lower-
and fixed-income households. Pacific Power performs energy audits on both residential
and commercial properties and offers zero-interest weatherization loans as well as some
limited weatherization-cost rebates. Pacific Power also operates a Wattsmart Incentives
Program that provides per unit incentives for specific Energy Efficiency Measures for
lighting, appliances, plumbing, home electronics, weatherization, HVAC, new homes,
and manufactured homes.
The Great Northern Corporation operates both weatherization and energy-cost support
programs for lower income households; eligibility is based on the household’s total
monthly income. The weatherization program can repair and replace exterior doors,
windows and certain appliances, and install floor and ceiling insulation. Additional
energy efficiency measures are also available, as well as diagnostic testing of heaters
and fuel burning appliances for the safety of the occupants.
Opportunities for energy conservation can be found for both existing and future
housing developments. Conservation can be achieved through a variety of
approaches including reducing the use of energy-consuming appliances and features
in a home, physically modifying existing structures or land uses, reducing the reliance on
automobiles by encouraging more mixed-use and infill development, and providing
pedestrian access to commercial and recreational facilities.
Some energy conservation features are incorporated into the design of residential
structures in the City of Mt. Shasta due to the requirements of Title 24, which outlines
measures to reduce energy consumption. These measures include low flow plumbing
fixtures, efficient heating and cooling opportunities, dual pane windows, and adequate
insulation and weather stripping. Incorporating new technology within residential
developments offers developers a chance to design projects that allow for maximum
energy conservation opportunities. Although energy regulations establish a uniform
standard of energy efficiency, they do not ensure that all available conservation
features are incorporated into building design. Additional measures may further reduce
heating, cooling, and lighting loads and overall energy consumption. While it is not
feasible that all possible conservation features be included in every development, there
are often a number of economically feasible measures that may result in savings in
excess of the minimum required by Title 24.
There is a new section within the California Building Code that now includes green
building regulations, referred to as CALGreen. This is the nation’s first mandatory
statewide green building code, intended to encourage more sustainable and
environmentally friendly building practices, require low pollution emitting substances
that can cause harm to the environment, conserve natural resources, and promote the
use of energy efficient materials and equipment. Mt. Shasta is enforcing the provisions
of CALGreen.
                                           2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-62                                                                City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

CALGreen requirements for new buildings include:
            Reduce water consumption by 20 percent;
            Divert 50 percent of construction waste from landfills;
            Install low pollutant-emitting materials;
            Separate water meters for nonresidential buildings’ indoor and outdoor water
             use;
            Moisture-sensing irrigation systems for larger landscape projects; and
            Mandatory inspections of energy systems (e.g., heat furnace, air conditioner,
             mechanical equipment) for nonresidential buildings over 10,000 square feet
             to ensure that all are working at their maximum capacity and according to
             their design efficiencies.
Constructing new homes with energy-conserving features, in addition to retrofitting
existing structures, will result in a reduction in monthly utility costs. There are many ways
to determine how energy efficient an existing building is and, if needed, what
improvements can be made. Many modern building design methods are used to
reduce residential energy consumption and are based on proven techniques. These
methods can be categorized in three ways:
    1. Building design that keeps natural heat in during the winter and keeps natural
         heat out during the summer. Such design reduces air conditioning and heating
         demands. Proven building techniques in this category include:
            Location of windows and openings in relation to the path of the sun to
             minimize solar gain in the summer and maximize solar gain in the winter;
            Use of “thermal mass”, earthen materials such as stone, brick, concrete, and
             tiles that absorb heat during the day and release heat at night;
            Use of window coverings, insulation, and other materials to reduce heat
             exchange between the interior of a home and the exterior;
            Location of openings and the use of ventilating devices that take advantage
             of natural air flow;
            Use of eaves and overhangs that block direct solar gain through window
             openings during the summer but allow solar gain during the winter; and
            Zone heating and cooling systems, which reduce heating and cooling in the
             unused areas of a home.
    2. Building orientation that uses natural forces to maintain a comfortable interior
         temperature. Examples include:
            North-south orientation of the long axis of a dwelling;
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                           8-63

          Minimizing the southern and western exposure of exterior surfaces; and
          Location of dwellings to take advantage of natural air circulation and
           evening breezes.
    3. Use of landscaping features to moderate interior temperatures. Such techniques
        include:
          Use of deciduous shade trees and other plants to protect the home;
          Use of natural or artificial flowing water; and
          Use of trees and hedges as windbreaks.
In addition to these naturally-based techniques, modern methods include:
          Use of solar energy to heat water;
          Use of radiant barriers on roofs to keep attics cool;
          Use of solar panels and other devices to generate electricity;
          High efficiency coating on windows to repel summer heat and trap winter
           warmth;
          Weather stripping and other insulation to reduce heat gain and loss;
          Use of natural gas for dryers, stovetops, and ranges;
          Use of energy efficient home appliances; and
          Use of low-flow showerheads and faucet aerators to reduce hot water use.
Major opportunities for residential energy conservation in the city will include insulation
and weatherproofing, landscaping and maximizing orientation, lowering appliance
consumption, and maximizing on solar energy.
                                              2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-64                                                                   City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

As noted in Table 8-42, there has been a significant change in the type of house
heating used by residents between 1990 and 2010. A significant decline in wood heat
has been off-set by a significant increase in fuel oil/kerosene heat sources, electricity,
and gas.
                                                               TABLE 8-42
                                                     HOUSE HEATING FUEL
                                                           City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                 1990-2000
                                                      1990                  2000               2010
          Type of Heating Fuel
                                                    Percent          Number     Percent Number      Percent
    Utility Gas                                        0.3%             38         2.3%   157         9.1%
    Bottled, Tank or LP Gas                            7.7%            160         9.6%    65         3.8%
    Electricity                                       34.6%            430        25.7%   632        36.8%
    Fuel Oil, Kerosene                                16.5%            758        45.3%   663        38.6%
    Wood                                              40.4%            278        16.6%   202        11.8%
    Coal or Coke                                       1.1%              0         0.0%     0         0.0%
    Solar Energy                                         --              0         0.0%     0         0.0%
    Other Fuel                                         0.5%              8         0.5%     0         0.0%
    No Fuel Used                                       0.0%              0         0.0%     0         0.0%
    Total                                            100.0%           1,672      100.0%  1,719      100.0%
    Notes: Percentages may not add up to 100 percent due to rounding
    Source: 1990, 2000, and 2010 U.S. Census.
E. HOUSING CONSTRAINTS
This section identifies possible governmental and non-governmental constraints to
housing development in Mt. Shasta. The City has planning, zoning, and building
standards that guide and affect residential development patterns and influence
housing availability and affordability. There are also environmental and housing market
conditions that affect the location, availability, affordability, and type of housing that is
constructed in Mt. Shasta. Potential governmental constraints consist of land use
controls, development standards, processing fees, development impact fees, code
enforcement, site improvement costs, development permit and approval processing,
and provision for a variety of housing. Potential non-governmental influences include
such factors as: the availability and cost of financing; land and materials for building
homes; natural conditions that affect the cost of preparing and developing land for
housing; and the business decisions of individuals and organizations in home building,
finance, real estate, and rental housing that impact housing cost and availability. These
interrelated factors may constrain the ability of the private and public sectors to
provide adequate housing that meets the needs of all economic segments of the
community.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                             8-65

20. Governmental Constraints
Land Use Controls
General Plan
The City of Mt. Shasta General Plan establishes policies that guide all new
development, including residential land uses. These policies, along with zoning
regulations, control the amount and distribution of land allocated for different land uses
in the city. Table 8-43 shows the residential land use designations established by the
General Plan.
                                                                 TABLE 8-43
                                        RESIDENTIAL LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
                                                             City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                       2014
       Designation                  Maximum Density                                           Uses
                                                                   Typical uses include large lot single family
                                                                   residential, either by design or by incorporation of
  Rural Residential
                                   1 unit/2.5 acre                 previously developed county areas. Agricultural
  (RR)
                                                                   use is limited due to the higher residential density
                                                                   than conventional agriculture.
  Low Density                                                      This designation allows single family development,
                                   8 units/acre
  Residential (LDR)                                                which is found throughout much of the city.
                                                                   Uses are primarily single family homes. Other uses
                                                                   include duplex, triplex, and fourplex
  Medium-Density
                                   12 units/acre                   developments, as well as smaller apartment
  Residential (MDR)
                                                                   buildings. This designation could also support
                                                                   garden apartments and townhouses.
                                                                   Uses typically take the form of dwellings in
                                                                   clustered development such as, duplexes,
  High Density                                                     triplexes, apartments, town homes, and
                                   20 units/acre
  Residential (HDR)                                                condominiums. Conventional apartment or
                                                                   condominium development for larger numbers of
                                                                   units within a single project is common.
                                                                   The mixed use-planned development designation
  Mixed Use                                                        may be applied to lands that are suitable for a
  Planned                                                          compatible mixture of land uses including
                                   20 units/acre
  Development                                                      residential uses, light industrial, commercial, and/or
  (MU-PD)                                                          public uses. Development is subject to a Planned
                                                                   Unit Development (PUD) Ordinance.
   Source: City of Mt. Shasta General Plan, adopted August 22, 2007
                                                                     2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-66                                                                                           City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

Zoning Ordinance
The City regulates the type, location, density, and scale of residential development
primarily through the Zoning Ordinance. In general, the City’s zoning regulations are
designed to balance the goal of providing affordable housing opportunities for all
income groups while protecting the health and safety of residents and preserving the
character of existing neighborhoods. Table 8-44 shows the residential zone districts and
the associated development standards.
The minimum residential lot sizes range from 4,500 square feet to 87,120 square feet. The
maximum height limit for residential units in the R-L, R1/B1, R-1, R-1-U, and R-2 districts is
35 feet and 45 feet in the R-3, C-1, C-2, and E-C districts. In the past, these restrictions
have not inhibited multifamily development.
The City’s two high density multifamily zones (i.e., at least 10 units/acre) are the Medium
Density Residential (R-2) and High Density Residential (R-3) zones. The zones are fairly
similar in the type of housing units that are allowed. The primary difference is the
allowable densities in each. The R-2 allows a maximum of 10 units per acre and the R-3
allows a maximum of 20 units per acre.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                          8-67

                                                                                                                   TABLE 8-44
                                                               RESIDENTIAL ZONE DISTRICTS AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
                                                                                                                City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                                                                          2014
                                            Low
                     Resource                               Low Density                   Low Density                                            High Density Res.        Downtown          General    Employment
                                         Density                                                                     Medium Density
                       Lands                                       Res.                    Res. Urban                                                                     Comm. (C-         Comm.         Center
                                            Res.                                                                           Res.(R-2)                      (R-3)
                         (R-L)                                    (R-1)                       (R-1-U)                                                                           1)             (C-2)       (E-C)
                                         (R1/B1)
Max. Units            1 (per 10               4                      6                             9                           10                            20                 20              20           --
Per Acre               acres)
Minimum               21,780 sf          10,000 sf              6,000 sf                      4,500 sf              Single Fam-4,500 sf          Single Fam-4,500 sf      Exist. 2,500 sf New 5,000 sf       --2
Lot Size                                                                                                                Duplex-6,000 sf             Duplex-6,000 sf
                                                                                                                        Triplex-9,000 sf          Triplex-8,000 sf MF-
                                                                                                                                                         2,000 sf
Minimum                 100 ft.             80 ft.                 60 ft                        50 ft.                        60 ft.                     Varies3           Existing-no requirement           --2
Lot Width                                                                                                                                                                            New-50 ft.
Front Yard               20 ft.             25 ft.                 20 ft                        10 ft.                        10 ft.                       10 ft.                --1             --1         --2
Setback
Side Yard                30 ft.             10 ft.                                                Not less than 10 ft. combined;                                                 --1             --1         --2
Setback                                                                                                   min. 4’ on one side
Rear Yard                30 ft.             10 ft.                10 ft.                        10 ft.                        10 ft.                       10 ft.                --1             --1         --2
Setback
Max.                     35 ft.             35 ft.                35 ft.                        35 ft.                        35 ft.                       45 ft.             45 ft.           45. ft.     45 ft.
Building
Height
Max. Lot                  10%               45%                    40%                          50%                           55%                           65%           Com.-100%        Com.-100%
                                                                                                                                                                                                            75%
Coverage
1
  No setback requirements for residential uses that are part of a commercial building. Standalone residential uses must confirm to the setback standards of the R-3 zone.
2
  No requirement
3
  Minimum lot width varies by use: single-family: 45 feet; duplex: 60 feet, triplex, 80 feet, multiple family: 80 feet.
Source: City of Mt. Shasta Zoning Ordinance, 2014.
                                                                                                                                                  2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
            8-68                                                                                                                                                             City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

Parking Requirements
Parking requirements for residential uses in Mt. Shasta are summarized as follows:
parking standards in the R1/B1, R-1, and R-2 districts require a minimum of two parking
spaces per unit and 1½ spaces per unit in the R-3 district. Mt. Shasta’s parking
requirements are minimal and are not considered a constraint to development.
Density Bonus Provisions
State law requires the provision of certain incentives for residential development
projects that set aside a certain portion of the units to be affordable to lower- and
moderate-income households. The City of Mt. Shasta does not have a specific Density
Bonus ordinance. However, Section 18.20.120 of the Municipal Code states that,
pursuant to the provisions of the Housing Element of the General Plan, applicable
projects may qualify for a density bonus to encourage the development of affordable
housing. This ordinance states that the procedures for compliance with the density
bonus law are set forth in Section 65915 of the California Government Code, and that
the Planning Commission may impose conditions on the project as would be
considered with any similar project.
Under current State law, jurisdictions are required to provide density bonuses and
development incentives on a sliding scale, where the amount of density bonus and
number of incentives vary according to the amount of affordable housing units
provided. State law requires provision of a density bonus to developers who agree to
construct any of the following:
            10 percent of total units for lower-income households;
            5 percent of total units for very low-income households;
            A senior citizen housing development or a mobile home park; or
            10 percent of total units for moderate income households.
The amount of density bonus granted varies depending on the percentage of
affordable units provided and ranges from 5 percent to 35 percent. The City is also
required to provide up to three additional incentives.
The City has never received a project proposal that included a density bonus
component.
Provisions for a Variety of Housing
The Housing Element must identify adequate sites that are available for the
development of housing types for all economic segments of the population. Part of this
entails evaluating the City’s Zoning Code and its provision for a variety of housing types.
Housing types include single family homes, multifamily homes, second units, mobile
homes, agricultural employee homes, group residential homes, homeless shelters,
transitional and supportive housing, and single room occupancy units.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                            8-69

      Table 8-45 summarizes the various housing types allowed within the City’s zoning
      districts. Some housing types are allowed by right while others are allowed with a
      conditional use permit. Conditions of approval for developments may include, special
      yards; open spaces; buffers; fences; walls; installation and maintenance of
      landscaping; street dedications and improvements; regulation of traffic circulation;
      regulation of signs; regulation of hours of operation and methods of operations; control
      of potential nuisances; standards for maintenance of building and grounds; prescription
      of development schedules and development standards; and such other conditions as
      the Commission may deem necessary to ensure compatibility of the use with
      surrounding developments and uses and to preserve the public health, safety and
      welfare.
                                                                         TABLE 8-45
                                      HOUSING TYPES PERMITTED BY ZONING DISTRICT
                                                                     City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                               2014
                       Residential Uses                                   R-L     R1/B1        R-1     R-1-U       R-2        R-3      C-1      C-2      E-C
Single family                                                              P          P          P        P          P         P         P       P        C
Duplex                                                                     --         --         --       --         P         P         P       P        C
Triplex                                                                    --         --         --       --         P         P         P       P
Condos/Townhomes                                                           --         --         --       --         P         P         P       P         --
Second Units                                                               P          P          P        P          P         P         --      --        --
Mobile Homes on Individual Lots1                                           --         --         P        --         --        --        --      --        --
Group Care Homes (6 or fewer) 2                                            P          P          P        P          P         P         P       P         --
Residential Care Facilities                                                C          --        C         C         C          C         C       --        --
Senior and Assisted Housing                                                --         C         C         C         C          C         C       --        --
Multifamily (no more than 4 units)                                         --         --         --       --         P         P         P       P         --
Multifamily (more than 4 units)                                            --         --         --       --         --        C         P       P         --
Mobile Home Park                                                           --         --         --       --         --        C         --      --        --
Mixed Uses (vertical or horizontal)                                        P          P          P        P          P         P         P       P         --
Emergency Shelter                                                          --         --         --       --         --        P         P       P         --
Transitional Housing                                                       --         --         P        P          P         P         P       P         --
Supportive Housing                                                         --         --         P        P          P         P         P       P         --
Single Room Occupancy (6 or fewer units)                                   --         --         --       --         --        P         P       P         --
Singe Room Occupancy (7 or more units)                                     --         --         --       --         --        C         --      C         --
Note: P = permitted; C = Conditional Use Permit
1
  While it is the City’s practice to comply with State law, Section 16.16.080 states that mobile homes are allowed only in the R-1 zone. Implementation Measure
HO-2.5.2 is included in the Housing Element to update Section 16.16.080 of the Code to ensure mobile homes on permanent foundations are allowed in all
residential zones consistent with State law.
2
  While it is the City’s practice to comply with State law, the Zoning Ordinance does not explicitly state that group homes (six or fewer) are allowed in all
residential zones. Implementation Measure HO-2.5.2 would amend the Zoning Ordinance to explicitly state that group homes of six or fewer are allowed in all
residential zones allowing residential uses.
 Source: City of Mt. Shasta Zoning Ordinance, 2014.
                                                                               2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
      8-70                                                                                                         City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

Single Family Units
A “single family dwelling” is defined in the Mt. Shasta Zoning Ordinance as any building
or portion thereof which contains one dwelling unit. Single family dwellings are
permitted in the R-L, R1/B1, R-1, R-1-U, R-2, R-3, and C-1 zones. A Conditional Use Permit
is required for single family units in the E-C zone.
Condominiums and Townhomes
Condominiums describe a type of common ownership, while townhomes describe a
type of use. Condominiums are permitted in the R-3 district and townhomes are
permitted in the R-2 and R-3 districts. Condominiums are also allowed with the Planned
Development (P-D) combining zone in any zone pursuant to approval of a planned
development plan.
Multifamily Units
Multifamily housing made up approximately 33 percent of the City’s housing stock in
2013. Multifamily developments are permitted in the R-2, R-3, C-1, and C-2 zones. The
maximum densities in these zones range from 10 units per acre in the R-2 zone to 20
units per acre in the R-3 and C-1 and C-2 zones.
Mobile Homes
Manufactured housing and mobile homes can be an affordable housing option for
low- and moderate-income households. According to the California Department of
Finance, in 2013 only about 1.5 percent of Mt. Shasta’s housing stock was made up of
mobile homes. Pursuant to State law, a mobile home built after June 15, 1976, certified
under the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Act of 1974, and built
on a permanent foundation may be located in any residential zone where a
conventional single family detached dwelling is permitted subject to the same
restrictions on density and to the same property development regulations. Section
6.16.080 of the Municipal Code only allows mobile homes on permanent foundations
within the R-1 zone. Implementation Measure HO-2.5.2 is included in the Housing
Element to modify the Municipal Code to comply with State law. Mobile home parks
can be established only by conditional uses permit in Mt. Shasta in the R-3 zone.
Group Homes/ Residential Care Facilities
Residential care facilities licensed or supervised by a Federal, State, or local
health/welfare agency provide 24-hour non-medical care of unrelated persons who
have a disability and are in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance
essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual
in a family-like environment. The Zoning Code currently provides a definition of group
care home that is based upon Health and Safety Code §1500 et seq. In accordance
with State law, the City must allow group facilities for six persons or less in any area
zoned for residential use, and may not require licensed residential care facilities for six or
less individuals to obtain conditional use permits or variances that are not required of
other family dwellings. Consequently, group care facilities for six and fewer individuals
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                 8-71

are allowed by right in all residential zones. However, the Zoning Code does not
explicitly state this. Implementation Measure HO-2.5.2 is included in the Housing Element
to modify the Zoning Code to explicitly comply with State law. Facilities for seven or
more persons are allowed with a Conditional Use Permit in all residential zone districts
and in the C-1 commercial zone district as senior and assisted living.
Mixed-Use
Mixed-use projects combine both nonresidential and residential uses on the same site.
Mixed-use development can help reduce the effects of housing cost burden by
increasing density and offering opportunities for reduced vehicular trips by walking,
bicycling, or taking public transportation. Mixed-use residential developments are
allowed in the C-1 and C-2 zones, and in any zone with the Planned Development (P-D)
combining zone pursuant to approval of a planned development plan.
Transitional and Supportive Housing
Transitional housing is a type of housing used to facilitate the movement of homeless
individuals and families to permanent housing. Residents of transitional housing are
usually connected to supportive services designed to assist the homeless in achieving
greater economic independence and a permanent, stable living situation. Transitional
housing can take several forms, including group quarters with beds, single family
homes, and multifamily apartments; and typically offers case management and
support services to help return people to independent living (often six months to two
years).
Supportive housing links the provision of housing and social services for the homeless,
people with disabilities, and a variety of other special needs populations. California
Health and Safety Code (Section 50675.2) defines “supportive housing” as housing with
no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the low-income adults with disabilities,
and that is linked to on-site or off-site services that assist the supportive housing resident
in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her
ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. Similar to transitional housing,
supportive housing can take several forms, including group quarters with beds, single
family homes, and multifamily apartments.
With the enactment of SB 2 in 2008, State law now requires cities and counties to treat
transitional housing as a residential use subject only to those restrictions that apply to
other residential uses of the same type in the same zone.
In 2010, the City amended the Zoning Ordinance to allow transitional and supportive
housing as permitted uses in zones allowing residential use, and the City adopted the
following definitions:
        “Transitional housing” means dwellings utilized as rental housing used to facilitate
        the movement of homeless individuals and families to permanent housing.
        Homeless persons may live in a transitional dwelling for up to two years.
        Transitional housing can include single-family or multifamily dwellings, residential
                                             2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-72                                                                  City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

         care facilities, or boarding houses. Any dwelling used for transitional housing is
         subject to the zone and use standards applicable to the zone in which it is
         located.
         “Supportive housing” means a residential care facility with no limit on length of
         stay that is occupied by the target population as defined in subdivision (d) of
         Cal. Gov’t Code § 53260 (i.e., low income persons with mental disabilities, AIDS,
         substance abuse or chronic health conditions, or persons whose disabilities
         originated before the person turned 18), and that is linked to on-site or off-site
         services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing,
         improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and,
         when possible, work in the community. Any dwelling used for supportive housing
         is subject to the zone and use standards applicable to the zone in which it is
         located.
The City partially complies with State law requirements for transitional and supportive
housing; however, to fully comply with State law, the City must amend the Zoning
Ordinance to allow transitional and supportive housing in the R-L and R-1/B-1 zones. The
Housing Element includes a program to amend the Zoning Ordinance to comply.
Single Room Occupancy
Singe room occupancy units (SROs) are one-room units intended for occupancy by a
single individual. They are distinct from a studio or efficiency unit, in that a studio is a
one-room unit that must contain a kitchen and a bathroom. Although SRO units are not
required to have a kitchen or bathroom, many SROs have one or the other. SROs are
often the most appropriate type of housing for extremely low-income persons.
In 2010 the City adopted Chapter 18.97 of the Municipal Code with standards for SROs.
A “small SRO,” of six or fewer units, is allowed in the R-3 multifamily residential zone and
is subject to the same district requirements applicable to multifamily residential or
apartment uses in that zoning district. A “large SRO,” of seven or more units, is allowed
with a conditional use permit in the R-3 and C-2 zones.
Second Dwelling Units
Another type of housing appropriate for lower-income persons are second dwelling
units. A "second unit" is defined as an attached or a detached residential dwelling unit
that provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons. It shall
include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the
same parcel that the single family dwelling is situated. A second unit also includes the
following: (an efficiency unit, as defined in Section 17958.1 of Health and Safety Code,
and a manufactured home, as defined in Section 18007 of the Health and Safety
Code.
Assembly Bill (AB) 1866 (Chapter 1062, Statutes of 2002), also known as the “second unit
law”, amended the California Government Code to facilitate the development of
second units. This amendment requires localities to allow second units ministerially
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                              8-73

without discretionary review or hearings. To be considered a ministerial review, the
process used to approve second units must “apply predictable, objective, fixed,
quantifiable and clear standards.” Applications for second units should not be subject
to onerous conditions of approval, public hearing processes, or public comment
periods.
The second unit law established maximum standards for second units on lots zoned for
residential use that contain existing single family dwellings. No other standards can be
applied to the approval of second units than those listed in Section 95852.2(b) of the
Government Code, except the City may require that the primary structure be owner-
occupied. The City has adopted these standards, which are outlined in Chapter 18.22,
Accessory Dwellings, of the Zoning Code:
Second units are allowed in the single family and multifamily zoning districts (R-1, R-2,
and R-3). In the City’s Zoning Code, second unit performance standards are addressed
separately within each of the residential zone districts. Second units must meet all of the
same requirements as the main structure, except that they may not exceed 1,200
square feet if detached, or 30 percent of the main structure if attached. Second units
must provide one off-street parking space per bedroom for a maximum of two parking
spaces.
Emergency Shelters
California Health and Safety Code (Section 50801) defines an emergency shelter as
“housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to
occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or households may
be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay.” State law, with the
passage of SB 2 in 2008, requires jurisdictions to allow emergency shelters without a
conditional use permit or other discretionary permit in at least one zone. The zone must
have land available to accommodate an emergency shelter.
Pursuant to Senate Bill 2, the City conducted a staff level review of its zoning districts
and available land and determined that the High Density Residential (R-3) zone or the
General Commercial (C-2) zone would be the most appropriate for emergency shelters
because it is intended as an area for multiple family dwellings and wholesale
commercial activities so public transportation would be accessible and NIMBY (Not In
My Back Yard) issues would be minimized. Approximately 53 acres on 48 vacant parcels
of currently zoned R-3 sites and 77 acres currently zoned C-2 is available to meet this
potential need.
In 2010 the City adopted Municipal Code Chapter 18.98, Emergency Shelters. The
Zoning Code permits emergency shelters in the R-3 zone by right, subject to certain
standards. Because the C-1 and C-2 zones permit residential uses that are permitted in
the R-3 zone, emergency shelters are also permitted in these zones. The standards
adopted by the City are all consistent with State law requirements for emergency
shelters, except for the locational requirement of 1,000 feet from other shelters. State
law limits the locational requirement for emergency shelters to 300 feet from other
                                           2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-74                                                                City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

shelters. The Housing Element includes Implementation Measure HO-2.5.2 to update the
Zoning Code to be consistent with State law.
Farmworker Housing
In accordance with Health and Safety Code Sections 17021.5 and 17021.6, housing for
farmworkers in the City of Mt. Shasta for six or fewer persons is permitted by right in all
residential zone districts. No additional discretionary approvals are required for any kind
of housing that is intended to house six or fewer people, including farmworkers. If the
proposed units looks like a single family house (i.e., two-car garage, driveway, front
yard, etc.), the process is a ministerial approval.
The City requires a conditional use permit for large-scale housing developments in all
residential zones except for the Planned Development zone district. The CUP process is
in place to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses. Conditions of approval vary from
project-to-project, but most likely they will contain provisions for landscaping, type of
fencing, driveway locations, compatible lighting, and recreational facilities. This process
is not a constraint to the development of farmworker housing as the process is very
streamlined and projects can be approved in three months.
Constraints to Housing for Persons with Disabilities
As part of a governmental constraints analysis, housing elements must analyze
constraints upon the development, maintenance, and improvement of housing for
persons with disabilities. Both the Federal Fair Housing Amendment Act (FHAA) and the
California Fair Employment and Housing Act direct local governments to make
reasonable accommodations (i.e., modifications or exceptions) in their zoning laws and
other land use regulations when such accommodations may be necessary to afford
disabled persons an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. An analysis was
conducted of the zoning ordinance, permitting procedures, development standards,
and building codes to identify potential constraints for housing for persons with
disabilities. The City’s policies and regulations regarding housing for persons with
disabilities are described below.
Zoning and Land Use
The Zoning Code currently provides a definition of group care home that is based upon
Health and Safety Code §1500 et seq. In accordance with State law, the City must
allow group facilities for six persons or fewer in any area zoned for residential use, and
may not require licensed residential care facilities for six or less individuals to obtain
conditional use permits or variances that are not required of other family dwellings.
Consequently, group care facilities for six and fewer individuals are allowed by right in
all residential zones. Facilities for seven or more persons are allowed with a use permit in
all residential zone districts and in the C-1 commercial zone district under senior and
assisted living.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                              8-75

Definition of a Family
A restrictive definition of “family” that limits the number of and differentiates between
related and unrelated individuals living together may illegally limit the development
and siting of group homes for persons with disabilities, but not for housing families that
are similarly sized or situated. The Mt. Shasta Zoning Ordinance defines a family as “a
group of individuals with a common bond by means of blood, marriage, or
conscientiously established relations living together as a housekeeping unit sharing a
dwelling unit.” This definition is not considered restrictive.
Building Codes
The City actively enforces 2013 California Building Standards Code provisions that
regulate the access and adaptability of buildings to accommodate persons with
disabilities. No unique restrictions are in place that would constrain the development of
housing for persons with disabilities. Government Code Section 12955.1 requires that 10
percent of the total dwelling units in multifamily buildings without elevators consisting of
three or more rental units or four or more condominium units subject to the following
building standards for persons with disabilities:
          The primary entry to the dwelling unit shall be on an accessible route unless
           exempted by site impracticality tests.
          At least one powder room or bathroom shall be located on the primary entry
           level served by an accessible route.
          All rooms or spaces located on the primary entry level shall be served by an
           accessible route. Rooms and spaces located on the primary entry level and
           subject to this chapter may include, but are not limited to, kitchens, powder
           rooms, bathrooms, living rooms, bedrooms, or hallways.
          Common use areas shall be accessible.
          If common tenant parking is provided, accessible parking spaces is required.
Reasonable Accommodation
Both the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act
direct local governments to make reasonable accommodations (i.e., modifications or
exceptions) in their zoning laws and other land use regulations when such
accommodations may be necessary to afford disabled persons an equal opportunity
to use and enjoy a dwelling. For example, it may be reasonable to accommodate
requests from persons with disabilities to waive a setback requirement or other standard
of the Zoning Ordinance to ensure that homes are accessible for the mobility impaired.
Whether a particular modification is reasonable depends on the circumstances.
Mt. Shasta’s reasonable accommodation policy was codified in Chapter 18.99 of the
Zoning Code in 2010 and provides reasonable accommodation in rules, policies,
practices, and procedures to persons with disabilities that may be necessary to ensure
equal access to housing. In order to make specific housing available to an individual
                                             2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-76                                                                  City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

    with a disability, any person acting on behalf of an individual with a disability may
    request a reasonable accommodation by completing the “Fair Housing
    Accommodation Request” form and filing it with the Planning Department. The request
    is then reviewed by the Planning Director, who will issue a written determination on the
    request.
    Table 8-46 is a checklist of potential constraints on housing for persons with disabilities
    pursuant to SB 520.
                                                    TABLE 8-46
                     CONSTRAINTS ON HOUSING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
                                                 City of Mt. Shasta
                                                         2014
                                              Overarching and General
Does the City of Mt. Shasta have a process       Yes. The City amended its zoning ordinance to include a
for persons with disabilities to make            Reasonable Accommodation Ordinance that outlines a
requests for reasonable accommodation?           process of ensuring equal access to housing for persons with
                                                 disabilities.
Has the City made efforts to remove              The City enforces the Building Code. Otherwise, the City has not
constraints on housing for persons with          identified any constraints to housing for persons with disabilities
disabilities?                                    over which the City has discretionary control.
Does the City make information available         The City places information relating to requests for reasonable
about requesting reasonable                      accommodations at the main counter at City Hall and on
accommodations?                                  meeting agendas.
                                                Zoning and Land Use
Has the City reviewed all of its zoning laws,    The City has reviewed its land use policies, zoning regulations
policies, and practices for compliance with      (which had a comprehensive update in 2009) and practices
fair housing law?                                and has not identified any area where it is not in compliance
                                                 with fair housing laws.
Are residential parking standards for            The City Parking Ordinance (15.44) has provisions for
persons with disabilities different from other   modification of parking requirements for persons with disabilities.
parking standards? Does the City have a          Otherwise, disabled access standards are those mandated for
policy or program for the reduction of           local enforcement by the State (Title 25, CCR, California Building
parking requirements for special needs           Code, Chapter 11A & B, and Chapter 34 for Historic properties).
housing if a proponent can demonstrate a
reduced parking need?
Does the locality restrict the siting of group   No, not for six or fewer clients. For group homes with more than
homes?                                           six clients (depending on the size of the facility and other
                                                 proposed services), the siting could be a factor in consideration
                                                 of a conditional use permit.
What zones allow group homes other than          Group homes with over six “clients” are considered “assisted
those allowed by State law? Are group            housing” and are permitted with approval of a conditional use
homes over six persons allowed?                  permit in all residential districts (R-1; R-2; R-3) and in the C-1
                                                 commercial district.
Does the City have occupancy standards           Not specifically “occupancy standards”. The issue might be
in the zoning code that apply specifically       considered if there was need to define whether a residence for
to unrelated adults and not to families?         more than six unrelated people was a “group home”, a
                                                 multifamily structure, or some other type of residence other than
                                                 a “single family” residence.
    2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
    City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                 8-77

                                                   TABLE 8-46
                     CONSTRAINTS ON HOUSING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
                                               City of Mt. Shasta
                                                        2014
Does the land use element regulate the         No. The Land Use Element does not require a minimum distance
siting of special housing in relationship to   between two or more special needs housing.
one another?
                                             Permits and Processing
How does the City process a request to         An application is made to the City Building Department. The
retrofit homes for accessibility?              City has adopted the Uniform Building Code. There are no local
                                               amendments of the Code that affect accessibility.
Does the City allow group homes with           The City allows licensed group homes serving six or fewer
fewer than six persons by right in single      residents in all districts that allow single family homes by
family zones?                                  preemption of State requirements; however, this is not explicitly
                                               stated in the zoning code.
Does the City have a set of particular         Facilities serving more than six would fall under the classification
conditions or use restrictions for group       of “Assisted Housing”. Assisted Housing is allowed in all
homes with greater than six persons?           residential districts and in the C-1 commercial zone subject to
                                               approval of a conditional use permit.
What kind of community input does the          No public input is solicited for licensed group homes serving six
City allow for approval of group homes?        or fewer since they are treated as single family dwellings. For
                                               facilities serving more than six (i.e., assisted housing), the
                                               conditional use permit process requires a public hearing by the
                                               Planning Commission and, if the commission’s action is
                                               appealed, a public hearing is held before the City Council.
Does the City have particular conditions for   For a licensed facility serving six or fewer people, the City has no
group homes that will be providing services    particular conditions for services that are permitted by the State
on site?                                       license for the facility. If the facility is an “assisted housing”
                                               proposal serving more than six, the proposal for “services”
                                               would be part of the project description for the use permit
                                               application, and the conditional use permit would specify
                                               conditions of approval.
                                                  Building Codes
Has the City adopted the Uniform Building      Yes. No local amendments affect disabled access.
Code?
Has the City adopted any universal design      The City will encourage the incorporation of universal design in
element into the code?                         new construction.
Does the City provide reasonable               Yes. The City amended its zoning ordinance to include a
accommodation for persons with                 Reasonable Accommodation Ordinance that outlines a
disabilities in the enforcement of building    process of ensuring equal access to housing for persons with
codes and the issuance of building             disabilities.
permits?
                                                    2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
    8-78                                                                          City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

Permit Processing Times Constraints
In Mt. Shasta, most development applications for single family and multifamily
developments take approximately two to three weeks to process as long as no
discretionary approvals are needed. Table 8-47 lists the typical review times for each
type of permit or approval process in the City. If an applicant proposes developments
that require discretionary review, such as a use that requires a CUP, the processing time
can extend to two months regardless of if it is a single family or multifamily project. These
review periods do not present constraints to development as some review is needed to
ensure the maintenance of health and safety standards. The Planning Department
encourages developers to submit applications concurrently where possible to minimize
the total processing time and related cost for a project.
                                                              TABLE 8-47
                                              PLANNING PROCESSING TIMES
                                                          City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                   2014
                     Type of Approval or Permit                             Typical Processing Time
             Ministerial Review                                       2-3 weeks
             Conditional Use Permit (CUP)                             2 months
             Zone Change                                              3 months
             General Plan Amendment                                   3 months
             Site Plan Review                                         45 days
             Parcel Maps                                              3-4 months
             Initial Study                                            6-8 weeks
             Environmental Impact Report                              8 months +
              Source: City of Mt. Shasta Planning Department, 2014
Conditional Use Permit
While approval of a use permit does require more detailed analysis and discretionary
consideration than a use allowed “by right,” this process does not appear to be a
substantial constraint to development of affordable housing. A Conditional Use Permit
for a multifamily housing project entails a public hearing before the City Council, as well
as notification of property owners within 300 feet of the project. An environmental
review pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) (typically a
negative declaration) is conducted and staff reviews the project for compliance with
City and CEQA standards. There are no design standards, architectural review, or other
criteria applied except normal setbacks, building height, lot coverage, density, and
parking requirements. The City Council primarily considers potential environmental
impacts, as well as public improvements (e.g., curb, gutter, sidewalk, and drainage
improvements) that may be necessary as conditions of approval to support the project.
The entire process from submittal to public hearing and project approval is typically
about six to eight weeks.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                     8-79

While on the surface the Conditional Use Permit process as an extra application step
may seem to be a constraint, actual practice has shown that residential projects have
not been denied, nor have projects been altered in a manner which would
substantially affect project feasibility. Since application and processing fees are
moderate, as shown herein, the only real constraint is the approximately two-month
period necessary to process the application before the City Council. This processing
time is minimal and has little to no effect on the cost or feasibility of a multifamily
housing project.
Variance
Where practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships may result from the strict
application of the Zoning Ordinance, the City may grant individuals relief from
provisions of the Ordinance in the form of a variance. Similar to Conditional Use Permits,
the processing of a variance requires an application to be filed with the Planning
Department, payment of a fee, and a public hearing before the Planning Commission.
Further, in deciding whether to grant a variance, the Planning Commission must be
able to make the following findings:
          That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions
           applying to the land, building or use referred to in the application, which
           circumstances or conditions do not apply generally to land, buildings or uses
           in the same district;
          That the granting of the application is necessary for the preservation and
           enjoyment of substantial property rights to the petitioner; and
          That the granting of such application will not, under the circumstances of the
           particular case, materially affect adversely the health or safety of persons
           residing or working in the neighborhood of the property of the applicant and
           will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be materially
           detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in
           such neighborhood.
If the Planning Commission is able to make the findings, as well as ensure that the
variance is, or can be made, harmonious with the general purpose of the Zoning
Ordinance, the variance can be granted. Further, if the Planning Commission denies
the variance request because the findings cannot be made, or the variance is in
conflict with the general purpose of the Zoning Ordinance, the applicant(s) may
appeal the decision to the City Council.
While the variance process provides considerable flexibility from the provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance in that it allows the Planning Commission to consider unusual
circumstances surrounding the use, building, and property, a variance may not be the
appropriate mechanism for accommodating the special needs of persons with
disabilities. This is because the granting of a variance is based upon the unique
characteristics of the property, building, or use and not the unique characteristics of the
                                           2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-80                                                                City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

property owner or prospective occupant. For this reason, the City has adopted a
reasonable accommodations ordinance for persons with disabilities.
On- and Off-Site Improvements
The City has residential development requirements for landscaping, street width,
fences, and walls. The City adopted these standards to ensure that minimum levels of
design and construction quality are maintained and adequate levels of street and
facility improvements are provided. Similar to most cities in this region of California, the
City’s construction standards have been adapted from those of the City of Redding.
These criteria are the basic minimums necessary to protect public health and safety.
The City’s standards are summarized below. The standards included in this summary are
those which typically have a potential to affect housing costs, but are necessary to
provide a minimum level of design and construction quality in the city’s neighborhoods.
Local Streets:
            Right-of-way: 50-56 feet
            Pavement width: 32 feet
Major Streets:
            Right-of-way: 80 feet
            Pavement width: 56 feet
Sidewalks:
            Provided when near schools, park or public area
Sewers:
            Minimum pipe: 8 inches
            Manholes: 500 foot maximum spacing
Storm drains:
            Based on 10-year storm event for 40 acres, over 40 acres 25-year storm event
Water mains and fire hydrants:
            As determined by the Director of Public Works
While all development-related improvements add to the cost of housing, the City’s
adopted standards do not substantially or unnecessarily constrain the development of
affordable housing. The greatest constraints to the development of affordable housing
continue to be the regional economy, the scarcity of jobs, land costs, and the distance
from major markets.
Most of the areas zoned for higher density projects (10-20 units per acre or more)
currently have on- and off-site improvements, such as water and sewer connections,
streets, and sidewalks in place, so there are no additional requirements. For other areas,
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                              8-81

however, the City does require developers to construct improvements and/or pay fees
to help deter the costs of providing infrastructure, public facilities, and services.
Development Impact, Connection, and Processing Fees
Impact fees that apply to new residential single family and multifamily construction are
listed in Table 8-48. The City of Mt. Shasta’s fees for a typical single family dwelling may
amount to $27,054 per unit, and $17,382 per unit for a multifamily dwelling.5 The City also
collects fees from developers to help cover the costs of planning and processing
permits. Processing fees are calculated based on average staff time and material costs
required to process a particular type of case. Planning and processing fees are
summarized in Table 8-49.
School impact fees in the amount of $3.36 per square foot (of habitable living space)
for Siskiyou Union High School District and $0.80 per square foot (of habitable living
space) for Mt. Shasta Union School District are collected for both for single family and
multifamily dwellings. School impact fees typically range from approximately $1,200 to
$5,0406 per unit for single family and multifamily development. These school fees are not
collected by the City, but are paid directly to the Siskiyou Union High School District and
the Mt. Shasta Union School District. These school fees are on par with other cities in the
region.
The City’s impact fees are somewhat higher than other small cities in the region. Siskiyou
County, for example, has fees of approximately $9,363 per single family unit and $6,821
per multifamily unit. Yreka’s impact fees are estimated at $15,530 per unit.
In 2009, the City adopted a Development Impact Fee Ordinance that increased
development impact fees to provide for the orderly development of infrastructure
necessary to accommodate the anticipated growth of the community. The fees
increased the fees at the time by $9,249 per residential unit. The total impact fees per
residential unit as of December 25, 2009 were $31,452. In 2010 and 2011, the City
significantly reduced fees (to the amounts described in this Housing Element) and
suspended the Neighborhood Park fee requirement for residential projects, which
further reduced fees by $4,792.
Depending on the housing unit size and type, the sum of estimated City connection
and impact fees and school district fees will amount to roughly 12 percent of the total
cost of each new housing unit (based on a 1,500 square foot unit).
While these costs will be passed on to the ultimate product consumer, thus impacting
housing prices, these requirements are necessary to provide and maintain necessary
public facilities and services, and maintain the quality of life desired by city residents. It
is recognized that the City’s increase in development fees may constrain the
5 Based on a 3 bedroom unit, costs vary by number of bedrooms and units over four
6 School impact fees are calculated based on a 1,500 square foot unit.
                                            2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-82                                                                 City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

development of affordable housing; however, the City has determined that this
increase is necessary to provide infrastructure and services for future development.
However, as noted in Implementation Measure HO-3.5.1, provisions shall be included for
potential fee reductions or cost reductions for projects where 25 percent or more of the
housing would be dedicated to low- and moderate-income persons when a covenant
is signed assuring continued use by low- and moderate-income households. Also, as
noted in Implementation Measure HO-3.5.4 the City will annually monitor the
development of new single family and multifamily housing by qualified developers and
determine whether the City’s development impact fees create an unjustified constraint
to affordable housing development.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                          8-83

                                                                         TABLE 8-48
                                                     CONNECTION AND IMPACT FEES
                                                                     City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                               2014
                                            Type of Fee                                                              Fee Per Dwelling Unit
                                                                      Connection Fees
Sewer
Single Family Residence                                                                                                      $13,502.00
Duplex, Triplex and Condo with private entrance (per unit)                                                                   $13,502.00
Four plus apartment units
Per unit-one bedroom unit                                                                                                     $8,371.00
Per unit-two bedroom units                                                                                                   $10,127.00
Per unit-three bedroom units                                                                                                 $11,881.00
Water
Single Family Residence                                                                                                      $10,938.00
Duplex, Triplex and Condo with private entrance (per unit)                                                                   $10,938.00
Four plus apartment units
Per unit-one bedroom unit                                                                                                     $6,782.00
Per unit-two bedroom units                                                                                                    $8,203.00
Per unit-three bedroom units                                                                                                  $9,626.00
Drainage fees
Single Family Residence (1.00 residential equivalent)                                                                   $200.00/structure
Duplex (1.25 residential equivalent)                                                                                    $250.00/structure
Triplex (1.50 residential equivalent)                                                                                   $300.00/structure
Fourplex (2.00 residential equivalent)                                                                                  $375.00/structure
Over four units (2.00 residential equivalent + 0.25 for each unit over
                                                                                                        $400.00 + $25.00 for each unit over four
four)
Commercial                                                                                                     $500.00 for first 5,000 sq. ft. of
                                                                                                                            coverage1
School Fees
Siskiyou Union High School District                                                                                Residential-$3.36/ sq. ft.
Mt. Shasta Union School District                                                                                    Residential-$0.80 sq. ft.
Development Impact Fees
Public Works                                                                                                                   $389.75
Police                                                                                                                         $295.75
Fire                                                                                                                           $528.25
Subtotal                                                                                                                      $1,213.75
Total Fees for Single Family Unit1                                                                                           $27,053.75
Total Fees for Multifamily Unit2                                                                                             $17,381.75
 Source: City of Mt. Shasta, April 2014.
 1
   Single family fee is based on a 1,500 sq. ft. home located in the Mt. Shasta Union School District.
 2
   Multifamily fee is based on an 800 square foot one bedroom unit in a fourplex located in the Mt. Shasta Union School District.
                                                                              2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
    8-84                                                                                                         City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                                                             TABLE 8-49
                                                  PLANNING PERMIT FEES
                                                          City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                    2014
                                                                                                  Fee1
                   Initial Study and Checklist                                    Cost plus 5%2,3
                   Negative Declaration                                           Cost plus 5%2,3
                   Environmental Impact Report                                    Cost plus 5%2,3
                   Annexation (5 acres or less)                                   $750
                   Annexation (More than 5 acres)                                 $1,200
                   General Plan Amendment                                         $580
                   Zoning Amendment                                               $425
                   Use Permit                                                     $480
                   Variance                                                       $580
                   Lot Line Adjustment                                            $150
                   Minor Subdivision (4 or less lots)                             $650
                   Major Subdivision (5 or more lots)                             $150/parcel plus $300
                   1
                     Fees adopted per Resolution No. CCR-03-40, Fees apply to both single family and multifamily units.
                   2
                     Additional fee for administration added to each application.
                   3
                     Additional fees for processing applications may include engineering review, attorney review,
                   environmental review with a deposit based on the City’s estimate of such costs plus 10 percent.
                    Source: City of Mt. Shasta, 2014.
Building Code and Enforcement Constraints
The City adopted the 2013 California Building Code for its code requirements and
deviates from it only in the case of requirements for snow load (i.e., the City has a
higher standard for roofing due to local conditions). Because the more stringent
standards apply only in case of snow load, and thus serve to protect public health and
safely, the enforcement of the California Building Code does not pose a significant
constraint to the production or improvement of housing in Mt. Shasta.
All new buildings and alterations to existing buildings in California must meet the
standards contained in Title 24, Part 6, of the California Code of Regulations (Building
Energy Efficiency Standards for Residential and Nonresidential Buildings). These
regulations respond to California's energy crisis and need to reduce energy bills,
increase energy delivery system reliability, and contribute to an improved economic
condition for the state. They were established in 1978 and most recently updated in
2013 (effective date of January 1, 2014). Through the building permit process, local
governments enforce energy efficiency requirements. All new construction must
comply with the standards in effect on the date a building-permit application is made.
In July 2010 the California Building Standards Commission (CBSC) adopted the 2010
California Green Building Standards Code, otherwise known as “CALGreen,” which
became effective January 1, 2011. CALGreen is California’s first green building code
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                         8-85

and a first-in-the-nation State-mandated green building code. It is formally known as
the California Green Building Standards Code, Title 24, Part 11, of the California Code of
Regulations. The City of Mt. Shasta has adopted the most recent version of this code,
which is the 2013 California Green Building Standards Code. CALGreen establishes
mandatory minimum green building standards and includes more stringent optional
provisions known as Tier 1 and Tier 2. Cities and counties, at their discretion, may adopt
Tier 1 or Tier 2 as mandatory, or adopt and enforce other standards that are more
stringent than the CALGreen Code. The City of Mt. Shasta has adopted the most recent
version of CALGreen, but has not adopted the optional tiers. The City is not considering
implementing voluntary Tier 1 or Tier 2 measures, but will focus instead on enforcement
of the mandatory requirements in the code.
CALGreen Requirements for new buildings include:
         Reduce water consumption by 20 percent;
         Divert 50 percent of construction waste from landfills;
         Install low pollutant-emitting materials;
         Separate water meters for nonresidential buildings’ indoor and outdoor water
          use; and
         Moisture-sensing irrigation systems for larger landscape projects;
Mandatory inspections of energy systems (e.g., heat furnace, air conditioner,
mechanical equipment) for nonresidential buildings over 10,000 square feet to ensure
that all are working at their maximum capacity and according to their design
efficiencies.
Code enforcement typically occurs when the building inspector is processing other
permits on the site, or when complaints are filed. The Building Department staff works
with the County Health Department when the complaint appears to be a matter of
both health and safety.
Most complaints come from renters who have complaints against their landlord. The
inspection may reveal building or health code violations that are then written up with a
time line for correction and follow up inspections. If there are no code violations, but
other non-code situations occur, the renter is given a question and answer sheet
prepared by the California State Department of Consumer Affairs, which helps to
define the renters’ rights and options in the matter. Complaints in mobile home parks
are referred to the enforcement section of the Department of Housing and Community
Development.
The City adopted Ordinance #07-02 on October 1, 2007, which establishes a process
for abating public nuisances. The types of nuisances defined within the ordinance vary
from unsightly storage and debris on a parcel, to elements of disrepair of buildings.
                                           2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-86                                                                City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

21. Non-Governmental Constraints
Availability of Financing
The cost of borrowing money to finance the construction of housing or to purchase a
house affects the amount of housing available to all income levels in Mt. Shasta;
fluctuating interest rates can eliminate many potential homebuyers from the housing
market. Higher interest rates increase a homebuyer’s monthly payment and decrease
the range of housing that a household can afford. Lower interest rates result in a lower
cost and lower monthly payments for the homebuyer. When interest rates rise, the
market typically compensates by decreasing housing prices. Similarly, when interest
rates decrease, housing prices begin to rise. There is often a lag in the market, causing
housing prices to remain high when interest rates rise until the market catches up.
Lower-income households often find it most difficult to purchase a home during this
time period.
As shown in Figure 8-2, mortgage rates decreased from 2007, hitting a historic low in
2013 at 3.41 percent for the 30-year fixed-rate mortgage. In 2013 interest rates started to
increase, but still remain historically low as of 2014. The mortgage banking crisis that
began in 2008 affected the availability of construction financing and mortgage loans.
Lenders that had once offered mortgage loans more freely became much more
restrictive after 2008. Lenders required down payments of 20 percent and credit scores
higher than 680 to receive competitive interest rates. These restrictions placed
homeownership out of reach for many, though in 2013 lenders began to ease the
qualifications required for a competitive mortgage rate. As the economy continues its
slow recovery, lenders may continue to make mortgage loans more accessible,
although they may never be as easy to obtain as they were prior to 2008.
                                                                 FIGURE 8-2
                                                              MORTGAGE RATES
                                                          January 2003-January 2013
                  6.5
                    6
                  5.5
                    5
                  4.5                                                                                                        1 yr ARM
                    4
                  3.5                                                                                                        15 yr FRM
                    3                                                                                                        30 yr FRM
                  2.5
                    2
                          Jan-03   Jan-04   Jan-05   Jan-06   Jan-07   Jan-08   Jan-09   Jan-10   Jan-11   Jan-12   Jan-13
       Notes: Mortgage Rates:
       ARM-Adjustable Rate Mortgage
       FRM- Fixed Rate Mortgage
       Source: Freddie Mac Primary Mortgage Market Survey, January 2014
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                                          8-87

Land Costs
The cost of raw, developable land creates a direct impact on the cost for a new home
and is considered a possible constraint. A higher cost of land raises the price of a new
home. Land prices are determined by numerous factors, most important of which are
land availability and permitted development densities. As land becomes less available,
the price of land increases. Developers often seek City approval for the maximum
allowed densities per parcel of land.
According to online listings from Zillow.com in April 2014, 40 vacant residential parcels
were listed for sale in the city. The asking prices for these vacant parcels ranged from
$5,800 to $875,000, or $0.19 to $42.33 per square foot, with an average price of $3.74
per square foot (or $33,669 per acre). The prices of land vary depending on a number
of factors, including size, location, the number of units allowed on the property, and
access to utilities.
Construction and Labor Costs
Factors that affect the cost of building a house include the type of construction,
materials, site conditions, finishing details, amenities, and structural configuration. They
are also influenced by market demands and market-based changes in the cost of
materials.
In 2014, RS Means (a reliable published source for construction industry costs) estimated
that the hard construction costs in the Redding area were $149 per square foot for a
typical two-story multifamily residential construction with wood siding and frames and a
floor area of 22,500. Based on the International Code Council Building Valuation Data,
a one- and two-family residential construction would cost approximately $118 per
square foot. This equals a rough estimate of $149,000 for a 1,000 square foot apartment
unit and $177,000 for a 1,500 square foot single family home.
A reduction in amenities and the quality of building materials can result in lower
construction costs and lower purchase prices. Per-unit costs also decline with the size of
the project, as developers benefit from economies of scale and are able to produce
housing at a lower per-unit cost. High labor or material costs could substantially
increase the cost of construction in Mt. Shasta to a level that impacts the price of new
construction and rehabilitation. Therefore, increased construction costs have the
potential to constrain new housing construction and rehabilitation of existing housing.
                                            2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-88                                                                 City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

         Appendices
APPENDIX 8-A: HOUSING IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS SUMMARY - 2009-2014 HOUSING
ELEMENT
APPENDIX 8-B: VACANT LAND INVENTORY
APPENDIX 8-C: LOCATION OF PARCELS IDENTIFIED IN VACANT LAND INVENTORY
APPENDIX 8-D: FUNDING SOURCES
APPENDIX 8-E: GLOSSARY
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                         8-89

This page is intentionally left blank.
                                       2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-90                                                            City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

F. APPENDIX 8-A: HOUSING IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS SUMMARY - 2009-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                TABLE 8-A
                            HOUSING IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS SUMMARY: 2005 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                             City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                 2009-2014
                    Implementation Program                           Status                  Evaluation                 Recommendation
Policy HO-1.1: Review the General Plan and zoning map on an annual basis to determine the availability of suitable land to
accommodate a variety of housing types. To reduce the impact that availability may have on the cost of vacant single family and
multifamily land, an adequate inventory of these lands shall be available at any time to serve five years of projected growth.
Program 1.1.1: Every year, as part of the annual Housing          Ongoing       The City conducts the Housing          Retain program
Element review, the Planning Commission will review the                         Element review annually, as
City’s vacant land inventory with the objective of ensuring                     required by State law. The City has
the City can accommodate a variety of housing types. If a                       more than enough land to
deficiency is found, steps shall be taken to change the                         accommodate the RHNA.
General Plan and zoning as needed to increase the amount
of available land. The inventory will be available to the
public, especially the development community for their
information and use.
Policy HO-1.2: Maintain compliance with Housing Element law and consistency between the Housing Element and General Plan Element
at all times.
Program1.2.1: Track and review changes in housing law to          Ongoing       The City tracks changes in State       Retain program, but
determine possible need for revisions in related general plan                   law and reviews the General Plan       modify timeframe to
policies and programs.                                                          for consistency upon each Housing      be consistent with 5-
                                                                                Element revision.                      year update of Housing
                                                                                                                       Element.
Policy HO-1.3: Provide adequate opportunities for persons from all economic segments of the community to participate in the
development of the Housing Element.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                                           8-91

                                                                  TABLE 8-A
                            HOUSING IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS SUMMARY: 2005 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                               City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                   2009-2014
                     Implementation Program                            Status                    Evaluation                 Recommendation
Program 1.3.1: In order to increase public input and support        Completed/    The City strives to encourage public     Retain program,
of the City’s housing programs, the City will encourage the         Ongoing       participation in the development         but modify
participation of groups interested in housing in the annual                       and review of each Housing               timeframe to be
Planning Commission review of the Housing Element. This will                      Element Update. The City published       consistent with 5-
occur through public notice and normal contact and                                a notice in the local newspaper,         year update of
solicitation of participation with local agencies and interest                    posted flyers, and sent emails and       Housing Element.
groups.                                                                           made phone calls to local
                                                                                  stakeholders for the recent Housing
                                                                                  Element Community Workshop.
Policy 1.4: The City will encourage housing suitable to a variety of income levels and household sizes and types.
Program 1.4.1: Facilitate the development of new housing in         Completed     The City conducts this review as         Retain program,
order to meet the needs generated by population growth.                           part of the five year update to the      but modify
Review building and development requirements and                                  Housing Element. The City made           timeframe to be
standards, and modify those deemed to be unnecessary or                           several changes to the Zoning            consistent with 5-
excessive and avoid policy changes that would present new                         Ordinance to remove constraints          year update of
unnecessary constraints to meeting housing goals.                                 identified in the 2009-2014 Housing      Housing Element.
                                                                                  Element including zoning for
                                                                                  emergency shelters and transitional
                                                                                  and supportive housing, and
                                                                                  adopting a reasonable
                                                                                  accommodation ordinance.
                                                                                         2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-92                                                                                                              City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                                                                    TABLE 8-A
                            HOUSING IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS SUMMARY: 2005 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                 City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                     2009-2014
                    Implementation Program                               Status                  Evaluation             Recommendation
Program 1.4.2: The City will encourage and support plans that         Not           There were no plans for lower      Retain program.
include extremely low, very low and low income housing in             applicable    income housing during the previous
areas appropriate to the needs and desires of the population                        planning period.
it would house, and at the same time be convenient to
public services including bus service and public transit
programs. The term “encourage and support”, as used
herein, may include:
Give priority to processing of affordable housing projects,
taking them out of submittal sequence if necessary to receive
an early hearing date;
Allow phasing of infrastructure whenever possible at time of
project review; and
Any other action on the part of the City which will help to
keep development costs to a minimum.
Provide density bonus or other concessions to qualifying
projects in accordance with Government Code 65915.
Facilitate the provision of public transportation services to
serve residential areas, including services for people with
handicaps and the installation of bus stops at safe and
convenient locations.
Program 1.4.3: The City will encourage developers of large            Not           There were no large residential    Retain program.
residential subdivisions (i.e. 50 or more units) to provide some      applicable    subdivisions during the previous
affordable housing. At a minimum, this may entail                                   planning period.
encouraging developers to incorporate duplexes, triplexes,
townhouses, or other affordable housing product or
recommend the overlay of the Planned Development (P-D)
zone district to provide development flexibility for clustering,
mixed use and condominium development.
Policy 1.5: Encourage, and take action to secure the rehabilitation of substandard or dilapidated housing units.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                                      8-93

                                                               TABLE 8-A
                            HOUSING IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS SUMMARY: 2005 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                            City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                2009-2014
                     Implementation Program                         Status                   Evaluation                  Recommendation
Program 1.5.1: Continue the rehabilitation of substandard        No funding    No funding was available during          Modify program to
residential units and removal and replacement of dilapidated     available     the planning period to implement         actively pursue
units, using all available State and Federal subsidies and                     this program.                            funding.
programs for the lower income residents for both owner and
rental units.
Policy 1.6: Encourage housing maintenance in order to avoid future need for significant rehabilitation or replacement.
Program 1.6.1: Utilize the code enforcement program as a         Ongoing       The City’s contract Building             Program is
means of keeping track of the condition of the City’s housing                  Inspector has worked to identify         repetitive with
stock. This, along with periodic review by Planning                            homes in need of maintenance.            Program 6.1.3
Commission and City Council of residential areas needing                       Since the City has gone to a
improvements, could identify needed code enforcement                           contract system for the Building
action, necessary improvements to City infrastructure, and/or                  Inspection Services, the City needs
the opportunity to obtain financing for improvements.                          to negotiate this into the contract,
                                                                               or develop a program where City
                                                                               staff conducts the visual
                                                                               inspections.
Policy HO-2.1: Ensure that the City’s development standards and/or processing requirements are not a constraint to the development of
affordable housing.
                                                                                      2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-94                                                                                                           City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                                                                TABLE 8-A
                            HOUSING IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS SUMMARY: 2005 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                             City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                 2009-2014
                    Implementation Program                           Status                   Evaluation             Recommendation
Program HO-2.1.1: Review the effectiveness of the updated         Completed     The Planning Department has, and    Retain.
zoning ordinance and make revisions if it is found the                          continues to, review the processes
ordinance is creating unusual constraints on affordability and                  for development and made
housing availability.                                                           changes to certain ordinances
                                                                                after identifying or experiencing
                                                                                problems with implementation. The
                                                                                adopted zoning code has not
                                                                                shown to have any unusual
                                                                                constraints to building housing for
                                                                                affordable to moderate, or
                                                                                otherwise targeted income groups.
                                                                                This is because many adjustments
                                                                                have been made in the past.
Program HO-2.1.2 Where public health, safety and welfare is       Not           Staff proposed a condominium        Retain program
not compromised, avoid imposing planning and other                completed     conversion ordinance but it was
permitting decisions that would result in the conversion of                     not approved by City Council after
affordable housing to other uses.                                               recommendation by the Planning
                                                                                Commission. Staff suggests the
                                                                                Council re-examine a
                                                                                condominium conversion
                                                                                ordinance in light of this housing
                                                                                policy.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                                    8-95

                                                                 TABLE 8-A
                           HOUSING IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS SUMMARY: 2005 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                              City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                  2009-2014
                     Implementation Program                           Status                  Evaluation                  Recommendation
Program HO-2.1.3: Prior to adoption of any policy or               Ongoing       The City adopted increased sewer        Retain as a policy
regulation which could significantly impede the development                      and water connection fees, and
of housing, the Planning Commission and City Council will                        subsequently adopted
consider the adverse effects of the policy or regulation on the                  development impact fees in 2010.
City’s ability to provide housing, and minimize adverse effects                  The City completed the
to the degree feasible.                                                          Development Impact Fee Study as
                                                                                 required by State law to support
                                                                                 the new fees, and lawfully adopted
                                                                                 development impact fees. The fees
                                                                                 for “neighborhood parks” have
                                                                                 been suspended since the fee was
                                                                                 considered impedance to the
                                                                                 development of housing. In the
                                                                                 ordinance, there are sections that
                                                                                 allow for adjustments to fees if fees
                                                                                 are found to be unrelated to the
                                                                                 impact of the project.
                                                                                 Subsequently the remaining impact
                                                                                 fees were reduced by 75 percent.
Program HO-2.1.4: With all due consideration to financial          Ongoing       There were no annexations or out        Retain as a policy
constraints, and consistent with other General Plan policies,                    of area service connections
encourage, participate and cooperate in extension of City                        processed in 2013. The last
services to currently un-served areas, including direct                          annexation occurred in 2010
financial participation when deemed appropriate by the City
Council.
                                                                                       2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-96                                                                                                            City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                                                                TABLE 8-A
                            HOUSING IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS SUMMARY: 2005 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                             City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                 2009-2014
                    Implementation Program                           Status                   Evaluation              Recommendation
Program HO-2.1.5: The City will not place any condition of        Not           This is standard practice since the  Retain as a policy
approval that lowers the proposed density of a residential        applicable    law was passed.
project if the project otherwise conforms to the general plan,    during
zoning and/or development policies in effect, unless the          planning
findings required by Government Code Section 65589.5 are          period
made.
Program HO-2.1.6: The City Zoning Ordinance allows                Ongoing       This is ongoing, and amendments      Retain as a policy
residential uses within the CBD on second floors and above in                   to the Zoning Code have made it
commercial structures. Encouragement of this concept will                       easier to locate mixed use
continue as a means to provide additional affordable and                        developments in commercial
convenient housing.                                                             areas. The Planning Commission
                                                                                approved a mixed use building in
                                                                                2011 consistent with this policy.
Goal HO-3: Encourage site development for low and moderate income housing.
Policy HO-3.1: Pursue public and private resources available to promote diverse housing opportunities, and particularly to assist in the
creation and retention of affordable housing for extremely low, very low, low and moderate income levels.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                                         8-97

                                                                 TABLE 8-A
                           HOUSING IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS SUMMARY: 2005 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                              City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                  2009-2014
                     Implementation Program                           Status                    Evaluation                  Recommendation
Program HO-3.1.1: Encouragement and Assistance. The City           Ongoing       A substantial housing project             Retain
will assist private and non-profit organizations in the                          application was received by the
development of extremely low-, very low-, low- and                               City in 2013 and is being processed.
moderate-income housing where such development does                              The Mountain Townhomes project
not conflict with other policies and provisions of the General                   proposes construction of a new 25-
Plan and City ordinances. Assistance will include:                               unit affordable multifamily
maintenance of relationships with funding and facilitating                       residential development within the
agencies and organizations; site identification; and local,                      downtown area. The project is
state, federal permit assistance.                                                currently undergoing CEQA
                                                                                 analysis. Construction is anticipated
                                                                                 once all permits and certifications
                                                                                 for the project have been secured.
                                                                                 In 2011, the City applied for funding
                                                                                 under the HOME program for
                                                                                 Tennant Based Rental Assistance
                                                                                 Program but did not get the
                                                                                 funding.
Program HO-3.1.2: Incentives. The City Council will review         Ongoing       Staff would recommend density             Retain
permit fees, connection fees and/or improvement                                  bonuses when applicable. The City
requirements for projects involving a substantial percentage                     uses all available fee adjustments
of units (minimum of 25%) for ―very low or ―other lower                          for affordable housing that the
income households. Fee threshold will be consistent with the                     State has legislated where
State density bonus law. A 25 percent density bonus may be                       appropriate. City Council also
granted to qualifying projects, pursuant to Government Code                      significantly reduced the
Section 65915, as noted in City of Mt. Shasta Ordinance No.                      development impact fees, but in
CCO-09-02, Section 2.13 (adopted on April 27, 2009, to be                        many cases the impact fees would
codified in Chapter 18 of the Municipal Code).                                   be waived or reduced in certain
                                                                                 cases where housing was intended
                                                                                 for targeted income groups.
                                                                                         2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-98                                                                                                              City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                                                                TABLE 8-A
                            HOUSING IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS SUMMARY: 2005 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                             City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                 2009-2014
                     Implementation Program                          Status                       Evaluation               Recommendation
Program HO-3.1.3: The City shall encourage, coordinate with       Incomplete    Funding for these brochures has           Retain
and support agencies and organizations operating rental                         been sought and has not been
and mortgage subsidy and self-help housing programs. The                        successfully secured. In the past the
City will refer persons interested in developing low-cost                       City linked to a community
housing to appropriate government and non-profit                                resource website on the County of
organizations for assistance. Those provisions of the City’s                    Siskiyou website. Unfortunately, the
ordinance which support affordable housing (e.g., second                        Siskiyou County page was
dwellings, group housing, density bonuses), will be made                        updated, and the link has been
available to the public in the form of “an affordable housing                   eliminated. Staff is actively seeking
information brochure”. This brochure will include information                   ways to re-establish that complete
from the Housing Needs Study completed for the City in July                     list. Staff will re-establish the list or
2005.                                                                           consider this as a budget item in
                                                                                2014. As mentioned above, in 2011,
                                                                                the City applied for funding with
                                                                                the help Great Northern Corp for
                                                                                Tennant Based Rental Assistance
                                                                                Program, but was not chosen for
                                                                                the funding.
Program HO-3.1.4: To support the development of housing           Ongoing       In 2011, the City applied for funding     Retain
affordable to extremely low-income households, the City shall                   under the HOME program for
continue to seek and pursue state and federal funds                             Tennant Based Rental Assistance
annually, or as funding becomes available; and grant priority                   Program but did not get the
to projects that include units affordable to extremely low-                     funding.
income households.
Policy HO-4: Minimize the adverse effects of new mitigation fees, sewer fees and drainage fees on the provision of housing for low- and
moderate-income persons.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                                       8-99

                                                                 TABLE 8-A
                           HOUSING IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS SUMMARY: 2005 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                              City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                  2009-2014
                    Implementation Program                            Status                    Evaluation                  Recommendation
Program HO-4.1.1: At the time of adoption of any new               Completed/    The City adopted development              Retain
mitigation fees, the City shall consider the housing needs of      Ongoing       impact fees in 2009, but
low- and moderate-income households. Provisions shall be                         significantly reduced those fees in
included for potential fee reductions or other cost reductions                   2010 and 2011. The fees were
for projects where 25 percent or more of the housing would                       adopted with the required
be dedicated to low- and moderate-income persons when a                          supporting fee study. The housing
covenant is signed assuring continued use by low- and                            element has provisions to alleviate
moderate-income households.                                                      the impacts of fees on affordable
                                                                                 housing projects. The language in
                                                                                 the impact fee ordinance provides
                                                                                 language as specified. (See
                                                                                 Sections 3.55.080 (fees can be
                                                                                 negotiated), 3.55.110 (A-D)
                                                                                 (applicants can petition for
                                                                                 modification if certain conditions
                                                                                 exist), Section 3.55.120 (through
                                                                                 Development Agreements)).
Program HO-4.1.2: The City will continue to review its             Ongoing       Staff is currently reviewing its          Retain
planning, permitting and environmental review programs to                        application process to identify
identify potential constraints to housing development and                        potential constraints to housing
means by which those constraints may be reduced.                                 development and means by which
                                                                                 potential constraints may be
                                                                                 reduced. In 2010, certain
                                                                                 modifications were made to the
                                                                                 subdivision ordinance.
Program HO- 4.1.3: Pursuant to Government Code § 65589.7,          Incomplete    There has been no action on this.         Retain
the City will develop specific procedures to grant priority                      Staff recommends that the City
sewer and water service to those residential developments                        have as a goal to complete this in
that include units affordable to lower income households.                        2014.
                                                                                         2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-100                                                                                                             City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                                                                TABLE 8-A
                            HOUSING IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS SUMMARY: 2005 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                             City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                  2009-2014
                    Implementation Program                             Status                   Evaluation                Recommendation
Program HO-4.1.4: The City will monitor the development of         Not            The City has not had any activity to   Retain
new single family and multifamily housing by qualified             applicable     ascertain this issue. However, the
developers and determine whether the City’s development            during         impact fees for neighborhood
impact fees and conditional use permit requirements create         reporting      parks were suspended, and the
an unjustified constraint to affordable housing development.       period         remaining impact fees were
                                                                                  reduced by 75%. Please note that
                                                                                  this State law applies to
                                                                                  “affordable” as defined by the
                                                                                  State, and not to “above
                                                                                  moderate” or “High Income”
                                                                                  projects. The only permits in the city
                                                                                  during the period were for above
                                                                                  moderate housing. The City does
                                                                                  not require a conditional use
                                                                                  permit for housing.
Policy HO-5.1: Rehabilitate, or seek funding to allow the rehabilitation of an average of three housing units per year during the planning
period.
Program HO-5.1.1: The City will actively apply for CDBG            Ongoing        The City is conducting a citywide      Retain
rehabilitation grants during the planning period.                                 income survey in an effort to qualify
                                                                                  for CDBG funds.
Program 5.1.2: The City will, as such information becomes          Ongoing        The City continually provides that     Retain
available, notify or cooperate in notification of owners of                       information, however responses are
homes in need of rehabilitation or weatherization about                           lacking.
programs which could help meet rehabilitation needs.
Policy HO-6: Conserve existing housing wherever possible.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                                        8-101

                                                                   TABLE 8-A
                            HOUSING IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS SUMMARY: 2005 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                    2009-2014
                     Implementation Program                             Status                    Evaluation                  Recommendation
Program HO-6.1.1: Prior to allowing the conversion of rental         Incomplete    Staff suggests that the Council           Retain as a policy
units for other purposes, the City shall consider the impact of                    revisit the addition of a
the conversion on the availability of rental units and may                         Condominium Conversion
deny the conversion if the City makes a finding that the                           Ordinance that takes into account
conversion will result in a substantial depletion of the                           considering factors prior to
available rental housing stock.                                                    approval, such as existing rental
                                                                                   vacancy rates to be consistent with
                                                                                   this policy.
Program HO-6.1.2: In rezoning, permit or other discretionary         Ongoing       Ongoing. However, no                      Retain as policy
decisions, the City shall consider the potential effects of the                    opportunities were presented
decision on affordable housing, particularly for low and                           during the planning period.
moderate-income households
Program 6.1.3: Periodically during the planning period, the          Ongoing       The City’s contract Building              Retain as a
City will conduct visual inspections of housing conditions to                      Inspector has worked to identify          program to
identify homes in need of maintenance. The Building                                homes in need of maintenance.             consider allocating
Department will notify the owners of the need and make                             Since the City has gone to a              staff resources
referrals for assistance as appropriate.                                           contract system for the Building
                                                                                   Inspection Services, the City needs
                                                                                   to negotiate this into the contract,
                                                                                   or develop a program where City
                                                                                   staff conducts the visual
                                                                                   inspections.
Program HO-6.1.4: The City will continue to offer free               Ongoing       The Building Department is                Modify
guidance and technical assistance through the Building                             accessible for these inquiries.
Department to homeowners who wish to repair and improve
existing housing. The City will encourage, and participate in
as appropriate, the activities of other agencies promoting
homeowner maintenance and improvement self-help skills.
                                                                                           2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-102                                                                                                               City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                                                                     TABLE 8-A
                            HOUSING IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS SUMMARY: 2005 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                  City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                      2009-2014
                      Implementation Program                              Status                   Evaluation               Recommendation
Program HO 6.1.5: The City will maintain a list of non-profit          Ongoing       Staff has a small list of             Retain
organizations interested in the retention and construction of                        organizations, such as CHIP, for
affordable housing. The City will respond to the property                            these reasons
owner on any Federal or State notices including Notice of
Intent or Opt-Out Notices on local projects. The City will meet
with and assist organizations desiring to maintain affordable
housing in the City.
Program HO-6.1.6: The City will assist in the search for gap           Ongoing       There were no opportunities for this. Retain
funding for at risk projects that may decide to pay off existing                     The City has worked on a number
assisted loans during the course of the planning period,                             of potential opportunities to secure
including CDBG, California Housing Finance Agency, HCD,                              gap funding to rehabilitate at risk
etc.                                                                                 projects including Alta Vista Manor
                                                                                     over the planning period, though
                                                                                     the funding has been denied on
                                                                                     numerous efforts. Staff also worked
                                                                                     with a law firm twice regarding the
                                                                                     same location, but these
                                                                                     applications did not require gap
                                                                                     funding. Again, the funding was
                                                                                     denied.
Program HO-6.1.7: The City will develop and maintain a                 Completed     The City maintains this list and has  Retain
current list of entities qualified and interested in participating                   updated this list as part of the 2014
in the offer of Opportunity to Purchase and Right of First                           Housing Element Update.
Refusal (per Government Code 65863.11).
Policy HO-7.1: Over the planning period (2009-2014), to meet the City’s share of regional housing needs, the City will facilitate the
development of a minimum of 58 dwelling units according to the following income levels: 7 units for extremely low income; 7 units for
very low income; 10 units for low income; 9 units for moderate income; and 25 units for above moderate income.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                                       8-103

                                                                  TABLE 8-A
                            HOUSING IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS SUMMARY: 2005 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                               City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                   2009-2014
                      Implementation Program                           Status                    Evaluation                 Recommendation
Program HO-7.1.1: Subject to availability of funding, the City      Ongoing       Funding was secured in 2013 to           Retain
will work with developers of housing located outside existing                     complete necessary improvements
sewer and/or water service areas, or in areas where existing                      to the City Sewer Interceptor and
systems are at or near capacity, to develop or improve                            the Wastewater Treatment Plant.
essential utility systems to facilitate housing development. City                 Design and CEQA review of this
assistance may involve direct participation in improvements                       project was initiated in 2013.
or cooperation in the formation of assessment districts or
other means of financing necessary improvements.
Program HO-7.1.2: The City will continue to develop and             Ongoing       The City adopted a Sewer System          Retain as policy
implement plans to expand domestic water and sewage                               Management plan in November
collection and treatment systems such that planned                                2010. In addition, the City adopted
development over the General Plan 20-year timeframe can                           a Master Water Plan that includes
be accommodated.                                                                  information such as costs and
                                                                                  locations of storage and extensions
                                                                                  to Springhill Road area, as well as
                                                                                  to enhance the efficiency of the
                                                                                  existing water system. Funding was
                                                                                  secured in 2013 to complete
                                                                                  necessary improvements to the
                                                                                  City Sewer Interceptor and the
                                                                                  Wastewater Treatment Plant.
                                                                                  Design and CEQA review of this
                                                                                  project was initiated in 2013.
Policy HO-8.1: Encourage programs that will address the needs for housing and programs for senior citizens, large families, disabled
persons, single-parent families, extremely low- income and the homeless.
                                                                                         2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-104                                                                                                             City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                                                                TABLE 8-A
                            HOUSING IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS SUMMARY: 2005 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                             City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                 2009-2014
                     Implementation Program                          Status                   Evaluation                Recommendation
Program HO-8.1.1: The City will partner with area social          Ongoing       The City partners with Jefferson       Retain
services agencies and non-profit organizations to assess the                    Economic Development Institute,
need for supportive housing types and identify funding                          Great Northern Corporation and
sources to develop needed services in the City.                                 CDBG on an ongoing basis. No
                                                                                action taken on this in 2011 except
                                                                                for the application with Great
                                                                                Northern Corp for Tennant based
                                                                                Rental Assistance.
Program HO-8.1.2: Work closely with qualified developers of       Continually   This program is inconsistent with the  Delete
new multifamily housing that includes affordable four- and                      identified needs in the existing
five-bedroom units. The City will offer expedited review                        needs assessment. The City has
process and technical assistance for projects that include                      smaller household sizes.
four- and five-bedroom units.
Program HO-8.1.3: Support the development of low-cost child       No action     No action taken in 2011 regarding      Retain
care facilities and job training programs in the City to          during        job training programs. Locating
encourage female householders to enter the job market.            planning      child care establishments in
Meet with the child care council on an annual basis to review     period        residential areas is allowed by right
possible childcare needs of the community.                                      (Zoning) so long as State licensing
                                                                                procedures are followed.
Program HO-8.1.4: Review building codes regarding door            Completed     The City uses the Uniform Building     Delete. Program
sizing, fixture placement and other provisions related to                       Code for those standards, and also     completed.
handicapped access, and prepare an ordinance that would                         adopted a reasonable
establish standards to promote improved handicapped                             accommodation policy in the
access for all multifamily housing, suggesting one handicap                     Zoning Code in 2010. The current
unit for every four units constructed.                                          law requires at least one unit in four
                                                                                be adaptable to ADA standards.
Program HO-8.1.5: Support agencies and organizations              Ongoing       One referral was made in 2012.         Retain
serving the homeless by annually updating referral
information on local homeless agencies.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                                      8-105

                                                                     TABLE 8-A
                           HOUSING IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS SUMMARY: 2005 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                  City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                      2009-2014
                    Implementation Program                                Status                     Evaluation                  Recommendation
Program HO-8.1.6: Support designated regulatory agencies in            Not           No housing discrimination reported.        Retain
the prevention and correction of any reported discrimination           applicable
in housing.
Program HO-8.1.7: Building permit processing and inspections           Ongoing       This is standard procedure for the         Retain as policy
for individuals with disabilities shall be given a high priority.                    City. We had one opportunity in
                                                                                     2011 for a carport that encroached
                                                                                     the set-back for a person who has
                                                                                     severe sight problems.
Program HO-8.1.8: Actively enforce handicapped-related                 Ongoing       By law, this is implemented.               Retain as policy
provisions as specified in the Uniform Building Code, Title 24 of
the California Code of Regulations, the Disabled Americans
Act, and the Municipal Code.
Program HO-8.1.9: Develop a “reasonable Accommodation                  Completed     The City adopted a Reasonable              Delete. Program
Policy to be adopted by City Council which would direct the                          Accommodation Ordinance in                 completed.
staff on ways to assist handicapped individuals in matters                           2010.
affecting City action and ordinance administration. This
would include: current practices of assisting handicapped
persons through the permit and zoning process;
accommodations at public meetings; and possible
modifications to the zoning ordinance such as giving
administrative approval in circumstances where a minor
variance may be needed to accommodate a handicapped
individual. After adoption by the City Council, this policy
should be published in a manner that is readily available to
the public, including the City website.
                                                                                              2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-106                                                                                                                  City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                                                                   TABLE 8-A
                            HOUSING IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS SUMMARY: 2005 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                    2009-2014
                     Implementation Program                             Status                   Evaluation              Recommendation
Program HO-8.1.10: The City will amend the Zoning                    Completed.    The City amended the Zoning          Delete. Program
Ordinance to clarify the definition of single-room occupancy                       Ordinance in 2010 to implement       completed.
units. The amendment will also describe specific                                   this program for SROs.
development standards for these units. Further, the City will
amend the Zoning Ordinance to allow ―small (6 or less)
single-room occupancy units by right in the High-Density
Residential (R-3) and ―large (6 or more) single-room
occupancy units by permit in the R-3 and C-2 zone districts.
Policy HO-9.1: Support activities of existing agencies and organizations in meeting the needs of the homeless.
Program HO-9.1.1: When requested, assist appropriate public          Ongoing       The City amended the zoning code     Retain
and/or non-profit entities to develop a shelter for homeless                       in 2010 for homeless and
persons in the City.                                                               transitional housing / shelter
                                                                                   standards.
Program HO-9.1.2a: Pursuant to SB2, the City will amend the          Completed     The City amended the Zoning          Delete. Program
Zoning Ordinance to include separate definitions of                                Ordinance in 2010 to comply with     completed.
―supportive housing and ―transitional housing‖. Further, the                       State law requirements for
City will amend the Zoning Ordinance to list supportive and                        transitional and supportive housing.
transitional housing as permitted uses within residential zoning
districts, subject only to those regulations that apply to other
residential dwelling of the same type in the same zoning.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                                       8-107

                                                                   TABLE 8-A
                            HOUSING IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS SUMMARY: 2005 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                    2009-2014
                     Implementation Program                             Status                   Evaluation                  Recommendation
Program HO-9.1.2b: To comply with SB-2, the City will amend          Complete      The City amended the Zoning              Replace with
the Zoning Ordinance to permit Emergency Shelters by right                         Ordinance in 2010 to comply with         program to modify
in the High Density Residential (R-3) zone without a                               State law requirements for               location restriction
conditional use permit (CUP) or other discretionary permits.                       emergency shelters, which are            for emergency
The R-3 zone district has sufficient capacity with                                 permitted by right in the R-3 and        shelters, which is
approximately 53 acres of vacant land currently zoned R-3,                         commercial zones.                        inconsistent with
with adjacent sewer and water infrastructure; and adjacent                                                                  State law.
to public transit stops (Pine Street, E. Ivy and Alma) and public
services.
Program 9.1.3: During the review of discretionary permits for        Not           No applications have been                Delete program.
group housing, homeless shelters, transitional housing and           applicable    submitted. The municipal code was
other special-needs groups, when such housing is not                 during        amended in 2010 with permitting
otherwise allowed in specific zoning districts by right, the City    planning      process standards consistent with
shall keep standards as minimal as possible as a means to            period        this policy.
maintain affordability to the extent practical without
significantly impacting nearby neighborhoods.
Policy HO-10.1: Promote the use of energy conservation measures in all housing, including very low, low and moderate income housing,
through the use of public and private weatherization programs
Program HO-10.1.1: Facilitate the weatherization of an               Ongoing       Great Northern Corporation               Merge with
average of ten homes per year during the planning period by                        administers this program and the         Program HO-10.1.2
providing information on currently available weatherization                        City refers customers to Great
and energy conservation programs to residents of the City.                         Northern Corporation.
The City will have information available for the public at the
front counter at City Hall and will distribute related
information when appropriate, including distribution through
the mail.
                                                                                          2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-108                                                                                                              City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                                                                  TABLE 8-A
                            HOUSING IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS SUMMARY: 2005 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                               City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                   2009-2014
                     Implementation Program                            Status                       Evaluation               Recommendation
Program HO-10.1.2: The City will support PP&L and Great             Ongoing          Referrals are made to PP&L and         Merge with
Northern Corporation’s energy audit and weatherization                               Great Northern Corporation by          Program HO-10.1.1
programs, and will provide referrals and participate in                              staff. Staff will include reference
informing households that would potentially benefit from                             information for these two programs
these programs.                                                                      on the City’s website in 2014. No
                                                                                     applications in 2011. The City’s
                                                                                     website has information regarding
                                                                                     rehab and energy assistance.
Program HO-10.1:3: Continue to enforce State requirements,          Ongoing          Have applied these standards in all    Retain
including Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, for                        projects. This is an ongoing project.
energy conservation in new residential projects and
encourage residential developers to employ additional
energy conservation measures for the location of buildings,
landscaping and solar access through development
standards contained in the Zoning Ordinance, Building Code,
and Specific Plans, as appropriate.
Policy HO-11.1: Ensure that all persons, regardless of race, sex, cultural origin, age, marital status, or physical handicaps, are provided
equal access to housing within the community without discrimination.
Program HO-11.1.1: City staff will refer all complaints             Not              City currently provides this           Retain
regarding housing discrimination of any kind to the State           applicable       information to the State
Department of Fair Employment and Housing. The City will            during           Department of Fair Employment
monitor such complaints by checking with the affected               reporting        and Housing as complaints arise.
agency and the complainant, and consider the need for               period           No known complaints during
further action if a trend develops, or the complaint is not                          reporting period.
resolved.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                                           8-109

                                                                   TABLE 8-A
                           HOUSING IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS SUMMARY: 2005 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                City of Mt. Shasta
                                                                    2009-2014
                    Implementation Program                              Status                   Evaluation                  Recommendation
Program HO-11.1.2: The City will provide information to the          Ongoing       City currently provides this             Retain
public at social service centers, the senior center, City Hall,                    information at City Hall, plus on the
the library, housing projects participating in HUD Section 8                       City website.
Programs, and other semi-public places. The information will
provide locations and phone numbers of agencies to
contact for assistance. This outreach effort will be made to
include groups likely to experience discrimination in housing
including minority, elderly, handicapped, and lower-income
families.
                                                                                         2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-110                                                                                                              City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

G. APPENDIX 8-B: VACANT LAND INVENTORY
Appendix 8-B consists of the City of Mt. Shasta’s vacant land inventory for the Housing
Element. Refer to Appendix 8-C for an illustration of the location of these sites.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                    8-111

                                                     TABLE 8-B
                           VACANT PARCELS WITH GENERAL PLAN AND ZONING USE DESIGNATIONS
                                                      Mt. Shasta
                                                         2014
  Assessor Parcel    Genera                          Realistic Potential
                                 Zone Max Units/Acre                     Residential Unit Yield   Sewer       Water     Acres
     Number           l Plan                                Units
 Residential Units Permitted By Right
 057-064-030         HDR       R-1          6                4.5                    6              Yes      Yes           1.3
 057-071-010         HDR       R-1          6                4.5                    2              Yes      Yes           0.5
 057-092-050         HDR       R-1          6                4.5                    5              Yes      Yes          1.22
 057-092-060         HDR       R-1          6                4.5                    0              Yes      No           0.04
 057-093-130         HDR       R-1          6                4.5                    1              Yes      Yes          0.17
 057-101-150         HDR       R-1          6                4.5                    1              Yes      Yes          0.14
 057-122-030         HDR       R-1          6                4.5                    1              Yes      Yes          0.22
 057-122-230         HDR       R-1          6                4.5                    3              Yes      No           0.63
 057-122-310         HDR       R-1          6                4.5                    1              Yes      Yes          0.22
 057-122-330         HDR       R-1          6                4.5                    1              Yes      Yes          0.17
 057-123-070         HDR       R-1          6                4.5                    1              Yes      Yes          0.26
 057-123-190         HDR       R-1          6                4.5                    1              Yes      Yes          0.28
 057-123-240         HDR       R-1          6                4.5                    1              Yes      Yes          0.17
 057-123-260         HDR       R-1          6                4.5                    1              Yes      Yes          0.18
 057-123-270         HDR       R-1          6                4.5                    1              Yes      Yes          0.18
 057-142-090         HDR       R-1          6                4.5                    2              Yes      Yes          0.53
 057-142-170         LDR       R-1          6                4.5                    1              Yes      Yes          0.26
 057-142-180         LDR       R-1          6                4.5                    1              Yes      Yes          0.31
 057-143-180         LDR       R-1          6                4.5                    0              Yes      Yes          0.07
 057-151-090         LDR       R-1          6                4.5                    1              Yes      Yes          0.26
 057-151-100         LDR       R-1          6                4.5                    1              Yes      Yes          0.26
                                                                         2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-112                                                                                             City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                                                         TABLE 8-B
                            VACANT PARCELS WITH GENERAL PLAN AND ZONING USE DESIGNATIONS
                                                          Mt. Shasta
                                                             2014
  Assessor Parcel     Genera                             Realistic Potential
                                  Zone    Max Units/Acre                     Residential Unit Yield Sewer  Water Acres
      Number           l Plan                                   Units
 057-153-130          HDR       R-1               6              4.5                  3              Yes  Yes     0.72
 057-161-050          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                  0              Yes  Yes     0.05
 057-161-090          HDR       R-1               6              4.5                  1              Yes  Yes     0.14
 057-161-100          HDR       R-1               6              4.5                  1              Yes  Yes     0.14
 057-161-120          HDR       R-1               6              4.5                  4              No   No      0.93
 057-201-020          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                  1              Yes  Yes     0.23
 057-241-120          HDR       R-1               6              4.5                  1              Yes  Yes     0.19
 057-241-130          HDR       R-1               6              4.5                  6              No   No      1.31
 057-281-040          HDR       R-1               6              4.5                  1              Yes  Yes     0.14
 057-281-060          HDR       R-1               6              4.5                  1              Yes  Yes     0.15
 057-282-160          HDR       R-1               6              4.5                  1              Yes  Yes     0.21
 057-283-020          HDR       R-1               6              4.5                  1              Yes  Yes     0.12
 057-283-060          HDR       R-1               6              4.5                  0              Yes  No      0.01
 057-291-030          HDR       R-1               6              4.5                  0              Yes  Yes     0.08
 057-291-100          HDR       R-1               6              4.5                  1              Yes  Yes     0.18
 057-291-120          HDR       R-1               6              4.5                  0              Yes  Yes     0.09
 057-291-130          HDR       R-1               6              4.5                  0              Yes  Yes     0.09
 057-291-170          HDR       R-1               6              4.5                  0              Yes  Yes     0.09
 057-301-100          HDR       R-1               6              4.5                  0              Yes  Yes     0.05
 057-301-110          HDR       R-1               6              4.5                  1              No   Yes     0.17
 057-301-120          HDR       R-1               6              4.5                  1              No   Yes     0.17
 057-302-100          HDR       R-1               6              4.5                  0              Yes  Yes     0.05
 057-311-130          HDR       R-1               6              4.5                  0              Yes  Yes     0.06
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                     8-113

                                                  TABLE 8-B
                        VACANT PARCELS WITH GENERAL PLAN AND ZONING USE DESIGNATIONS
                                                   Mt. Shasta
                                                      2014
  Assessor Parcel Genera                          Realistic Potential
                             Zone  Max Units/Acre                     Residential Unit Yield   Sewer       Water     Acres
     Number        l Plan                                Units
 057-332-030      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    2              Yes      Yes          0.42
 057-335-050      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    0              Yes      Yes          0.08
 057-335-070      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    1              No       Yes          0.12
 057-335-100      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    1              Yes      No           0.14
 057-342-010      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    1              No       No           0.18
 057-342-100      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    0              Yes      Yes          0.01
 057-351-100      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    9              Yes      Yes            2
 057-362-040      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    1              No       Yes          0.29
 057-362-080      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    1              Yes      Yes          0.29
 057-362-120      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    0              Yes      Yes          0.09
 057-362-140      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    0            Yes        Yes          0.09
 057-362-160      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    0            Yes        No           0.11
 057-364-080      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    0            Yes        Yes          0.06
 057-372-140      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    1            Yes        Yes          0.16
 057-392-100      HDR      R-1           6                4.5                    1            Yes        No           0.18
 057-392-110      HDR      R-1           6                4.5                    1            Yes        No           0.18
 057-392-120      HDR      R-1           6                4.5                    1            Yes        No           0.18
 057-392-130      HDR      R-1          20                4.5                    1            Yes        Yes          0.23
 057-411-030      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    1            Yes        Yes          0.15
 057-422-040      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    0            Yes        Yes          0.01
 057-423-170      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    0            Yes        No           0.03
                                                                      2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-114                                                                                          City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                                                         TABLE 8-B
                            VACANT PARCELS WITH GENERAL PLAN AND ZONING USE DESIGNATIONS
                                                          Mt. Shasta
                                                             2014
  Assessor Parcel     Genera                             Realistic Potential
                                  Zone    Max Units/Acre                     Residential Unit Yield Sewer  Water Acres
      Number           l Plan                                   Units
 057-431-020          HDR       R-1               6              4.5                   1            Yes   Yes     0.18
 057-432-020          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   1            Yes   Yes     0.13
 057-432-030          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   1            Yes   Yes     0.13
 057-433-020          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   1            Yes   Yes     0.14
 057-443-060          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   1            Yes   Yes     0.19
 057-463-070          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   1            Yes   Yes     0.16
 057-465-080          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   0            Yes   Yes     0.11
 057-465-090          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   0            Yes   Yes     0.11
 057-472-020          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   1            No    Yes      0.2
 057-481-110          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   1            Yes   Yes     0.22
 057-492-100          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   1            Yes   Yes     0.22
 057-511-020          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   6            Yes   Yes     1.29
 057-511-120          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   1            Yes   Yes     0.17
 057-511-200          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   2            No    Yes     0.41
 057-511-540          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   2            Yes   Yes     0.43
 057-511-570          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   2            Yes   Yes     0.35
 057-512-080          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   1            No    Yes     0.27
 057-512-170          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   1            Yes   Yes     0.29
 057-512-260          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   1            Yes   Yes     0.15
 057-512-280          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   2            Yes   Yes     0.55
 057-513-200          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   3            Yes   Yes     0.62
 057-513-220          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   1            No    No      0.17
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                     8-115

                                                  TABLE 8-B
                        VACANT PARCELS WITH GENERAL PLAN AND ZONING USE DESIGNATIONS
                                                   Mt. Shasta
                                                      2014
  Assessor Parcel Genera                          Realistic Potential
                             Zone  Max Units/Acre                     Residential Unit Yield   Sewer       Water     Acres
     Number        l Plan                                Units
 057-513-580      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    2            Yes        Yes          0.41
 057-513-590      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    2            No         No           0.41
 057-513-600      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    2            Yes        Yes          0.41
 057-513-610      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    2            Yes        No           0.41
 057-513-620      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    6            Yes        Yes          1.41
 057-541-260      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    1            Yes        No           0.27
 057-551-720      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    1            Yes        No           0.13
 057-562-040      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                   23            No         No           5.15
 057-562-050      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                   18            No         No           4.02
 057-562-060      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                   60            No         No          13.43
 057-562-100      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    5            No         No           1.11
 057-562-110      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                   18            No         No           3.91
 057-562-120      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    9            No         No           1.96
 057-562-130      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    5            No         No           1.02
 057-562-140      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                   32            No         No            7.1
 057-562-150      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    5            No         No           1.11
 057-562-160      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                   20            No         No           4.47
 057-562-200      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    1            No         No           0.17
 057-562-210      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                   19            No         No           4.17
 057-562-240      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                   11            No         Yes          2.55
 057-562-250      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                   12            No         No           2.62
                                                                      2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-116                                                                                          City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                                                         TABLE 8-B
                            VACANT PARCELS WITH GENERAL PLAN AND ZONING USE DESIGNATIONS
                                                          Mt. Shasta
                                                             2014
  Assessor Parcel     Genera                             Realistic Potential
                                  Zone    Max Units/Acre                     Residential Unit Yield Sewer  Water Acres
      Number           l Plan                                   Units
 057-562-260          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                  12            No    No      2.69
 057-562-270          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                  11            No    No      2.52
 057-562-280          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                  19            No    No      4.13
 057-562-300          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                  12            No    Yes     2.67
 057-562-310          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                  21            No    No      4.61
 057-562-320          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                  44            No    No      9.69
 057-562-330          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                  48            No    No     10.73
 057-562-340          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                  62            No    No     13.83
 057-562-410          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   3            No    Yes     0.67
 057-562-490          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   2            No    Yes     0.55
 057-571-030          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   5            Yes   Yes       1
 057-571-040          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   2            Yes   Yes     0.51
 057-571-100          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   0            Yes   Yes      0.1
 057-571-160          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   2            No    No      0.51
 057-571-170          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   3            No    Yes     0.62
 057-571-200          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   1            Yes   Yes     0.17
 057-571-220          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   4            No    Yes     0.79
 057-571-340          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   2            Yes   Yes     0.51
 057-571-370          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   1            Yes   No      0.17
 057-571-400          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                  19            Yes   Yes     4.13
 057-571-410          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   2            No    No      0.46
 057-581-050          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   1            Yes   Yes      0.2
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                     8-117

                                                  TABLE 8-B
                        VACANT PARCELS WITH GENERAL PLAN AND ZONING USE DESIGNATIONS
                                                   Mt. Shasta
                                                      2014
  Assessor Parcel Genera                          Realistic Potential
                             Zone  Max Units/Acre                     Residential Unit Yield   Sewer       Water     Acres
     Number        l Plan                                Units
 057-581-060      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    0            Yes        Yes          0.11
 057-581-120      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    0            Yes        No           0.08
 057-581-310      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    1            Yes        Yes          0.14
 057-581-320      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    2            Yes        Yes          0.45
 057-594-180      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    1            Yes        Yes          0.15
 057-594-300      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    6            Yes        Yes          1.29
 057-594-400      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    1            No         Yes          0.15
 057-594-440      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    2            No         No            0.5
 057-594-450      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    2            No         No            0.5
 057-594-480      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    2            No         No            0.5
 057-594-490      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    2            No         No            0.5
 057-594-530      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    2            Yes        Yes          0.45
 057-594-560      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    4            No         No           0.78
 057-594-570      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    2            Yes        Yes          0.38
 057-594-580      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    1            Yes        Yes          0.23
 057-594-590      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    1            Yes        Yes          0.23
 057-594-600      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    2            Yes        Yes          0.42
 057-594-620      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    2            No         No           0.39
 057-594-660      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    3            Yes        No           0.62
 057-595-090      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    2            Yes        Yes          0.47
 057-595-140      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    1            Yes        Yes          0.18
                                                                      2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-118                                                                                          City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                                                         TABLE 8-B
                            VACANT PARCELS WITH GENERAL PLAN AND ZONING USE DESIGNATIONS
                                                          Mt. Shasta
                                                             2014
  Assessor Parcel     Genera                             Realistic Potential
                                  Zone    Max Units/Acre                     Residential Unit Yield Sewer  Water Acres
      Number           l Plan                                   Units
 057-595-180          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   2            Yes   Yes     0.46
 057-595-190          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   2            Yes   Yes     0.46
 057-595-260          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   1            No    No      0.21
 057-595-320          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   2            Yes   Yes     0.43
 057-595-470          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   5            No    No      1.08
 057-595-560          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   1            No    No      0.23
 057-596-020          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   1            Yes   Yes     0.21
 057-596-060          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   4            Yes   Yes     0.88
 057-596-210          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   0            Yes   Yes      0.1
 057-596-230          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   2            Yes   Yes     0.41
 057-596-270          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   1            Yes   Yes     0.29
 057-601-080          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                 100            Yes   Yes    22.26
 057-611-060          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   1            Yes   Yes      0.3
 057-611-100          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   1            Yes   Yes     0.31
 057-611-110          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   1            Yes   Yes      0.3
 057-611-120          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                   1            Yes   Yes     0.31
 057-631-070          LDR       R-1               6              4.5                  46            Yes   Yes    10.17
 057-651-110          HDR       R-1               6              4.5                   2            Yes   Yes     0.34
 057-691-330          HDR       R-1               6              4.5                   1            Yes   Yes     0.15
 057-691-400          HDR       R-1               6              4.5                   1            Yes   Yes     0.15
 057-691-410          HDR       R-1               6              4.5                   1            Yes   Yes     0.15
 057-691-610          HDR       R-1               6              4.5                   0            Yes   Yes     0.08
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                     8-119

                                                  TABLE 8-B
                        VACANT PARCELS WITH GENERAL PLAN AND ZONING USE DESIGNATIONS
                                                   Mt. Shasta
                                                      2014
  Assessor Parcel Genera                          Realistic Potential
                             Zone  Max Units/Acre                     Residential Unit Yield   Sewer       Water     Acres
     Number        l Plan                                Units
 057-711-010      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    1            Yes        Yes          0.21
 057-711-090      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    1            Yes        Yes          0.21
 057-722-120      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    1            Yes        Yes          0.14
 057-722-160      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    1            Yes        Yes          0.14
 057-722-210      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    1            Yes        Yes          0.14
 057-722-280      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    1            Yes        Yes          0.16
 057-750-260      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    1            Yes        Yes          0.21
 057-811-020      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    1            No         No           0.28
 057-811-070      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    1            No         No           0.18
 057-811-160      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    1            No         Yes          0.24
 057-811-190      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    2            Yes        No           0.37
 057-811-200      CC       R-1           6                4.5                    1            Yes        Yes          0.14
 057-811-210      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    1            Yes        No           0.28
 057-811-230      LDR      R-1           6                4.5                    1            No         Yes          0.14
 057-821-130      HDR      R-1           6                4.5                   13            No         Yes           2.8
 067-010-070      CC       R-1           6                4.5                    7            Yes        Yes          1.51
 067-010-110      CC       R-1           6                4.5                    5            No         No           1.11
 067-010-120      CC       R-1           6                4.5                   11            No         No            2.4
 057-084-040      HDR      R-2          10                7.5                    2            Yes        Yes           0.2
 057-084-060      HDR      R-2          10                7.5                    6            Yes        Yes          0.79
 057-084-070      HDR      R-2          10                7.5                    3            Yes        Yes          0.46
                                                                      2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-120                                                                                          City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                                                         TABLE 8-B
                            VACANT PARCELS WITH GENERAL PLAN AND ZONING USE DESIGNATIONS
                                                          Mt. Shasta
                                                             2014
  Assessor Parcel     Genera                             Realistic Potential
                                  Zone    Max Units/Acre                     Residential Unit Yield Sewer  Water Acres
      Number           l Plan                                   Units
 057-084-080          HDR       R-2               10             7.5                   0            Yes   No      0.02
 057-084-090          HDR       R-2               10             7.5                   3            Yes   Yes      0.4
 057-153-060          HDR       R-2               10             7.5                   5            Yes   Yes     0.73
 057-154-180          HDR       R-2               10             7.5                   2            No    Yes      0.2
 057-154-190          HDR       R-2               10             7.5                   2            No    Yes     0.27
 057-172-280          MDR       R-2               10             7.5                   2            Yes   Yes      0.2
 057-172-290          MDR       R-2               10             7.5                   2            Yes   Yes     0.25
 057-192-100          CC        R-2               10             7.5                   1            Yes   Yes     0.17
 057-192-280          CC        R-2               10             7.5                   1            Yes   Yes     0.16
 057-202-120          HDR       R-2               10             7.5                   2            Yes   Yes     0.23
 057-202-150          HDR       R-2               10             7.5                   1            Yes   Yes     0.17
 057-202-160          HDR       R-2               10             7.5                   5            No    No      0.65
 057-203-040          HDR       R-2               10             7.5                   1            Yes   Yes     0.17
 057-203-050          HDR       R-2               10             7.5                   2            Yes   Yes     0.26
 057-203-060          HDR       R-2               10             7.5                   4            No    No      0.47
 057-596-010          MDR       R-2               10             7.5                   1            Yes   Yes     0.16
 057-671-060          MDR       R-2               10             7.5                   2            Yes   Yes     0.23
 057-671-160          MDR       R-2               10             7.5                   2            Yes   Yes     0.23
 057-671-170          MDR       R-2               10             7.5                   2            Yes   Yes     0.23
 057-701-100          MDR       R-2               10             7.5                   4            Yes   Yes     0.57
 057-702-190          MDR       R-2               10             7.5                  11            Yes   Yes     1.43
 057-703-100          MDR       R-2               10             7.5                   7            Yes   Yes     0.87
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                     8-121

                                                  TABLE 8-B
                        VACANT PARCELS WITH GENERAL PLAN AND ZONING USE DESIGNATIONS
                                                   Mt. Shasta
                                                      2014
  Assessor Parcel Genera                          Realistic Potential
                             Zone  Max Units/Acre                     Residential Unit Yield   Sewer       Water     Acres
     Number        l Plan                                Units
 057-031-030      HDR      R-3          20                 15                   12            Yes        Yes          0.78
 057-031-060      HDR      R-3          20                 15                   16            Yes        Yes          1.04
 057-044-020      HDR      R-3          20                 15                   16            Yes        Yes          1.08
 057-044-040      HDR      R-3          20                 15                    1            No         No           0.07
 057-051-010      HDR      R-3          20                 15                   17            Yes        Yes          1.15
 057-051-020      HDR      R-3          20                 15                   17            Yes        Yes          1.15
 057-071-040      HDR      R-3          20                 15                    8            Yes        Yes           0.5
 057-072-060      CC       R-3          20                 15                    3            Yes        Yes          0.18
 057-072-070      CC       R-3          20                 15                    3            No         No           0.22
 057-102-130      CC       R-3          20                 15                    6            Yes        Yes          0.42
 057-102-140      CC       R-3          20                 15                    8            No         No           0.56
 057-102-170      CC       R-3          20                 15                    2            Yes        Yes           0.1
 057-102-180      CC       R-3          20                 15                    2            No         No           0.16
 057-112-130      HDR      R-3          20                 15                    3            No         No           0.21
 057-131-170      HDR      R-3          20                 15                    3            Yes        Yes          0.22
 057-163-110      HDR      R-3          20                 15                    2            Yes        Yes          0.14
 057-173-060      HDR      R-3          20                 15                   21            No         No           1.42
 057-173-070      HDR      R-3          20                 15                    5            Yes        Yes          0.34
 057-181-090      HDR      R-3          20                 15                    2            Yes        Yes          0.14
 057-181-190      HDR      R-3          20                 15                    1            Yes        No           0.07
 057-311-010      HDR      R-3          20                 15                    2            Yes        Yes          0.15
                                                                      2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-122                                                                                          City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                                                         TABLE 8-B
                            VACANT PARCELS WITH GENERAL PLAN AND ZONING USE DESIGNATIONS
                                                          Mt. Shasta
                                                             2014
  Assessor Parcel     Genera                             Realistic Potential
                                  Zone    Max Units/Acre                     Residential Unit Yield Sewer  Water Acres
      Number           l Plan                                   Units
 057-562-190          LDR       R-3               20              15                   2            No    No      0.11
 057-631-260          HDR       R-3               20              15                  64            Yes   Yes     4.28
 057-641-110          LDR       R-3               20              15                  16            No    No      1.08
 057-731-040          CC        R-3               20              15                  66            No    Yes     4.39
 057-740-060          HDR       R-3               20              15                   2            Yes   Yes     0.14
 057-740-080          HDR       R-3               20              15                   2            Yes   Yes     0.14
 057-740-090          HDR       R-3               20              15                   3            Yes   Yes     0.22
 057-740-100          HDR       R-3               20              15                   2            Yes   Yes     0.14
 057-760-070          HDR       R-3               20              15                   2            Yes   Yes      0.1
 057-760-080          HDR       R-3               20              15                   1            Yes   Yes     0.09
 057-821-370          HDR       R-3               20              15                 193            No    No     12.87
 057-821-380          HDR       R-3               20              15                  38            No    No       2.5
 057-831-130          HDR       R-3               20              15                 113            Yes   Yes     7.53
 057-831-140          HDR       R-3               20              15                  76            No    No      5.04
 057-840-130          HDR       R-3               20              15                   1            Yes   Yes     0.04
 057-840-140          HDR       R-3               20              15                   1            Yes   Yes     0.04
 057-840-150          HDR       R-3               20              15                   1            Yes   Yes     0.04
 057-840-160          HDR       R-3               20              15                   1            No    Yes     0.04
 057-840-170          HDR       R-3               20              15                   1            No    Yes     0.04
 057-840-180          HDR       R-3               20              15                   1            No    No      0.04
 057-840-190          HDR       R-3               20              15                   1            No    No      0.04
 057-840-200          HDR       R-3               20              15                   1            No    No      0.04
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                     8-123

                                                          TABLE 8-B
                             VACANT PARCELS WITH GENERAL PLAN AND ZONING USE DESIGNATIONS
                                                           Mt. Shasta
                                                              2014
  Assessor Parcel    Genera                               Realistic Potential
                                  Zone     Max Units/Acre                     Residential Unit Yield   Sewer       Water     Acres
     Number            l Plan                                    Units
 057-840-210         HDR        R-3              20                15                     1           No         No           0.04
 057-840-220         HDR        R-3              20                15                     1           No         No           0.04
 057-840-230         HDR        R-3              20                15                     1           No         No           0.04
 057-840-240         HDR        R-3              20                15                     1           No         No           0.04
 057-840-250         HDR        R-3              20                15                     1           Yes        Yes          0.04
 057-840-260         HDR        R-3              20                15                     1           Yes        Yes          0.04
 057-840-270         HDR        R-3              20                15                     1           Yes        Yes          0.05
 057-840-280         HDR        R-3              20                15                     1           Yes        Yes          0.05
 057-840-290         HDR        R-3              20                15                     1           Yes        Yes          0.04
 057-840-300         HDR        R-3              20                15                     1           Yes        Yes          0.04
 057-840-310         HDR        R-3              20                15                    16           Yes        Yes          1.05
 057-840-320         HDR        R-3              20                15                    30           Yes        Yes            2
 057-851-170         HDR        R-3              20                15                    10           Yes        Yes          0.67
 Subtotal                 --        --           --                --                  1,782             --          --      262.9
 Residential Units with a Conditional Use Permit
 057-023-010         CC         C-1              20                15                    38           No         Yes           2.5
 057-044-060         CC         C-1              20                15                    82           No         No           5.49
 057-064-060         CC         C-1              20                15                    55           No         No           3.66
 057-084-010         CC         C-1              20                15                     3           Yes        Yes          0.18
 057-084-030         CC         C-1              20                15                    12           Yes        Yes          0.79
 057-091-070         CC         C-1              20                15                     8           No         No            0.5
                                                                              2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-124                                                                                                  City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                                                         TABLE 8-B
                            VACANT PARCELS WITH GENERAL PLAN AND ZONING USE DESIGNATIONS
                                                          Mt. Shasta
                                                             2014
  Assessor Parcel     Genera                             Realistic Potential
                                 Zone     Max Units/Acre                     Residential Unit Yield Sewer  Water Acres
      Number           l Plan                                   Units
 057-091-090          CC        C-1               20              15                   2            No    No      0.16
 057-111-040          CC        C-1               20              15                   3            Yes   Yes      0.2
 057-111-090          CC        C-1               20              15                   9            Yes   Yes     0.59
 057-112-010          CC        C-1               20              15                  17            Yes   Yes     1.15
 057-131-210          CC        C-1               20              15                  47            Yes   Yes     3.15
 057-141-100          CC        C-1               20              15                   2            Yes   Yes     0.12
 057-142-040          CC        C-1               20              15                   2            Yes   Yes     0.14
 057-142-070          CC        C-1               20              15                   3            Yes   Yes     0.17
 057-171-080          CC        C-1               20              15                   2            Yes   Yes     0.12
 057-172-080          CC        C-1               20              15                   1            Yes   Yes     0.07
 057-182-070          CC        C-1               20              15                   2            Yes   Yes     0.16
 057-182-080          CC        C-1               20              15                   4            No    No      0.24
 057-182-090          CC        C-1               20              15                   2            Yes   Yes     0.12
 057-183-030          CC        C-1               20              15                   2            Yes   Yes     0.16
 057-186-050          CC        C-1               20              15                   2            Yes   Yes     0.15
 057-191-150          CC        C-1               20              15                   1            Yes   Yes     0.06
 057-191-180          CC        C-1               20              15                   2            Yes   Yes     0.11
 057-191-210          CC        C-1               20              15                   2            Yes   Yes     0.11
 057-191-230          CC        C-1               20              15                   1            Yes   Yes     0.06
 057-211-010          CC        C-1               20              15                   2            Yes   Yes     0.12
 057-211-040          CC        C-1               20              15                   2            Yes   Yes     0.15
 057-221-060          CC        C-1               20              15                   2            Yes   Yes     0.15
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                     8-125

                                                  TABLE 8-B
                        VACANT PARCELS WITH GENERAL PLAN AND ZONING USE DESIGNATIONS
                                                   Mt. Shasta
                                                      2014
  Assessor Parcel Genera                          Realistic Potential
                            Zone   Max Units/Acre                     Residential Unit Yield   Sewer       Water     Acres
     Number        l Plan                                Units
 057-231-120      CC       C-1          20                 15                   85            No         No           5.69
 057-231-130      CC       C-1          20                 15                   19            Yes        Yes          1.24
 057-241-150      CC       C-1          20                 15                    6            Yes        Yes           0.4
 057-241-220      CC       C-1          20                 15                   32            Yes        Yes          2.15
 057-241-240      CC       C-1          20                 15                    8            Yes        Yes           0.5
 057-241-290      CC       C-1          20                 15                    8            Yes        Yes           0.5
 057-241-300      CC       C-1          20                 15                    7            Yes        Yes          0.48
 057-241-360      CC       C-1          20                 15                   18            Yes        Yes          1.23
 057-241-370      CC       C-1          20                 15                   35            Yes        Yes          2.35
 057-241-430      CC       C-1          20                 15                   21            Yes        Yes           1.4
 057-251-110      CC       C-1          20                 15                   36            No         No           2.43
 057-261-020      CC       C-1          20                 15                    1            Yes        No           0.06
 057-262-130      CC       C-1          20                 15                    2            Yes        Yes          0.15
 057-351-250      LDR      C-1          20                 15                    4            Yes        No           0.25
 057-582-230      CC       C-1          20                 15                    3            Yes        Yes          0.21
 057-601-120      CC       C-1          20                 15                    2            Yes        Yes          0.15
 057-601-180      CC       C-1          20                 15                    3            No         Yes          0.19
 057-601-200      CC       C-1          20                 15                    1            Yes        Yes          0.05
 057-601-230      CC       C-1          20                 15                   26            Yes        Yes          1.75
 057-601-240      CC       C-1          20                 15                    9            Yes        Yes          0.58
 057-760-030      CC       C-1          20                 15                    2            Yes        Yes          0.14
                                                                      2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-126                                                                                          City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                                                         TABLE 8-B
                            VACANT PARCELS WITH GENERAL PLAN AND ZONING USE DESIGNATIONS
                                                          Mt. Shasta
                                                             2014
  Assessor Parcel     Genera                             Realistic Potential
                                 Zone     Max Units/Acre                     Residential Unit Yield Sewer  Water Acres
      Number           l Plan                                   Units
 057-760-040          CC        C-1               20              15                   2            Yes   Yes     0.14
 057-760-050          CC        C-1               20              15                   2            Yes   Yes     0.14
 067-010-100          CC        C-1               20              15                  26            No    Yes     1.74
 057-083-080          CC        C-2               20              15                   2            Yes   Yes      0.1
 057-111-080          CC        C-2               20              15                   1            Yes   No      0.09
 057-263-020          CC        C-2               20              15                   3            Yes   Yes     0.19
 057-264-050          CC        C-2               20              15                  40            Yes   Yes     2.65
 057-265-170          CC        C-2               20              15                   3            Yes   No      0.18
 057-265-210          CC        C-2               20              15                   4            Yes   No      0.26
 057-272-110          CC        C-2               20              15                   3            No    Yes     0.19
 057-272-130          CC        C-2               20              15                   4            Yes   Yes     0.26
 057-273-030          CC        C-2               20              15                   2            Yes   Yes     0.13
 057-273-070          CC        C-2               20              15                   2            Yes   Yes     0.13
 057-273-120          CC        C-2               20              15                   2            Yes   Yes     0.13
 057-283-100          CC        C-2               20              15                   4            Yes   Yes     0.26
 057-312-020          CC        C-2               20              15                   5            Yes   Yes     0.34
 057-391-050          CC        C-2               20              15                   4            Yes   Yes     0.25
 057-771-110          CC        C-2               20              15                  13            Yes   No      0.87
 057-771-120          CC        C-2               20              15                  98            Yes   No      6.51
 057-771-170          CC        C-2               20              15                  25            Yes   No      1.68
 057-771-180          CC        C-2               20              15                  23            Yes   No      1.56
 057-771-250          CC        C-2               20              15                  23            Yes   No      1.52
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                     8-127

                                                          TABLE 8-B
                          VACANT PARCELS WITH GENERAL PLAN AND ZONING USE DESIGNATIONS
                                                           Mt. Shasta
                                                              2014
  Assessor Parcel  Genera                                 Realistic Potential
                               Zone      Max Units/Acre                       Residential Unit Yield   Sewer       Water     Acres
     Number         l Plan                                       Units
 057-771-260       CC        C-2               20                  15                    26           Yes        No            1.74
 057-771-270       CC        C-2               20                  15                    14           No         No            0.95
 057-771-280       CC        C-2               20                  15                    15           Yes        No            1.02
 057-781-020       CC        C-2               20                  15                    26           Yes        No             1.7
 057-781-040       CC        C-2               20                  15                    26           Yes        No             1.7
 057-781-060       CC        C-2               20                  15                    48           Yes        No            3.22
 057-781-070       CC        C-2               20                  15                    61           Yes        No            4.06
 057-781-100       CC        C-2               20                  15                    34           Yes        No            2.27
 057-781-220       CC        C-2               20                  15                   302           Yes        No           20.16
 057-781-230       CC        C-2               20                  15                    62           Yes        No            4.11
 057-781-240       CC        C-2               20                  15                    88           Yes        No            5.85
 057-791-010       CC        C-2               20                  15                   130           Yes        No            8.65
 057-801-040       CC        C-2               20                  15                     5           Yes        Yes           0.33
 057-801-160       CC        C-2               20                  15                     5           Yes        Yes            0.3
 057-801-170       CC        C-2               20                  15                    10           Yes        No            0.67
 057-801-190       CC        C-2               20                  15                    19           Yes        No            1.26
 057-821-020       CC        C-2               20                  15                     2           No         Yes           0.13
 057-821-110       CC        C-2               20                  15                    24           No         Yes           1.59
 Subtotal              --        --             --                 --                  1,826             --          --      121.51
 Other Zoning Designations Permitting Residential Units
 057-581-260       EC        E-C         --             -                     --                      Yes        Yes           0.52
                                                                              2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-128                                                                                                  City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                                                           TABLE 8-B
                            VACANT PARCELS WITH GENERAL PLAN AND ZONING USE DESIGNATIONS
                                                            Mt. Shasta
                                                               2014
  Assessor Parcel     Genera                               Realistic Potential
                                  Zone    Max Units/Acre                       Residential Unit Yield Sewer  Water Acres
      Number           l Plan                                     Units
 057-581-340          EC        E-C       --             -                     --                     Yes   Yes     0.26
 057-581-360          EC        E-C       --             -                     --                     Yes   Yes     0.24
 057-621-010          EC        E-C       --             -                     --                     No    No      1.79
 057-621-030          EC        E-C       --             -                     --                     Yes   Yes    32.57
 057-621-210          EC        E-C       --             -                     --                     Yes   Yes     0.94
 057-621-240          EC        E-C       --             -                     --                     Yes   Yes     0.68
 057-621-270          EC        E-C       --             -                     --                     Yes   Yes     0.34
 057-621-280          EC        E-C       --             -                     --                     Yes   Yes     0.34
 057-621-300          EC        E-C       --             -                     --                     Yes   Yes     0.34
 057-621-360          EC        E-C       --             -                     --                     Yes   Yes     0.65
 057-771-020          CC        E-C       --             -                     --                     No    No      0.28
 057-771-030          CC        E-C       --             -                     --                     No    No      5.49
 057-771-040          CC        E-C       --             -                     --                     No    No      0.53
 057-771-050          CC        E-C       --             -                     --                     No    No      7.51
 057-771-150          CC        E-C       --             -                     --                     No    No     32.34
 057-771-160          HDR       E-C       --             -                     --                     No    No     91.97
 057-771-160          HDR       E-C       --             -                     --                     No    No     14.26
 057-771-290          CC        E-C       --             -                     --                     No    No      0.77
 057-781-180          HDR       E-C       --             -                     --                     No    No     81.45
 057-781-190          CC        E-C       --             -                     --                     No    No     15.58
 057-781-200          CC        E-C       --             -                     --                     Yes   No      4.34
 057-781-210          CC        E-C       --             -                     --                     No    No        1
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                                       8-129

                                                      TABLE 8-B
                          VACANT PARCELS WITH GENERAL PLAN AND ZONING USE DESIGNATIONS
                                                       Mt. Shasta
                                                          2014
  Assessor Parcel Genera                              Realistic Potential
                               Zone  Max Units/Acre                       Residential Unit Yield   Sewer       Water     Acres
     Number         l Plan                                   Units
 057-821-280      EC         E-C     --             -                     --                      No         No            0.44
 067-010-010      MU-PD      P-D     --             -                     --                      Yes        Yes          16.31
 067-010-010      P          P-D     --             -                     --                      Yes        Yes           4.49
 067-010-020      MU-PD      P-D     --             -                     --                      Yes        Yes           44.4
 067-010-140      MU-PD      P-D     --             -                     --                      Yes        Yes          56.83
 067-010-160      MU-PD      P-D     --             -                     --                      No         No             0.8
 067-010-170      MU-PD      P-D     --             -                     --                      No         No            3.74
 057-231-180      CC         U       --             -                     --                      No         No           14.32
 057-231-180      CC         U       --             -                     --                      No         No            0.09
 057-231-180      CC         U       --             -                     --                      No         No            0.09
 057-231-180      CC         U       --             -                     --                      No         No            0.09
 057-231-180      CC         U       --             -                     --                      No         No            0.09
 057-231-190      CC         U       --             -                     --                      No         Yes          15.96
 057-781-160      CC         U       --             -                     --                      No         No           40.36
 057-791-020      CC         U       --             -                     --                      No         No           37.84
 057-791-030      CC         U       --             -                     --                      No         No           39.76
 057-801-010      CC         U       --             -                     --                      Yes        Yes          17.74
 Subtotal              --        --        --                  --                    --               --         --      587.54
 Grand Total           --        --       --                   --                  3,608             --          --      971.95
                                                                          2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-130                                                                                              City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

H. APPENDIX 8-C: LOCATION OF PARCELS IDENTIFIED IN VACANT LAND
    INVENTORY
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                8-131

This page is intentionally left blank.
                                       2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-132                                                           City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                       ke
                  La
             ms
     A   br a
                                                                                                          r
                                                                                                      Eve
                                                                                                       itt M
                                                                                                               l
                                                                                                           oria
                                                                                                         em
                                                         Mo
                                                         u nt S h a s
                                                           ta
                                         Lassen
                                                                                                           Washington
                                                                              C
                                                                                  st
                                                                        in
                                                                        e          nut
                                                                                    Alpine Mccloud
                                                                              e
                                                                         La k
                                                                                       Mount Shasta
                  City Limits
                  Roads
                  Railroads
     Zones Allowing Residential By Right                                              Ream
                  R-1 Low Density Residential
                  R-2 Medium Density Residential
                  R-3 High Density Residential
                                                                                          g
     Zones Allowing Residential with CUP*                                             Sta
                                                                                  Old
                  C-1 Downtown Commerical                                             e
                  C-2 General Commercial
*Parcels in zones allowing residential with a Conditional                                                      Mo
Use Permit (CUP) are included in the inventory but                                                                un
not counted against the RHNA.                                                                                           tS
                                                                                                                         st
    Source: City of Mt. Shasta, Mintier Harnish, 2014.                                                                        a   V
                                                                                                                                  U
                                                                                                                                  89
                                                                                                                        ha
0          0.25             0.5      1
                                         Miles   I                                       Figure 8-3:Vacant Land Inventory
                                                                                        Residential and Commerical Zones
This page is intentionally left blank.
                                       2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-134                                                           City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                       ke
                  La
            ms
    A   br a
                                                                                                                r
                                                                                                            Eve
                                                                                                             itt M
                                                                                                                     l
                                                                                                                 oria
                                                                                                               em
                                                          Mo
                                                              u nt S h a s
                                                                ta
                                       Lassen
                                                                                                                 Washington
                                                                                    C
                                                                                        he
                                                                                n       st
                                                                             Pi
                                                                              e          nut
                                                                                          Alpine Mccloud
                                                                                    e
                                                                               La k
                                                                                             Mount Shasta
                  City Limits
                  Roads
                  Railroads
    Zoning                                                                                   Ream
                  E-C Employment Center
                  PUD Planned Development
                  P Public
                                                                                                g
                  U Unclassified                                                            Sta
                                                                                        Old
    General Plan Designations*                                                               e
                  CC
                  HDR
                                                                                                                     Mo
*General Plan Designations are shown where the designations                                                            un
are inconsistent with the zoning for a particular parcel.                                                                     tS
Source: City of Mt. Shasta, Mintier Harnish, 2014.                                                                             st
                                                                                                                              ha
                                                                                                                                    a   V
                                                                                                                                        U
                                                                                                                                        89
0          0.25             0.5    1
                                       Miles   I                                Figure 8-4: Land Inventory - Other Zones
This page is intentionally left blank.
                                       2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-136                                                           City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

I. APPENDIX 8-D: FUNDING SOURCES
The following lists the grant and loan options the City or other agencies can apply for to
fund services for residents of Mt. Shasta.
                                                TABLE 8-C
                                           FUNDING SOURCES
                                           City of Mount Shasta
                                                    2014
         Program Name                     Description of Program                Eligible Activities
                                            Federal Programs
  Community Development         Grants available to the City on a          Acquisition
  Block Grant (CDBG)            competitive basis for a variety of housing Rehabilitation
                                and community development activities.
                                                                           Homebuyer Assistance
                                City competes for funds through the
                                State’s allocation process.                Economic Development
                                                                           Homeless Assistance
                                                                           Public Services
  Housing Choice Voucher        Assistance program that provides direct    Rental Assistance
  Program                       funding for rental subsidies for very low-
                                income families.
  Section 202                   Grants to private nonprofit developers of  New Construction
                                supportive housing for very low-income
                                seniors.
  Housing Rehabilitation        Provides financial assistance to low-      Rehabilitation
  Program                       income homeowners for health and
                                safety improvements.
                                              State Program
  AB 80/SB104 Emergency         New 4/9/2014. Provides rental subsidies    Homeless Assistance
  Drought Rental Assistance     for the purposes of disaster relief to     Rental Assistance
  Program                       persons rendered homeless or at risk of
                                becoming homeless due to
                                unemployment, underemployment, or
                                other economic hardship or losses due to
                                the drought conditions.
  Affordable Housing            Provides lower interest rate CHFA loans    Homebuyer Assistance
  Partnership Program           to homebuyers who receive local
  (AHPP)                        secondary financing.
  Home Investment               Provides grants to local governments       Homebuyer Assistance
  Partnership Program           and nonprofit agencies, through the        Rehabilitation
  (HOME)                        State of California, for many homeowner
                                                                           New Construction
                                and renter needs.
                                                                           Rental Assistance
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                    8-137

                                              TABLE 8-C
                                         FUNDING SOURCES
                                         City of Mount Shasta
                                                  2014
         Program Name                   Description of Program                     Eligible Activities
  Building Equity and Growth A State-funded program administered            Homebuyer Assistance
  in Neighborhoods (BEGIN)   by HCD that provides low- and
                             moderate-income households up to
                             $30,000 for a down payment.
  CalHome                    Grants awarded to jurisdictions for            Homebuyer Assistance
                             owner-occupied housing rehabilitation          Rehabilitation
                             and first-time homebuyer assistance.
  Single Family Housing Bond Bonds issued to local lenders and              Homebuyer Assistance
  Program (Mortgage          developers so that below market interest
  Revenue Bonds)             rate loans can be issued to first-time
                             homebuyers.
  Low Income Housing Tax     A 4% annual tax credit that helps owners       New Construction
  Credits                    of rental units develop affordable
                             housing.
  HUD Emergency Shelter      Competitive grants to help local               New Construction
  Grants (administered       governments and nonprofits to finance          Rehabilitation
  through the state)         emergency shelters, transitional housing,
                                                                            Homeless Assistance
                             and other supportive services
                                                                            Public Services
                               Private Resources/Financing Programs
  California Community       Nonprofit mortgage banking consortium          New Construction
  Reinvestment Corporation   designed to provide long-term debt             Rehabilitation
  (CCRC)                     financing for affordable multi-family
                                                                            Acquisition
                             rental housing.
                             Nonprofit and for-profit developers
                             contact member banks
  Federal National Mortgage  Fixed-rate mortgages issued by private         Homebuyer Assistance
  Association (Fannie Mae)   mortgage insurers.
                             Mortgages that fund the purchase and           Homebuyer Assistance
                             rehabilitation of a home.                      Rehabilitation
                             Low down-payment mortgages for                 Homebuyer Assistance
                             single-family homes in underserved low-
                             income and minority cities.
  Freddie Mac Home Works     Provides first and second mortgages that       Homebuyer Assistance
                             include rehabilitation loan. County
                             provides gap financing for rehabilitation
                             component. Households earning up to
                             80 percent MFI qualify.
  Affordable Housing         Loans (and some grants) to public              New Construction
  Program                    agencies and private entities for a wide       Homebuyer Assistance
                                                  2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-138                                                                      City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

                                                                   TABLE 8-C
                                                            FUNDING SOURCES
                                                            City of Mount Shasta
                                                                         2014
           Program Name                                    Description of Program         Eligible Activities
 (Federal Home Loan Bank)                     variety of housing projects and        Rehabilitation
                                              programs. Participation is by FHLB     Housing Supportive
                                              participating lenders.                 Services
  Source: City of Yreka 2014-2019 Housing Element Update Adoption Draft, April 2014.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                                              8-139

J. APPENDIX 8-E: GLOSSARY
The following glossary defines various acronyms and terminology used in the Housing
Element, including definitions of terms used by the U.S. Census Bureau.
The following definitions are commonly used terms in a Housing Element:
Above Moderate-Income. Above moderate-income households are defined as
households with incomes over 120 percent of the county median.
Accessible Units. Indicates certain units or all units in the property are wheelchair
accessible or can be made wheelchair accessible. Accessible units also may include
those that are accessible to people with sensory impairments or can be made
accessible for people with sensory impairments.
Affordability. Annual cost of housing includes mortgage, principle and interest
payments as amortized over 25 years with a 25 percent down payment or gross rent
that does not exceed 30 percent of gross annual household income or 30 percent of
gross annual income devoted to rental housing, including utilities are defined as
"affordable".
Affordability Covenant. A property title agreement that places resale or rental
restrictions on a housing unit; also known as a deed restriction.
Affordable Housing. "Affordable Housing" refers to the relationship between the price of
housing in a region (either sale price or rent) and household income. Affordable
housing is that which is affordable to households of very low, low and moderate
incomes. For housing to be affordable, shelter costs must not exceed 30 percent of the
gross annual income of the household.
Assisted Housing. Assisted housing refers to a unit that rents or sells for less than the
prevailing market rate due to governmental monetary intervention or contribution. The
terms “assisted” and “subsidized” are often used interchangeably.
At-Risk Housing. Applies to existing subsidized affordable rental housing units, especially
federally subsidized developments, that are threatened with conversion to market rents
because of termination of use restrictions, due to expiration or non-renewal of subsidy
arrangements.
Below Market Rate (BMR) Unit. A BMR unit is a housing unit that sells or rents for less than
the going market rate. It is typically used in reference to housing units that are directly
or indirectly subsidized or have other restrictions in order to make them affordable to
very low, low or moderate-income households.
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG). The State CDBG program was
established by the federal Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as
amended (42 USC 5301, et seq.). The primary federal objective of the CDBG program is
the development of viable urban communities by providing decent housing and a
suitable living environment and by expanding economic opportunities, principally for
                                           2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-140                                                               City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

persons of low and moderate income. "Persons of low and moderate income" or the
"targeted income group" (TIG) are defined as families, households, and individuals
whose incomes do not exceed 80 percent of the county median income, with
adjustments for family or household size.
Condominium. A building or group of buildings in which units are owned individually,
but the structure, common areas and facilities are owned by all owners on a
proportional, undivided basis.
Continuum of Care. An approach that helps communities plan for and provide a full
range of emergency, transitional, and permanent housing and service resources to
address the various needs of homeless persons at the point in time that they need
them. The approach is based on the understanding that homelessness is not caused
merely y a lack of shelter, but involves a variety of underlying, unmet needs – physical,
economic, and social. Designed to encourage localities to develop a coordinated and
comprehensive long-term approach to homelessness, the Continuum of Care
consolidates the planning, application, and reporting documents for the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development’s Shelter Plus Care, Section 8
Moderate Rehabilitation Single-Room Occupancy Dwellings (SRO) Program, and
Supportive Housing Program. (U.S. House Bill 2163).
Cost Burden. A household has a "housing cost burden" if it spends 30 percent or more of
its income on housing costs. A household has a "severe housing cost burden" if it spends
50 percent or more of its income on housing. Owner housing costs consist of payments
for mortgages, deeds of trust, contracts to purchase, or similar debts on the property;
real estate taxes; fire, hazard, and flood insurance on the property; utilities; and fuels.
Where applicable, owner costs also include monthly condominium fees. Renter
calculations use gross rent, which is the contract rent plus the estimated average
monthly cost of utilities (electricity, gas, water and sewer) and fuels (oil, coal, kerosene,
wood, etc.) if these are paid by the renter (or paid for the renter by someone else).
Household income is the total pre-tax income of the householder and all other
individuals at least 15 years old in the household. In all estimates of housing cost
burdens, owners and renters for whom housing cost-to-income was not computed are
excluded from the calculations.
Decennial Census. Every ten years, the Census Bureau conducts a national household
survey, producing the richest source of nationally-available small-area data. Article I of
the Constitution requires that a census be taken every ten years for the purpose of
reapportioning the U.S. House of Representatives. The federal government uses
decennial census data for apportioning congressional seats, for identifying distressed
areas, and for many other activities. Census data are collected using two survey forms:
the short form and the long form. Short form information is collected on every person
and includes basic characteristics, such as age, sex, and race. The long form is sent to
one out of every six households and collects more detailed information, such as
income, housing characteristics, and employment. Most of the indicators in DataPlace
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                          8-141

are from the long form, and are thus estimates based on the sample of households.
These values may differ considerably from the same indicators based on the short form
data, particularly for small areas.
Density. This refers to the number of housing units on a unit of land (e.g. ten units per
acre).
Density Bonus Programs. Allows minimum density increase over the zoned maximum
density of a proposed residential development, if the developer makes a specified
amount of units affordable to lower income households.
Disability. A long-lasting physical, mental, or emotional condition. This condition can
make it difficult for a person to do activities such as walking, climbing stairs, dressing,
bathing, learning, or remembering. This condition can also impede a person from being
able to go outside the home alone or to work at a job or business.
Downpayment Assistance. The most popular loans for these programs are with the
Federal Housing Administration (FHA). FHA allows 100 percent gift funds for your down
payment and some allowable closing costs. The gift can be from any relative or can be
collected through charitable organizations like Neighborhood Gold / The Buyer Fund.
Another popular tactic, which can be used in a broader range of loan programs, is to
borrow from a 401K. A withdrawal can be made without a penalty and pay it back
over a specified period.
Development Impact Fees. A fee or charge imposed on developers to pay for a
jurisdiction’s costs of providing services to new development.
Development Right. The right granted to a land owner or other authorized party to
improve a property. Such right is usually expressed in terms of a use and intensity
allowed under existing zoning regulation.
Dwelling Unit. Any residential structure, whether or not attached to real property,
including condominium and cooperative units and mobile or manufactured homes. It
includes both one-to-four-family and multifamily structures. Vacation or second homes
and rental properties are also included.
Elderly Units. Specific units in a development are restricted to residents over a certain
age (as young as 55 years and over). Persons with disabilities may share certain
developments with the elderly.
Element. A division or chapter of the General Plan, Master Plan or Comprehensive Plan.
Emergency Shelter. A facility designed to provide free temporary housing on a night-by-
night basis to homeless families and individuals.
Emergency Shelter Grants (ESG). A grant program administered by the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) provided on a formula basis to large
entitlement jurisdictions.
                                             2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-142                                                                 City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

Extremely Low-Income Limit. The upper limit for the extremely low-income category, set
at 30 percent of the HUD area median family income. This is not an official program
eligibility income limit, except when associated with a specific family size (e.g., "single
person", "family of two", "family of three", etc.).
Fair Market Rent (FMR). Fair Market Rents are freely set rental rates defined by HUD as
the median gross rents charged for available standard units in a county or Standard
Metropolitan Statistical Area (SMSA). Fair Market Rents are used for the Section 8
Housing Choice Voucher Program and other HUD programs and are published annually
by HUD.
Farm Labor Housing (Farm Worker). Units for migrant farm workers that can be available
for transitional housing for the homeless when not occupied by migrant farm workers.
Family Income. In decennial census data, family income includes the incomes of all
household members 15 years old and over related to the householder. Although the
family income statistics from each census cover the preceding calendar year, the
characteristics of individuals and the composition of families refer to the time of
enumeration (April 1 of the respective census years). Thus, the income of the family
does not include amounts received by individuals who were members of the family
during all or part of the calendar year prior to the census if these individuals no longer
resided with the family at the time of census enumeration. Similarly, income amounts
reported by individuals who did not reside with the family during the calendar year prior
to the census but who were members of the family at the time of enumeration are
included. However, the composition of most families was the same during the
preceding calendar year as at the time of enumeration.
FHA-Insured. The Federal Housing Administration insured mortgages so that lower- and
moderate- income people can obtain financing for homeownership.
First-time homebuyer. A first-time homebuyer program provides low-income first time
homebuyers down-payment assistance in the form of a second mortgage loan to serve
as "gap financing". These loans can be up to $ 40,000 depending on the amount of
assistance required by the individual homebuyer.
General Plan. The General Plan is a legal document, adopted by the legislative body of
a City or County, setting forth policies regarding long-term development.
Groups Quarters. A facility which houses groups of unrelated persons not living in
households such as dormitories, institutions and prisons.
Habitable (room). A habitable room is a space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating
or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, storage or utility space, and similar
areas, are not considered habitable space.
Habitat for Humanity. Habitat for Humanity is a nonprofit, ecumenical Christian housing
ministry that seeks to eliminate poverty housing and homelessness from the world, and
to make decent shelter a matter of conscience and action. Through volunteer labor
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                       8-143

and donations of money and materials, Habitat builds and rehabilitates simple, decent
houses with the help of the homeowner (partner) families. Habitat houses are sold to
partner families at no profit, financed with affordable, no-interest loans. The
homeowners' monthly mortgage payments are used to build still more Habitat houses.
Hispanic or Latino. In decennial census data, Hispanics or Latinos are those who classify
themselves in one of the specific Hispanic or Latino categories listed on the census
questionnaire — ‘‘Mexican,’’ ‘‘Puerto Rican,’’ or ‘‘Cuban’’ — as well as those who
indicate that they are ‘‘other Spanish, Hispanic, or Latino.’’ People who do not identify
with one of the specific origins listed on the questionnaire but indicate that they are
‘‘other Spanish, Hispanic, or Latino’’ are those whose origins are from Spain, the
Spanish-speaking countries of Central or South America, the Dominican Republic, or
people identifying themselves generally as Spanish, Spanish-American, Hispanic,
Hispano, Latino, and so on. People who are Hispanic or Latino may be of any race.
There are two important changes to the Hispanic origin question for Census 2000. First,
the sequence of the race and Hispanic origin questions for Census 2000 differs from that
in 1990; in 1990, the race question preceded the Hispanic origin question. Second, there
was an instruction preceding the Hispanic origin question in 2000 indicating that
respondents should answer both the Hispanic origin and the race questions. This
instruction was added to give emphasis to the distinct concepts of the Hispanic origin
and race questions and to emphasize the need for both pieces of information.
Home Investment Partnership Program (HOME). HOME provides formula grants to States
and localities that communities use—often in partnership with local nonprofit groups—
to fund a wide range of activities that build, buy, and/or rehabilitate affordable housing
for rent or homeownership or provide direct rental assistance to low-income people.
Homeless Person. An individual living outside or in a building not meant for human
habitation, or which they have no legal right to occupy, in an emergency shelter, or in
a temporary housing program which may include a transitional and supportive housing
program if habitation time limits exist. This definition includes substance abusers,
mentally ill people, and sex offenders who are homeless. (U.S. House Bill 2163).
Household. A household is made up of all persons living in a dwelling unit whether or not
they are related by blood, birth or marriage
Housing Authority. An organization established under state law to provide housing for
low- and moderate-income persons. Commissioners are appointed by the local
governing body of the jurisdiction in which they operate. Many housing authorities own
their own housing or operate public housing funded by HUD.
Housing Choice Voucher Program. Housing Choice Voucher Program (formerly known
as Section 8) is a subsidy program funded by the federal government and overseen by
the California Department of Housing and Community Development to provide low
rents and/or housing payment contributions for very low and low-income households.
                                          2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-144                                                              City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

HUD. The United States Department of Housing and Urban Development is cabinet level
department of the federal government that oversees program and funding for
affordable housing laws, development, and federally funded financial assistance.
HUD Area Median Family Income. HUD is required by law to set income limits that
determine the eligibility of applicants for HUD's assisted housing programs. Income limits
are calculated annually for metropolitan areas and non-metropolitan counties in the
United States. They are based on HUD estimates of median family income, with
adjustments for family size. Adjustments are also made for areas that have unusually
high or low income to housing cost relationships.
Income Categories. The federal and state governments require that local jurisdictions
consider the housing needs of households in various "income categories." Income
categories are determined by the median household income at the local level.
Large Family or Household. A household or family with five or more members.
Low-Income Limit. Low-income households are defined as households with incomes
between 50 percent and 80 percent of the area median household income.
Low-Income Housing. Housing that is made available at prices lower than market rates.
These lower prices are achieved through various financial mechanisms employed by
state and local government authorities.
Low-Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC). The LIHTC Program is an indirect Federal subsidy
used to finance the development of affordable rental housing for low-income
households. The LIHTC Program may seem complicated, but many local housing and
community development agencies are effectively using these tax credits to increase
the supply of affordable housing in their communities. This topic is designed to provide a
basic introduction to the LIHTC Program.
Market Rate Housing. Housing that is not built or maintained with the help of
government subsidy. The prices of market rate homes are determined by the market
and are subject to the laws of supply and demand.
Manufactured Home. Housing that is constructed of manufactured components,
assembled partly at the site rather than totally at the site. Also referred to as modular
housing
McKinney-Vento Act. The primary federal response targeted to assisting homeless
individuals and families. The scope of the Act includes. Outreach, emergency food and
shelter, transitional and permanent housing, primary health care services, mental
health, alcohol and drug abuse treatment, education, job training, and child care.
There are nine titles under the McKinney-Vento Act that are administered by several
different federal agencies, including the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD). McKinney-Vento Act Programs administered by HUD include.
Emergency Shelter Grant Program Supportive Housing Program, Section 8 Moderate
Rehabilitation for Single-Room Occupancy Dwellings, Supplemental Assistance to
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                       8-145

Facilities to Assist the Homeless, and Single Family Property Disposition Initiative. (U.S.
House Bill 2163).
Median-Income. Each year, the federal government calculates the median income for
communities across the country to use as guidelines for federal housing programs. Area
median incomes are set according family size.
Mental Illness. A serious and persistent mental or emotional impairment that significantly
limits a person’s ability to live independently.
Mixed Use. This refers to different types of development (e.g. residential, retail, office,
etc.) occurring on the same lot or in close proximity to each other. City and County’s
sometimes allows mixed-use in commercial zones, with housing typically located above
primary commercial uses on the premises.
Mobile Home. A type of manufactured housing. A structure movable in one or more
sections, which is at least 8 feet in width and 32 feet in length, is built on a permanent
chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit when connected to the required
utilities, either with or without a permanent foundation.
Mobile Home Park. A parcel or tract of land having as its principal use the rental,
leasing or occupancy of space by two or more mobile homes on a permanent or semi-
permanent basis, including accessory buildings, or uses customarily incidental thereto.
Mobile Home Subdivision. A subdivision of land, platted in conformance to NRS
Chapter 278 and applicable city ordinances for the purpose of providing mobile home
lots.
Moderate-Income. Moderate-income households are defined as households with
incomes between 80 percent and 120 percent of the county median.
Mortgage Credit Certificate Program (MCCs). The MCC is a Federal Income Tax Credit
Program. An MCC increases the loan amount you qualify for and it increases an
applicant's take-home pay. The MCC entitles applicants to take a federal income tax
credit of twenty percent (20 percent) of the annual interest they pay on their home
mortgage. Because the MCC reduces an applicant's federal income taxes and
increases their net earnings, it helps homebuyers qualify for a first home mortgage. The
MCC is registered with the IRS, and it continues to decrease federal income taxes each
year for as long as an applicant lives in the home.
Mortgage Revenue Bond. A state, county or city program providing financing for the
development of housing through the sale of tax-exempt bonds.
Multifamily Dwelling. A structure containing two or more dwelling units for the use of
individual households; an apartment or condominium building is an example of this
dwelling unit type.
                                            2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-146                                                                City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

Non-Hispanic. In decennial census data and in Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data
after 2003, non-Hispanics are those who indicate that they are not
Spanish/Hispanic/Latino.
Permanent Housing. Housing which is intended to be the tenant’s home for as long as
they choose. In the supportive housing model, services are available to the tenant, but
accepting services cannot be required of tenants or in any way impact their tenancy.
Tenants of permanent housing sign legal lease documents. (U.S. House Bill 2163).
Permanent Supportive Housing. Long-term community-based housing and supportive
services for homeless persons with disabilities. The intent of this type of supportive
housing is to enable this special needs population to live as independently as possible in
a permanent setting. The supportive services may be provided by the organization
managing the housing or provided by other public or private service agencies. There is
no definite length of stay. (U.S. House Bill 2163)
Persons with a Disability. HUD’s Housing Choice Voucher (formerly Section 8) program
defines a “person with a disability” as a person who is determined to 1) have a physical,
mental, or emotional impairment that is expected to be of continued and indefinite
duration, substantially impedes his or her ability to live independently, and is of such a
nature that the ability could be improved by more suitable housing conditions; or 2)
have a developmental disability, as defined in the Developmental disabilities Assistance
and Bill of Rights Act. (U.S. House Bill 2163)
Project-Based Rental Assistance. Rental assistance provided for a project, not for a
specific tenant. A tenant receiving project-based rental assistance gives up the right to
that assistance upon moving from the project.
Public Housing. The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
administers Federal aid to local housing agencies (HAs) that manage the housing for
low-income residents at rents they can afford. HUD furnishes technical and professional
assistance in planning, developing and managing these developments. It provides
decent and safe rental housing for eligible low-income families, the elderly, and persons
with disabilities. Public housing can be in the form of high-rise apartments or scattered
site single family homes.
Rehabilitation. The upgrading of a building previously in a dilapidated or substandard
condition for human habitation.
Rental Assistance. A rental subsidy for eligible low and very low income tenants. This
assistance provides the share of the monthly rent that exceeds 30% of the tenants’
adjusted monthly income.
Rent-to-Own. A development is financed so that at a certain point in time, the rental
units are available for purchase based on certain restrictions and qualifications.
Rural Housing Service (RHA). A part of the United States Department of Agriculture’s
Rural Development. The RHA offers financial aid to low-income residents of rural areas.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                       8-147

Second Units. Also referred to as "granny" or "in-law apartments." Second units provide a
second housing unit on the same lot as a single family dwelling unit.
Section 8. Section 8, now known as the Housing Choice Voucher Program is a subsidy
program funded by the federal government and overseen by the California
Department of Housing and Community Development to provide low rents and/or
housing payment contributions for very low and low-income households.
Service Needs. The particular services required by special populations, typically
including needs such as transportation, personal care, housekeeping, counseling,
meals, case management, personal emergency response, and other services
preventing premature institutionalization and assisting individuals to continue living
independently.
Single-Room Occupancy Dwelling (SRO). The SRO Program provides rental assistance
for homeless persons in connection with the moderate rehabilitation of SRO dwellings.
SRO housing contains units for occupancy by one person. These units may contain food
preparation or sanitary facilities, or both.
Special Needs Projects. Housing for a designated group of people who desire special
accommodations, such as services, in addition to the housing. Services may or may not
be provided as part of the rental project. Examples of special needs populations are
people with physical disabilities, developmental disabilities, mental illness, or those who
need assisted living. It also includes health care facilities.
Substandard Housing. This refers to housing where major repair or replacement may be
needed to make it structurally sound, weatherproofed and habitable.
Subsidized Housing. Typically refers to housing that rents for less than the market rate
due to a direct financial contribution from the government. There are two general
types of housing subsidies. The first is most commonly referred to as “project-based”
where the subsidy is linked with a particular unit or development and the other is known
as “tenant-based” where the subsidy is linked to the low income individual or family. The
terms “assisted” and “subsidized” are often used interchangeably.
Supportive Housing. Housing with a supporting environment, such as group homes or
Single Room Occupancy (SRO) housing and other housing that includes a supportive
service component such as those defined below.
Supportive Services. Services provided to residents of supportive housing for the
purpose of facilitating the independence of residents. Some examples are case
management, medical or psychological counseling and supervision, child care,
transportation, and job training.
Transitional Housing. Housing for people recovering from substance abuse issues or
transitioning for homelessness. Transitional housing provides longer term
accommodations to homeless families and individuals than emergency shelter housing.
Transitional Housing provides a stable living environment for the period of time
                                             2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-148                                                                 City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

necessary to learn new skills, find employment, and/or develop a financial base with
which to re-enter the housing market.
VA-Guaranteed. VA guaranteed loans are made by private lenders to eligible veterans
for the purchase of a home which must be for their own personal occupancy. To get a
loan, a veteran must apply to a lender. If the loan is approved, VA will guarantee a
portion of it to the lender. This guaranty protects the lender against loss up to the
amount guaranteed and allows a veteran to obtain favorable financing terms.
Very Low-Income Limit. Very low-income households are defined as households with
incomes less than 50 percent of the area median household income.
Veteran. Anyone who has been discharged from the military generally after at least two
years of service whether they served on active duty in a conflict or not. (U.S. House Bill
2163).
Workforce Housing. Refers to housing that is meant for residents making low, moderate
to above moderate area median income. Some programs focus on employers
providing assistance to their employees; some are instituting inclusionary programs,
while others give preference to this group in their homeownership programs. Some
jurisdictions have programs for specific segments of the workforce that are vital for the
everyday function of the community such as teachers, policeman and other public
employees.
Zoning. Zoning is an activity under taken by local jurisdictions to direct and shape land
development activities. The intent of zoning is to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare by ensuring that incompatible land uses (e.g. residential vs. heavy industrial) are
not located next to each other. Zoning also impacts land values, creating and taking
away "capitol" for and from property owners. For example, a lot that is zoned for
commercial development is more valuable (in financial terms) than a lot that is zoned
for open space. Typically, lots that are zoned for higher densities have greater value on
the market than lots that are zoned for lower densities. Zoning is one of the most
important regulatory functions performed by local jurisdictions.
U.S. Census Terms
Children. The term “children,” as used in tables on living arrangements of children under
18, are all persons under 18 years, excluding people who maintain households, families,
or subfamilies as a reference person or spouse.
Own Children. Sons and daughters, including stepchildren and adopted children, of the
householder. Similarly, “own” children in a subfamily are sons and daughters of the
married couple or parent in the subfamily. (All children shown as members of related
subfamilies are own children of the person(s) maintaining the subfamily>) For each type
of family unit identifies in the CPS, the count of “own children under 18 year old” is
limited to never-married children; however, “own children under 25”and “own children
of any age,” as the terms are used here, include all children regardless of marital status.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                       8-149

The counts include never-married children living away from home in college
dormitories.
Related children. Includes all people in a household under the age of 18, regardless of
marital status, who are related to the householder. It does not include householder's
spouse or foster children, regardless of age.
Ethnic Origin. People of Hispanic origin were identified by a question that asked for self-
identification of the persons’ origin or descent. Respondents were asked to select their
origin (and the origin of other household members) from a “flash card” listing ethnic
origins. People of Hispanic origin in particular, were those who indicated that their origin
was Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Central or South American, or some other Hispanic
origin. It should be noted that people of Hispanic origin may be of any race.
Family. A group of two or more people who reside together and who are related by
birth, marriage, or adoption.
Family household (Family). A family includes a householder and one or more people
living in the same household who are related to the householder by birth, marriage, or
adoption. All people in a household who are related to the householder are regarded
as members of his or her family. A family household may contain people not related to
the householder, but those people are not included as part of the householder's family
in census tabulations. Thus, the number of family households is equal to the number of
families, but family households may include more members than do families. A
household can contain only one family for purposes of census tabulations. Not all
households contain families since a household may comprise a group of unrelated
people or one person living alone.
Family size. Refers to the number of people in a family.
Family type. Refers to how the members of a family are related to one another and the
householder. Families may be a "Married Couple Family," "Single Parent Family,"
"Stepfamily," or "Subfamily."
Household. A household includes all the people who occupy a housing unit as their
usual place of residence.
Household Income. The total income of all the persons living in a household. A
household is usually described as very low income, low income, moderate income, and
above moderate income based on household size and income, relative to regional
median income.
Household size. The total number of people living in a housing unit.
Household type and relationship. Households are classified by type according to the
sex of the householder and the presence of relatives. Examples include: married-couple
family; male householder, no wife present; female householder, no husband present;
spouse (husband/wife); child; and other relatives.
                                            2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-150                                                                City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

Householder. The person, or one of the people, in whose name the home is owned,
being bought, or rented. If there is no such person present, any household member 15
years old and over can serve as the householder for the purposes of the census. Two
types of householders are distinguished: a family householder and a non-family
householder. A family householder is a householder living with one or more people
related to him or her by birth, marriage, or adoption. The householder and all people in
the household related to him are family members. A non-family householder is a
householder living alone or with non-relatives only.
Housing unit. A house, an apartment, a mobile home or trailer, a group of rooms, or a
single room occupied as separate living quarters, or if vacant, intended for occupancy
as separate living quarters. Separate living quarters are those in which the occupants
live separately from any other individuals in the building and which have direct access
from outside the building or through a common hall. For vacant units, the criteria of
separateness and direct access are applied to the intended occupants whenever
possible.
Median. This measure represents the middle value (if n is odd) or the average of the two
middle values (if n is even) in an ordered list of data values. The median divides the
total frequency distribution into two equal parts: one-half of the cases fall below the
median and one-half of the cases exceed the median.
Median age. This measure divides the age distribution in a stated area into two equal
parts: one-half of the population falling below the median value and one-half above
the median value.
Median income. The median income divides the income distribution into two equal
groups; one has incomes above the median and the other having incomes below the
median.
Occupied housing unit. A housing unit is classified as occupied if it is the usual place of
residence of the person or group of people living in it at the time of enumeration, or if
the occupants are only temporarily absent; that is, away on vacation or a business trip.
The occupants may be a single family, one person living alone, two or more families
living together, or any other group of related or unrelated people who share living
quarters.
Overcrowded units. Overcrowded units are occupied housing units that have more
than 1 person per room.
Per capita income. Average obtained by dividing aggregate income by total
population of an area.
Population estimate (Population Estimates Program). The Census Bureau's Population
Estimates Program (PEP) produces July 1 estimates for years after the last published
decennial census (2000), as well as for past decades. Existing data series such as births,
deaths, Federal tax returns, Medicare enrollment, and immigration, are used to update
the decennial census base counts. POP estimates are used in Federal funding
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                       8-151

allocations, in setting the levels of national surveys, and in monitoring recent
demographic changes.
Population projections. Estimates of the population for future dates. They illustrate
plausible courses of future population change based on assumptions about future
births, deaths, international migration, and domestic migration. Projections are based
on an estimated population consistent with the most recent decennial census as
enumerated. While projections and estimates may appear similar, there are some
distinct differences between the two measures. Estimates usually are for the past, while
projections typically are for future dates. Estimates generally use existing data, while
projections must assume what demographic trends will be in the future.
Poverty. Following the Office of Management and Budget's (OMB's) Directive 14, the
Census Bureau uses a set of money income thresholds that vary by family size and
composition to detect who is poor. If the total income for a family or unrelated
individual falls below the relevant poverty threshold, then the family or unrelated
individual is classified as being "below the poverty level."
Poverty rate. The percentage of people (or families) who are below poverty.
Race. The race of individuals was identified by a question that asked for self-
identification of the person’s race. Respondents were asked to select their race from a
“flashcard” listing racial groups.
Severely Overcrowded. Are occupied housing units with 1.51 or more persons per room.
Single family detached homes. This is a one-unit residential structure detached from any
other house (i.e., with open space on all four sides). A house is considered detached
even if it has an adjoining shed or garage.
Single family attached housing. This is a one-unit residential structure that has one or
more walls extending from ground to roof separating it from adjoining structures. This
category includes row houses, townhouses, and houses attached to non-residential
structures.
Tenure. Refers to the distinction between owner-occupied and renter-occupied
housing units. A housing unit is “owned” if the owner or co-owner lives in the unit, even if
it is mortgaged or not fully paid for. A cooperative or condominium unit is “owned only
if the owner or co-owner lives in it. All other occupied units are classified as “rented, “
including units rented for cash rent and those occupied without payment of cash rent.
Two-family buildings. These dwellings may also be referred to as single family attached
because a duplex with a shared wall would qualify in both categories. Other two family
buildings would include older single family homes that have been converted into two
separate living spaces or “flats” that do not share walls, but a floor/ceiling.
Units in structure. A structure is a separate building that either has open spaces on all
sides or is separated from other structures by dividing walls that extend from ground to
                                            2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
8-152                                                                City of Mt. Shasta General Plan

roof. In determining the number of units in a structure, all housing units, both occupied
and vacant, are counted.
Unemployed. All civilians 16 years old and over are classified as unemployed if they (1)
were neither "at work" nor "with a job but not at work" during the reference week, and
(2) were actively looking for work during the last 4 weeks, and (3) were available to
accept a job. Also included as unemployed are civilians who did not work at all during
the reference week, were waiting to be called back to a job from which they had
been laid off, and were available for work except for temporary illness.
Unemployment Rate. The proportion of the civilian labor force that is unemployed,
expressed as a percent.
Vacancy Rate. The housing vacancy rate is the proportion of the housing inventory that
is available ‘‘for sale’’ or ‘‘for rent.’’ It is computed by dividing the number of available
units by the sum of occupied units and available units, and then multiplying by 100.
Vacant Housing Unit. A housing unit is vacant if no one is living in it at the time of
enumeration, unless its occupants are only temporarily absent. Units temporarily
occupied at the time of enumeration entirely by people who have a usual residence
elsewhere are also classified as vacant. New units not yet occupied are classified as
vacant housing units if construction has reached a point where all exterior windows and
doors are installed and final usable floors are in place. Vacant units are excluded from
the housing inventory if they are open to the elements; that is, the roof, walls, windows,
and/or doors no longer protect the interior from the elements. Also excluded are
vacant units with a sign that they are condemned or they are to be demolished.
White. In decennial census data, the White category includes persons having origins in
any of the original peoples of Europe, the Middle East, or North Africa. It includes
people who indicate their race as ‘‘White’’ or report entries such as Irish, German,
Italian, Lebanese, Near Easterner, Arab, or Polish. The "alone" designation, as used with
decennial census data, indicates that the person reported only one race.
Year Structure (housing unit) Built. Year structure built refers to when the building was first
constructed, not when it was remodeled, added to, or converted. For housing units
under construction that met the housing unit definition—that is, all exterior windows,
doors, and final usable floors were in place—the category ‘‘1999 or 2000’’ was used for
tabulations. For mobile homes, houseboats, recreational vehicles, etc, the
manufacturer’s model year was assumed to be the year built. The data relate to the
number of units built during the specified periods that were still in existence at the time
of enumeration.
2014 – 2019 Housing Element (Adopted October 13, 2014)
City of Mt. Shasta General Plan                                                          8-153

