  CITY OF DESERT HOT SPRINGS
                  RIVERSIDE COUNTY, CALIFORNIA
COMPREHENSIVE GENERAL PLAN
                            Adopted September 5, 2000
                                      PREPARED FOR
                     CITY OF DESERT HOT SPRINGS
                       65-950 PIERSON BOULEVARD
                    DESERT HOT SPRINGS, CA 92240
                                       PREPARED BY
          TERRA NOVA PLANNING & RESEARCH, INC.®
                               400 S. FARRELL, B-205
                           PALM SPRINGS, CA 92262

         CITY OF DESERT HOT SPRINGS
                 COMPREHENSIVE
                        GENERAL
                              PLAN
                           CITY COUNCIL
Mayor                    Council Members                    Vice Mayor
Matt Weyuker               Gary Bosworth                   Greg Ruppert
                           Jan Pye
                           Mary Stephens
                     PLANNING COMMISSION
                           Angelo Avramidis
                           Paula Harris
                           Teddy Kovach
                           Will Pieper
                           Steve Sobotta
               GENERAL PLAN ADVISORY COMMITTEE
                         Committee Members
Don Coleman                John Furbee                    Tim McCreary
Colleen Peters             Frank Purcell                   John Santucci
Hank Schmitz               George Thacker                   Mac Villines
John Waters                Jack Webb                      Nancy Wright
Paula Harris               Dick Cromwell
                             Prepared By
                    Terra Nova Planning & Research, Inc.®
                    400 S. Farrell Dr., Suite B-205
                       Palm Springs, CA 92262
                     Adopted September 5, 2000

                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                          General Plan/Table of Contents
                 CITY OF DESERT HOT SPRINGS
              COMPREHENSIVE GENERAL PLAN
                                TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                                 Page
I.   INTRODUCTION TO THE GENERAL PLAN                                           I
     Introduction                                                               I-1
II.  ADMINISTRATION AND IMPLEMENTATION                                          II
     Administration Element                                                     II-1
III. COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT                                                      III
     A.     Land Use Element                                                    III-1
     B.     Circulation Element                                                 III-26
     C.     Housing Element                                                     III-50
     D.     Parks and Recreation Element                                        III-94
     E.     Community Design Element                                            III-105
     F.     Economic Development Element                                        III-121
IV.  ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES                                                    IV
     A.     Biological Resources Element                                        IV-1
     B.     Archaeological and Historic Resources Element                       IV-12
     C.     Water Resources Element                                             IV-22
     D.     Air Quality Element                                                 IV-32
     E.     Open Space and Conservation Element                                 IV-41
     F.     Energy and Mineral Resources Element                                IV-55
V.   ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARDS                                                      V
     A.     Geotechnical Element                                                V-1
     B.     Flooding and Hydrology Element                                      V-17
     C.     Noise Element                                                       V-26
     D.     Hazardous and Toxic Materials Element                               V-43
VI.  PUBLIC SERVICES AND FACILITIES                                             VI
     A.     Water, Sewer and Utilities Element                                  VI-1
     B.     Fire and Police Protection Element                                  VI-9
     C.     Schools and Libraries Element                                       VI-14
     D.     Health Services Element                                             VI-19
     E.     Emergency Preparedness Element                                      VI-24
     F.     Public Building and Facilities Element                              VI-32
VII  GLOSSARY                                                                   VII
     Glossary                                                                   VII-1
                                              i
                                                                     TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                    General Plan/Table of Contents
                               TABLE OF CONTENTS (cont’d)
CHARTS                                                                                    Page
III-1  City of Desert Hot Springs Population 1970 Through 2000                            III-123
III-2  Desert Hot Springs Per Capita and Median Household Income
       Trends from 1970 through 2000                                                      III-124
III-3  Housing Unit Trends for the City of Desert Hot Springs 1970-2000                   III-125
III-4  Construction Valuations: Residential and Non-Residential
       1990 Thru 1996 (Million)                                                           III-129
III-5  Taxable Sales for Desert Hot Springs 1985 Through 1995                             III-133
EXHIBITS
I-1    City Planning Area Map                                                             I-4
III-1  General Plan Land Use Map                                                          III-10
III-2  Existing Average Daily Traffic Volumes (ADT)                                       III-30
III-3  General Plan Buildout Traffic Projections                                          III-37
III-4  Roadway Classification Map                                                         III-38
III-5  Street Cross Sections                                                              III-39
III-6  CVAG Non-Motorized Transportation                                                  III-44
IV-1   Geothermal Temperature Contour Map                                                 IV-24
IV-2   Soil Types in Desert Hot Springs                                                   IV-47
V-1    Faults in the Desert Hot Springs General Plan Area                                 V-8
V-2    Seismically Induced Rock Falls and Landslide Susceptibility Map                    V-10
V-3    Wind Hazard Zones in the Desert Hot Springs Area                                   V-12
V-4    Flooding Hazards                                                                   V-23
V-5    Noise Monitoring Sites                                                             V-36
TABLES
III-1  City of Desert Hot Springs Draft General Plan Proposed Land Use
       Designations                                                                       III-3
III-2  City of Desert Hot Springs & SOI Statistical Summary of Land Uses
       GPAC Preferred Alternative                                                         III-11
III-3  Commercial Land Use Development Potential                                          III-19
III-4  Level of Service Description                                                       III-28
III-5  Daily Roadway Capacity Estimates                                                   III-29
III-6  General Plan Road Analysis                                                         III-34
III-7  New Residential Building Permits 1994-1999                                         III-53
III-8  Age Distribution                                                                   III-60
III-9  Ethnic Characteristics, 1990                                                       III-60
III-10 Household Income Distribution, 1990                                                III-61
III-11 Major Employers - 1998                                                             III-62
III-12 Employment by Industry, 1995                                                       III-63
III-13 Housing Characteristics - 1990                                                     III-64
III-14 Housing Characteristics - 1997                                                     III-64
                                               ii

                                                                      TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                     General Plan/Table of Contents
                              TABLE OF CONTENTS (cont’d)
Tables (cont’d)                                                                            Page
III-15 Age of Housing Units                                                                III-65
III-16 Vacancy Status - 1990                                                               III-66
III-17 Housing Tenure - 1990                                                               III-67
III-18 Overcrowding, 1990                                                                  III-67
III-19 Values, Specified Owner-Occupied Housing Units, 1990                                III-68
III-20 Vacant Residential Land, 1999                                                       III-69
III-21 2000 County of Riverside Housing Program Income Limits                              III-72
III-22 City of Desert Hot Springs Planning Department Fees                                 III-74
III-23 Residential Development Standards Minimum Area Requirements for
       Residential Zones                                                                   III-75
III-24 Minimum Development Standards for Residential Zones                                 III-76
III-25 Development Fees - City of Desert Hot Springs - 1996                                III-78
III-26 Future Housing Needs by Income Category 1998-2005                                   III-81
III-27 Affordable Housing, Income Limits County of Riverside, 2000                         III-86
III-28 Lower Income Households Overpaying for Housing - 1998                               III-87
III-29 Representative Mobilehome Park Market Rates in Desert Hot Springs 2000              III-87
III-30 Representative Apartment Market Rates in Desert Hot Springs 2000                    III-88
III-31 Quantified Objectives Matrix 1998-2005                                              III-89
III-32 Housing Characteristics for Desert Hot Springs 1990-1997 Comparison                 III-126
III-33 Occupations of Residents in the City of Desert Hot Springs 1990                     III-127
III-34 Major Employers - 2000                                                              III-128
III-35 1995 Annual Expenditure Estimate for Desert Hot Springs Residents                   III-131
III-36 Taxable Sales for Desert Hot Springs 1985 through 1995                              III-132
III-37 Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT) Desert Hot Springs                                    III-134
IV-1 Desert Hot Springs Species of Special Concern                                         IV-6
IV-2 Mineral Analysis of Representative Surface Waters                                     IV-27
IV-3 State and Federal Ambient Air Quality Standards                                       IV-37
IV-4 Designated Open Space Lands City of Desert Hot Springs and
       General Plan Study Area Approximate Acres                                           IV-44
V-1 Major and Minor Drainages Desert Hot Springs Planning Area                             V-20
V-2 Community Noise and Land Use Compatibility                                             V-30
V-3 Existing Exterior Noise Exposure Adjacent to City Roadways
       Desert Hot Springs 1994                                                             V-32
V-4 Noise Monitoring at Selected Site Locations and CNEL Values (1994)                     V-35
V-5 1994 and General Plan Buildout Projected Noise Contours on Major
       Roadways (Distance to CNEL Contours in Feet from Centerline)                        V-37
                                               iii

                                                                                      TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                                                        General Plan
            CITY OF DESERT HOT SPRINGS
       COMPREHENSIVE GENERAL PLAN
                                                     CHAPTER I
                             INTRODUCTION TO THE GENERAL PLAN
This introductory chapter of the General Plan provides the broadest overview of the General Plan, what it is, what
information it contains and how it should be used. The chapter also summarizes the City’s history and important
features. The size of the planning area, the state of existing development and the community’s valuable resources are
also summarized and maps of the region and City boundaries are provided. The relationship of the General Plan to
the Environmental Impact Report is explained.
                                                             I

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                              General Plan/Introduction
INTRODUCTION
DESERT HOT SPRINGS
COMPREHENSIVE GENERAL PLAN
All incorporated towns and cities, and all counties are required by the California Government
Code to prepare comprehensive, long-term general plans, which direct development of the
community. As an official document of the City of Desert Hot Springs, the General Plan
provides the goals, policies and programs to guide the development of the City and to preserve
its valued assets and resources. In addition to goals and policies, the General Plan includes issues
discussions, diagrams and maps, tables and charts that provide direction for the prudent and
conscientious management of future development.
The makeup and composition of the City of Desert Hot Springs are described in this section of
the General Plan. It also describes the planning area which includes the City limits, and the
regional context and long-term perspective taken by the City in developing this document.
Finally, this brief chapter provides an overview of the General Plan and the Environmental
Impact Report, and their role as the principal development guides for community development.
City of Desert Hot Springs
The City of Desert Hot Springs comprises an established residential community with important
vacation resorts centered on the City’s unique hot water mineral springs resource. The City also
provides community-scale commercial and business centers serving the City and surrounding
communities. Located in the northwest portion of the Coachella Valley in Riverside County, the
City is a transitional area between a more intense tourist commercial base to the south and
southeast and the more rural and quasi-industrial windfarm development to the west.
Relatively isolated from surrounding development of other communities in the Coachella Valley,
Desert Hot Springs must rely on its own resources and capabilities to meet the needs of its
residents and local businesses. The City is also at a pivotal position in the setting of
governmental policy for such issues as public safety and the conservation and preservation of our
City’s environment. The extremes in climate and the high geological activity of the region have
shaped Desert Hot Springs and given it unique and valued characteristics that warrant our
appreciation and protection.
Before considerable settlement of Europeans took place in the Coachella Valley in the latter part
of the 19th century, for millennia before that time, Native Indians of the Serrano and associated
clans, and their ancestors, shared this region and its resources. It was not until the middle 20th
century that Desert Hot Springs began to expand into a city. Today, it is a center for spa hotels
and hot mineral spring therapy, as well as a center of massage and holistic health.
The City of Desert Hot Springs encompasses 14,782+ acres or over 23 square miles. The City’s
Sphere-of-Influence (SOI), County managed lands over which the City has an advisory role,
                                                 I-1

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                            General Plan/Introduction
totals another 32.5 square miles. Development over the past decades has been focused within the
existing urban growth area and in the north-central portion of the City. Approval of new
residential and resort development has been predominantly in the western portions of the City
and at the eastern end of Pierson Boulevard. Newly annexed lands provide an opportunity for
community-scale commercial and a wide range of residential densities, with wind energy lands
located in the extreme southwest corner of the City and in its Sphere-of-Influence.
Unincorporated City SOI lands are primarily located south of the incorporated city limits, with
important and developable sphere lands also located to the east.
The City is situated on an upper valley plain and mountain foothills within the widening low
desert Coachella Valley, which ranges from one to about ten miles wide. The San Bernardino
and Little San Bernardino Mountains bound the City on the west and north, respectively. The
extensive alluvial plains formed by drainage from these mountains form the elevated valley on
which most of the City has developed. The adjoining mountains and the San Jacinto and Santa
Rosa Mountains to the southwest and south, respectively, also provide dramatic and valuable
viewsheds. The City is a geographically and biologically important location, where significantly
differing wildlife habitat, landscape and geology meet.
This General Plan for Desert Hot Springs reflects the City’s appreciation for the quality of desert
living the community has to offer and a determination to protect it. The Plan also reflects and
acts on the new opportunities for community and economic development. As part of a strategy to
broaden the City’s economic base, the primary environmental resources, including the hot
mineral springs which gave birth to the City, must be protected. Simply, the community's highest
values go hand in hand; appreciating and protecting the built and natural environments are two
sides of the same coin.
The General Plan and Environmental Impact Report
The Comprehensive General Plan and associated Environmental Impact Report (EIR) have been
developed to serve as a framework for decision-making regarding the appropriate types and
intensities of land use, and conditions by which development is to be permitted in the City. The
process of preparing these documents must involve thoughtful and extensive community
consultation, including the identification of issues, and the development of goals, policies, and
programs. It also involves the consideration of various alternatives, the consensus selection of a
preferred course of action, and finally, the development of strategies to implement the General
Plan.
As required by state law, each jurisdiction must prepare and adopt a General Plan and supporting
documentation to provide the basis for the community's development. The Plan identifies the
environmental, social and economic goals, and sets forth policies, standards and programs for
existing and future development. The General Plan also provides the framework to analyze and
respond to changing circumstances as the City evolves.
The background information and issues are summarized in the General Plan and are discussed in
greater depth in the General Plan EIR. Therefore, both documents provide City officials and the
general public with vital information necessary to make informed decisions. The General Plan
                                                I-2

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                             General Plan/Introduction
and the EIR also serve as the basis for subsequent planning efforts, including the preparation of
Specific Plans and special environmental and planning studies.
The General Plan Process
The City’s previous General Plan was last comprehensively undated in 1986-87 and adopted in
October, 1987. Based upon a need to respond to recent social, economic, physical and political
conditions, the City Council determined that a comprehensive update to the General Plan was
necessary. In December, 1996, the City Council approved a process for the review and updating
of the General Plan, which included proposed community participation objectives and
techniques, a proposed committee to recommend General Plan goals and policies, an
identification of needed staff and consultant resources, and a preliminary schedule and budget.
General Plan Advisory Committee
The Planning Commission and City Council appointed a fifteen member General Plan Advisory
Committee (GPAC) to serve as the primary means of citizen involvement in the formulation of
the draft General Plan. Beginning in April, 1997, the GPAC met publicly twice monthly to
discuss and review draft General Plan elements and their goals, policies and programs. The
GPAC also took City-wide field trips in an effort to obtain a better understanding of community
conditions and opinions.
Between April and September of 1997, the General Plan Advisory Committee held 12 public
meetings during which staff and consultant presentations were followed by preliminary votes to
adopt, modify or reject proposed goals, policies and programs. The proposed land use map
designations received the most amounts of citizen input and GPAC discussion during the
meetings. The final version of the Preferred Alternative was selected in November, 1999. Special
newspaper notices were published in an effort to inform the public of proposed changes to be
considered in the General Plan. The recommendations of the GPAC were forwarded to the
Planning Commission and City Council for their review and adoption.
General Plan Format
The General Plan is organized into five major chapters: Administration, Community
Development, Environmental Resources, Environmental Hazards, and Public Services and
Facilities. Within each chapter are the various General Plan elements and their accompanying
background information, goals, policies and programs.
 Goals, Policies and Programs
Each element contains at least one goal statement and related policy statements and programs. A
goal in the General Plan is the most general statement of community values expressed as a
desirable end-state condition to be achieved in the future. The heart of the General Plan is
contained within its policy statements. Policies further refine the goal statements and provide a
clear direction for decision-making. Policies frequently include “shall” statements to provide
                                                I-3

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                              General Plan/Introduction
unequivocal directives. Decision-making criteria, major development standards and funding
priorities are best established by clear General Plan policies. General Plan programs are included
as implementation measures needed to carry out related policy statements.
Programs provide the basis for scheduling and assigning staff and other resources to specific
actions which are needed to implement certain directives of the Plan.
The maps and graphics which are included in the General Plan illustrate policies. For example,
the land use map represents a series of policies for the type and intensity of future development
to occur at various locations throughout the City.
EXHIBIT I-1 CITY PLANNING AREA
                                                 I-4
                                                                                        TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                                                         General Plan
             CITY OF DESERT HOT SPRINGS
        COMPREHENSIVE GENERAL PLAN
                                                  CHAPTER II
                            ADMINISTRATION AND IMPLEMENTATION
This Chapter of the General Plan addresses the administration of the General Plan, through the Administration and
Implementation Element. Key discussions in this element include the format and content of the General Plan, the
various chapters and elements, determining consistency with the General Plan, amending the General Plan, purpose
and scope of Specific Plans, and other means of implementing the Plan. The Specific Plan plays an important role
as a refined version of the General Plan applicable to specific portions of the City. Other components and aspects of
the General Plan are also discussed in the Administration and Implementation Element, including environmental
resource and hazard maps, design concepts, and procedural matters.
                                                           II
                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                    General Plan/Administration Element
ADMINISTRATION ELEMENT
PURPOSE
The Administration Element provides background on the information set forth in the General
Plan, its organization, the Plan's function and its relationship to other regulatory documents,
including the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), the Subdivision Map Act, and the
City Zoning Ordinance. The Administration Element also describes General Plan review and
amendment procedures. It is the intent of this Element to describe the various means by which
the General Plan is implemented, including Element-specific implementation strategies, which
are incorporated throughout the General Plan. The Element also sets forth goal, policies and
programs intended to effectively administer the General Plan.
BACKGROUND
The Administration Element provides for the periodic review and amendment of the General
Plan, establishing formal procedures to ensure that the Plan is maintained and kept current with
changing conditions, and that it continues to reflect the goals of the community as a whole. The
Element also facilitates the review and processing of land use and development proposals, the
appropriateness of which are determined through a review of applicable policies and standards
for consistency with the General Plan.
California Government Code (Section 65300) requires that incorporated communities                  and
counties prepare and adopt a comprehensive, long-term General Plan which regulates                  the
physical development of lands under the jurisdiction of, or having an influence upon,               the
community, including the City’s legally recognized Sphere-of-Influence. The General Plan           and
its various elements are required to function as an integrated, internally consistent              and
compatible statement of policies (Government Code Section 65300.5).
It is also recognized that special local conditions and circumstances must be accommodated and
that the General Plan may take differing forms, while meeting its minimum requirements
(Government Code Section 65300.7). The General Plan must be designed to be responsive to the
variations in community size and density, fiscal and administrative capabilities, land use and
development issues, and the needs of each community's residents (Government Code Sections
65300.9, 65302).
Format and Content
The Desert Hot Springs General Plan is organized into five major chapters: Administration,
Community Development, Environmental Resources, Environmental Hazards, and Public
Services and Facilities. Within each chapter are the various General Plan Elements, providing
background information and related issues, goals and specific policies.
                                                 II - 1

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                     General Plan/Administration Element
The Desert Hot Springs General Plan is strongly supported by programs set forth in each element
that reflect the community's pro-active philosophy of local government. These have been
consolidated and elaborated upon to provide implementation strategies to facilitate long-term
planning and infrastructure development.
Goals, Policies, and Programs
The General Plan goals are developed as broad statements reflecting the City’s values, aims and
aspirations. These goals address the physical development of the City, as well as the preservation
of the community's important environmental and cultural assets. The policies have been
developed to further the goals of the General Plan, and set forth specific performance
requirements for each element. Programs accompanying the elements provide quantitative and
qualitative targets set forth the agencies most likely to carry out the program, and propose
possible schedules for program implementation and review.
Maps and Graphics
Official maps and graphics are incorporated into the General Plan to delineate land use and
circulation patterns, scenic highways, community focal points, open space and recreation
facilities, and areas requiring special consideration or study. Important or significant
environmental resource and hazard areas are also mapped, as well as public and quasi-public
facilities. These official maps carry equal authority to the goals and policies of the General Plan.
The Elements
California Government Code Section 65302 establishes the seven (7) mandatory elements of the
General Plan: Land Use, Circulation, Housing, Conservation, Open Space, Safety, and Noise. It
is recognized that some of the required elements may be addressed in combination with other
complementary elements, such as Open Space and Conservation.
All of the mandated elements are found within the Desert Hot Springs General Plan. This
document integrates the mandatory and discretionary elements into five (5) major chapters,
organized to reflect compliance with State requirements that the General Plan be internally
consistent, comprising an integrated and compatible statement of policies for the City. Each
element of the General Plan has equal legal authority.
Community Development Chapter
The Community Development chapter most directly affects the character and quality of life of
the community through the distribution of land uses, the intensity of commercial and other
development, densities and types of housing, roadway and circulation plans, the provision of
parks and recreational facilities, the establishment of architectural and community design
guidelines, the preservation of scenic vistas, and the development, preservation and enhancement
of a healthy economy. This chapter includes the following General Plan elements:
                                                 II - 2

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                     General Plan/Administration Element
                                     Community Development
    •   Land Use
    •   Circulation
    •   Housing
    •   Parks and Recreation
    •   Community Design
    •   Economic and Fiscal
Environmental Resources Chapter
The resources of the physical natural environment, including man-made artifacts of historical or
archaeological significance, biological resources, open space and conservation and other natural
resources and described in this chapter. Goals and policies are set forth within each element to
assure the preservation and enhancement of the physical environment and resources as important
assets of the community. The Environmental Resources chapter includes the following elements:
                                     Environmental Resources
    •   Archaeological and Historic Resources
    •   Biological Resources
    •   Water Resources
    •   Air Quality
    •   Energy and Mineral Resources
    •   Open Space and Conservation
Environmental Hazards Chapter
The hazards of the physical environment, including man-made hazardous conditions and toxic
materials, are described in this chapter. Within each Element, goals and policies are set forth
which identify specific hazards and means of assuring the protection of public health, safety and
welfare. Hazards of particular concern to the City are given special attention in this chapter. The
Environmental Hazards chapter of the General Plan includes the following elements:
                                      Environmental Hazards
    •   Geotechnical (Seismic Safety, Soils and Erosion)
    •   Flooding and Hydrology
    •   Noise
    •   Hazardous and Toxic Materials
Public Services and Facilities Chapter
The principal concern of local government is the long-term provision of adequate levels of
essential public facilities and services. Goals and policies are set forth in each element to assure
an adequate level of services and facilities congruent with the level of development anticipated in
the City. The Public Services and Facilities chapter of the General Plan includes the following
elements:
                                                 II - 3

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                   General Plan/Administration Element
                                  Public Services and Facilities
    •   Public Utilities
    •   Fire and Police Protection
    •   Schools and Libraries
    •   Health Services
    •   Emergency Preparedness
    •   Public Buildings and Facilities
    •   Arts and Culture
Using The General Plan
Frequently described as the “constitution” of the City, the General Plan is the foundation upon
which all land use decisions are to be based. The Plan is a comprehensive information and
planning guide established by State law to provide a framework for making informed decisions
about the future of the community. The Plan identifies the community’s land use, circulation,
environmental, economic and social goals and policies as they relate to land use and
development. The General Plan, and supporting environmental documentation, identifies
concerns and issues important to the community, analyze them, and establish goals, policies, and
program implementation measures, which resolve these issues. It also provides the basis for a
rational nexus to support development, mitigation measures and exactions. Special studies and
performance programs are also integral parts of the goals, policies, programs which assure
effective implementation of the General Plan.
Consistency with the General Plan
Whether developer or City initiated, proposals for development must be analyzed and tested for
consistency with the goals, policies, and programs in every applicable element of the General
Plan. On an on-going basis, the City must assure and maintain consistency of the General Plan
with adopted Specific Plans and the City Zoning Ordinance. This test of General Plan
compliance is also a required criterion for determining significant impacts under the provisions
of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).
Interpretation of the General Plan
In any case where uncertainty exists regarding the location of boundaries of any land use
category, proposed public facility symbol, circulation alignment, or other symbol or line found
on the official maps, the following procedures will be used to resolve such uncertainty.
Boundaries shown in the General Plan and on official maps as approximately following the
limits of any municipal corporation are to be construed as following these limits. Boundaries
shown as following or approximately following section lines, half or quarter section lines shall
be construed as following such lines.
                                               II - 4

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                     General Plan/Administration Element
Boundaries shown as following or approximately following the centerline of streams, creeks,
rivers, or other continuously or intermittently flowing streams or creeks are to be construed as
following the channel centerline of these water courses taken at mean low water, and, in the
event of natural change in the location of such streams or other water courses, the zone boundary
is to be construed as moving with the channel centerline.
Where a land use category applied to a parcel is not mapped to include an adjacent street or
alley, the category shall be considered to extend to the centerline of the right of way. Boundaries
shown as separated from, parallel, or approximately parallel to any of the features listed above
shall be construed to be parallel to such features and at such distances there from as are shown on
the map. Symbols that indicate appropriate locations for proposed public facilities are not
property specific. They indicate only the general area within which a specific facility should be
established.
CEQA Review of Consistency
State CEQA Guidelines require that an initial study include "an examination of whether the
project is compatible with existing zoning and plans." The State CEQA Guidelines further
stipulate that, "A project will normally have a significant effect on the environment if it will
conflict with adopted environmental plans and goals of the community where it is located." If a
determination is made by the Planning Commission or the City Council that the proposed action
is inconsistent with the General Plan, no further action shall be taken without the completion and
processing of an EIR or other detailed analysis which would support a finding of overriding
consideration.
Zoning Consistency
California State law also mandates that the City’s Zoning Ordinance be consistent with the
General Plan. In the event that the Zoning Ordinance becomes inconsistent with the General Plan
by reason of a General Plan Amendment, the Zoning Ordinance must be amended within a
reasonable time so that it is made consistent with the General Plan, as amended. The Zoning
Ordinance cannot be amended if it causes an inconsistency with the General Plan.
Amending The General Plan
Rather than a static document, the General Plan is dynamic and multi-faceted, continuously
defining and addressing the changing needs of the community. It is also based on an on-going
assessment and understanding of existing and projected community needs. To assure that the
General Plan is kept current, short-term programs and policies may be reviewed annually to
reflect compatibility with budgetary priorities and related program status. Long-term programs
and implementation measures must also be given forward planning consideration to assure
timely funding and development of critical infrastructure and public services and facilities.
                                                 II - 5

                                                                        TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                  General Plan/Administration Element
Annual Review
California Government Code requires that the planning agency "render an annual report to the
legislative body (City Council) on the status of the Plan and the progress in its implementation"
(Section 65400(b)). State law further requires that the Housing Element be reviewed and updated
at least once every five (5) years.
Mandatory elements of the General Plan may be amended up to four (4) times in each calendar
year. The City Council or any citizen may initiate a General Plan Amendment. It is left to the
discretion of the local jurisdiction to establish an amendment schedule to be published one year
in advance.
Application Procedures
Applications for the amendment of the General Plan and the appropriate fees are filed with the
City Community Development Department. An amendment to the General Plan constitutes a
project under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), and therefore is evaluated for
its environmental effects and consistency with other elements of the General Plan. Final approval
of General Plan amendments is the responsibility of the City Council.
Exemptions
The State Legislature has recognized that occasions arise which require the local jurisdiction to
have some flexibility in amending the General Plan. As set forth in the California Government
Code, the following are exempt from the General Plan amendment schedule.
(1) Amendments requested and determined necessary for the development of a residential
project, of which at least twenty-five percent (25%) of its units will be available to persons of
low or moderate income (Sections 65361(b) and 65358(d)).
(2) Any amendment necessary to comply with a court decision in a case involving the legal
adequacy of the General Plan (Sections 65361 and 65358 (d) (1)).
Specific Plans
A Specific Plan plays an important role as a refined version of the General Plan, applicable to a
specific portion of the community. Specific Plans often provide detailed design and analysis of
complex mixed-use projects, and indicate precise land use locations and designs. Specific Plans
contain text, exhibits, and diagrams indicating the distribution, location, and intensity of
proposed land uses and the necessary public and private urban support systems, including streets,
utilities and drainage facilities.
The standards and criteria by which development and, where applicable, conservation will
proceed on the property are also defined in the Specific Plan. Additionally, a Specific Plan
provides a program of implementation measures and financing necessary to carry out the project.
                                                 II - 6
                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                    General Plan/Administration Element
It must also be consistent with all facets of the General Plan and in turn, zoning, subdivision, and
public works projects must be consistent with an existing Specific Plan (Government Code
Section 65455).
Development proposals on lands designated with the Specific Plan overlay on the Land Use Map
must also be processed through the submittal of a Specific Plan. Larger complex development
proposals may also be required to process a Specific Plan. Specific Plans are prepared, adopted
and amended in the same manner as a General Plan, may be adopted by resolution or ordinance,
and may be amended as often as deemed necessary by the City Council. Development proposals
within areas designated with a Specific Plan overlay on the General Plan Land Use Map cannot
proceed until a Specific Plan has been prepared and adopted by the City Council.
In areas where the Specific Plan encompasses more than one property, the plan must be
completed and adopted prior to development on any affected property. Specific Plans may be
prepared either by the applicant or the City. Should the City prepare the Specific Plan, it is
entitled to reimbursement by affected property owners pursuant to Section 65456 of the
California Government Code.
Capital Facilities
Among the statutory responsibilities of California, incorporated towns, cities and counties is to
“annually review the capital improvement program of the city or county and the local public
works projects of other local agencies for their consistency with the General Plan.” Also,
pursuant to Government code Section 65401; all departments within the City and all other local
government agencies must submit a list of proposed projects to the City. The City is responsible
for reviewing these projects for conformity with the General Plan.
Implementation of the General Plan
California Government Code Section 65103(c) requires that local jurisdictions implement the
General Plan once it has been adopted. The Desert Hot Springs General Plan relies on element
programs and implementation strategies, as well as the related mitigation measures and programs
set forth in the General Plan Program EIR, to serve as implementation measures. The City
Zoning Ordinance also plays a critical role in implementing the goals and policies of the Plan
and Specific Plans provide detailed implementation programs for specific portions of the General
Plan area.
Implementation Through the Zoning Ordinance
The Zoning Ordinance is an exercise of police powers granted to the City by the State, and is the
primary tool for implementing the General Plan. The Zoning Ordinance regulates land use by
distinct development zones and permitted uses. Text, maps, diagrams and other materials
describe the distribution and intensity of land uses into such categories as residential, commercial
and industrial uses. Written regulations establish minimum development standards for each of
the land use zones in a manner consistent with the General Plan. Permitting processes set forth in
the Zoning Ordinance, including Conditional Use Permits, Variances, Architectural Reviews and
                                                 II - 7

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                     General Plan/Administration Element
other land use permitting, also implement the General Plan. The implementation of the General
Plan is further regulated by Government Code Sections 65800 et. seq.
Implementation Through the
Subdivision Ordinance
Like Zoning Ordinances, subdivision regulation is also an exercise of police powers and a
principal instrument for implementing the General Plan. Establishing state-wide uniformity in
local subdivision procedures, the State Subdivision Map Act (Government Code Sections 66410
et seq.) leaves the standards for regulating the design and improvement of subdivision to local
government.
The broadest authority for regulating subdivisions lies in Government Code Sections 66473.5,
66474, 66474.60, and 66474.61, requiring findings that, among other things, the subdivision is
consistent with the City General Plan and any applicable Specific Plan.
Development Agreements
State law provides for the adoption of development agreements between a project proponent and
the City, in accordance with Government Code Section 65865 et seq. The purpose of
development agreements is to provide developers with additional assurances that development
approvals will not be nullified by some future local policy or regulation change. In exchange, the
developer may be required to meet certain conditions or performance criteria which become part
of the agreement.
Development agreements can be a useful means of meeting General Plan goals and policies,
while removing some of the risks faced by developers. Agreements can remain in effect for a
few or several years, the term typically being set forth in the agreement.
It is important to emphasize that, as set forth in Government Code Section 65866, the City,
unless otherwise provided by the development agreement, is not prevented from applying new
rules, regulations, and policies which do not conflict with those rules, regulations, and policies
applicable to that property. Neither is the City prevented from denying or conditionally
approving any subsequent development project application on the basis of such existing or new
rules, regulations or policies.
Commissions and Committees
The City is also empowered to establish advisory commissions or committees, which may be
comprised of public officials as well as private individuals, to review and make
recommendations on policies or programs facilitating implementation of the General Plan. These
commissions typically address such issue areas as parks and recreation, trails, libraries, public
safety, community and architectural design, affordable housing and emergency preparedness.
The City Council may establish commissions or committees to address specific and focused
issues, or to provide recommendations on an on-going basis. The Council may perpetuate or
dissolve these commissions or committees as it sees fit.
                                                II - 8
                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                   General Plan/Administration Element
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The Administration Element is essential to the effective enactment of the General Plan. The Plan
relies on the development and maintenance of City regulatory documents, including the Zoning
Ordinance, Specific Plan requirements, the Subdivision Ordinance, and City Rules for the
Implementation of CEQA. The General Plan itself is a living document with mandates for
frequent review and refinement. Amendments to the Plan should be given careful consideration
and not be granted casually. The goal, policies, programs and implementation strategies of the
Element will help to assure the effective administration and implementation of all elements of
the Desert Hot Springs General Plan.
ADMINISTRATION GOAL, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
GOAL
Comprehensive and integrated administration and implementation of all elements of the Desert
Hot Springs General Plan through consistent and effective policies and programs.
Policy 1
Provide for the periodic revision and updating of the General Plan and ensure that associated
City ordinances, including the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinances, are maintained in
conformance with the General Plan.
Program 1 A
The City Council shall, through the public hearing process, receive an annual report from the
Planning Commission on the status of the General Plan and shall make recommendations which
address identified inadequacies or opportunities for updating the Plan.
Responsible Agency: City Council; Planning Commission; Community Development
Department
Schedule: Annually.
Program 1 B
The City shall comprehensively review and amend, as necessary, the Zoning and Subdivision
Ordinances to maintain consistency with the General Plan.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Planning Commission City
Council
Schedule: Annually
Policy 2
The City shall provide for the use of Specific Plans as a preferred method of detailed and
systematic implementation of the General Plan.
                                               II - 9
                                                                        TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                  General Plan/Administration Element
Program 2 A
Maintain application materials and guidelines for the preparation of specific plans and encourage
their use for large and/or complex residential, commercial or industrial projects of twenty acres
or larger and on lands contemplated for annexation into the City.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: On-going
Policy 3
On a periodic and on-going basis, the City shall examine and review the long- term implications
of General Plan policies and programs as they relate to the City’s ability to provide public
services and facilities.
Program 3 A
The annual review of the General Plan, as set forth in Program 1.A, above, shall include a report
on interrelationships, impacts or enhancements of the General Plan with regard to the City’s
ability to fund public services or secure public facilities.
Responsible Agency: City Council; Planning Commission; Community Development
Department
Schedule: Annually.
Policy 4
The City shall establish and maintain a cooperative planning process with Riverside County,
assuring an effective advisory role regarding any and all development and land use planning
issues proposed within or in close proximity to the City’s Sphere-of-Influence.
Program 4 A
Effectively coordinate and cooperate with Riverside County to review all proposed land use and
other development proposals, recognize the City’s advisory role, and request that the County
forward copies of all development plans proposed within the advisory area to the City for review
and comment.
Responsible Agency: City Council; Community Development Department; City Attorney
Schedule: Continuous.
Policy 5
The City shall assure that properly filed development applications shall be processed in an
expeditious and timely manner.
Program 5 A
The City shall maintain application processing procedures that assure expeditious and timely
processing of land development applications, including "fast tracking” procedures for priority
development proposals.
Responsible Agency: City Council; Planning Commission; Community Development
Department
Schedule: Continuous.
                                                II - 10

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                    General Plan/Administration Element
Policy 6
Master facility and similar plans shall be utilized by the City to address the recreation,
drainage/flood control, infrastructure, utility management, traffic control, and other facility needs
of the community.
Program 6 A
The City shall develop master facility plans to establish availability of, need and availability of
funding for additional public services and facilities. Master plans should also include schedules
for phased implementation, which shall be incorporated into the City’s capital improvement
programs.
Responsible Agency: City Council; Public Works Department; Community Development
Department
Schedule: 2001-02; as required by development.
Policy 7
The City shall encourage in-fill development within already urbanized areas of the corporate
boundaries of the City, and expansion of new development shall be logically phased and, as
appropriate, guided by the development of existing and new Specific Plans.
Policy 8
City shall provide opportunities for review and comment on development proposals through
public hearing notices sent to owners of property located at least within 300 feet of development
proposal sites.
Policy 9
City projects shall comply with the same policies, procedures and regulations required of the
private sector.
                                                 II - 11

                                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                                                            General Plan
            CITY OF DESERT HOT SPRINGS
       COMPREHENSIVE GENERAL PLAN
                                                    CHAPTER III
                                       COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
The Community Development chapter includes the following elements: Land Use, Circulation, Housing, Parks and
Recreation, Community Design, and Economic and Fiscal Development. This chapter significantly influences the
character and quality of life in the community, the distribution of land uses, the intensity and types of housing, the
provision of parks and recreational facilities, the establishment of architectural and community design guidelines,
the preservation of scenic vistas, and the preservation and enhancement of a healthy economy.
                                                             III
                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                         General Plan/Land Use Element
LAND USE ELEMENT
PURPOSE
The Land Use Element provides a comprehensive plan of the general allocation and distribution
of land uses throughout the City. The element serves as a statement of the standards and targets
for residential population density and building intensity. The Land Use Element also identifies
areas planned for commercial and industrial uses, and areas of existing and planned public and
quasi-public uses. It is the broadest of the elements and is the basis for coherent land use policy
development.
BACKGROUND
This element is the primary focus of the General Plan, incorporating all of the principles of
community and land use planning which are applied to the drafting and adoption of a
comprehensive, long-term General Plan of land uses for the physical development of the City.
The process of developing the land use plan involves the analysis of existing land use patterns,
current and future available public services and facilities, and consideration of physical
environmental constraints and opportunities on development.
Government Code Section 65300 requires every city and county to prepare and adopt “a
comprehensive, long-term general plan for the physical development” of the community. The
City General Plan is further required to provide a land use element that designates lands for
housing, business, industry, open space, as well as other uses deemed appropriate by the City
(Government Code Sections 65302(a) and 65303). Although all the General Plan Elements are
important, the Land Use Element is generally considered to be the most representative of and
essential to the General Plan. In practice, the Land Use Element is of the broadest scope and the
most widely used in the General Plan, with goals, policies and programs set forth to guide and
direct the physical development of the community.
The Land Use Element is the essential General Plan component with direct and indirect
relationships to all other elements. One of the most closely related of these is the Circulation
Element, which is directly affected by and has a constraining effect upon the viability of the
Land Use Element. The General Plan Guidelines and case law require a close and logical
correspondence between these two elements. Other elements with strong dependence upon the
Land Use Element and its land allocation model include Housing, Community Design, and
Economic Development, as well as those elements recognizing the environmental hazards and
resources of the community. Policies and programs associated with each of the major land use
categories are set forth in the Land Use Element and reflect the compatible and integrally
planned distribution of land uses reflected in the Plan.
                                                III - 1

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                        General Plan/Land Use Element
Types of Land Uses
The Land Use Element and accompanying land use map describe and designate the distribution
of land uses by type, location, intensity and/or extent of use. Uses to be considered are diverse
and include: residential, commercial, industrial, open space, recreation, public buildings and
facilities, and other categories of public and private land uses.
Prior to the adoption of the Desert Hot Springs General Plan comprehensive update, the City
utilized the land use designations and assignments adopted in the 1987 Plan. A comprehensive
assessment of existing land uses and their distribution was conducted using field surveys, aerial
photo analysis and a comprehensive computer mapping system. Based upon this analysis, a
revised land use model was developed by the City General Plan Advisory Committee (GPAC).
Table III-1 provides a description of the City’s General Plan land use designations, and Table III-
2 provides the statistical summary of these land uses. Following the tables, overall land use
goals, policies and programs are presented. A discussion of each major land use category is also
presented, followed by related goals, policies and programs.
Role of the Element
The development of a community Land Use Element requires the broadest consideration of the
issues addressed in all the other General Plan Elements. It clarifies and addresses most of the
concerns of the community’s development and plays an essential role in synthesizing all land use
issues.
                                                 II - 2

                                                                        TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                       General Plan/Land Use Element
                                          Table III-1
                       City of Desert Hot Springs General Plan
                            Proposed Land Use Designations
Land Use Designation (Density)                      Purpose of Land
Residential
(R-E) Residential Estates (0-1 du/varies ac)        This designation provides for single-family
                                                    residential development on lots varying
                                                    from one to 10 acre minimum in size. This
                                                    land use provides intermediate steps in
                                                    development density between more typical
                                                    open space lands and low residential
                                                    densities, providing lots sufficient for rural
                                                    and estate lifestyle yet with room to limit
                                                    site and environmental impacts.
(R-L) Low Density Residential (0-5 du/ac)           This low density designation provides for
                                                    single-family residential development on
                                                    individual lots of not less than 9,000 sq. ft.
                                                    These lands serve to buffer more dense
                                                    residential development from estate
                                                    residential uses, and may be appropriate in
                                                    areas with some site constraints.
                                                    This designation typically provides for
                                                    moderately low density single family
                                                    subdivisions and Planned Residential
                                                    Developments (PRDs). It serves to transition
                                                    between lower and more moderate
                                                    (medium) residential densities.
                                                    Planned       Residential       Developments
                                                    (PRDs) are master planned communities
                                                    which consolidate areas for structures,
                                                    common open space and recreation areas,
                                                    and integrate access and private internal
                                                    roadways. PRDs permit the transfer of
                                                    densities from open space/recreation areas,
                                                    thus preserving open space and possibly
                                                    permitting the development to maximize
                                                    allowable densities.
                                                    The purpose of PRDs is to promote planned
                                                    residential development and amenities
                                             II - 3
                                                                        TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                      General Plan/Land Use Element
                                                   beyond those expected under conventional
                                                   development. They are also meant to
                                                   provide greater flexibility in design, varying
                                                   ranges in densities, and to encourage well
                                                   planned neighborhoods through creative and
                                                   imaginative planning. PRDs also provide for
                                                   an appropriate mix of housing types, which
                                                   are unique in their physical characteristics to
                                                   warrant special methods of residential
                                                   development. A full range of residential
                                                   development is permitted in PRDs.
(R-M) Medium Density Residential (0-8 du/ ac)      Appropriate residential development under
                                                   this designation includes single family and
                                                   PRDs with shared open space, recreation
                                                   and other amenities. Condominiums, garden
                                                   apartments and affordable housing may also
                                                   be appropriate for these lands. The intent of
                                                   this     designation    is      to     encourage
                                                   development of a wide variety of dwelling
                                                   unit types.
(R-MH) Residential Mobilehome (0-10 du/ac)         This land use designation is assigned to
                                                   existing      mobilehome           parks      and
                                                   subdivisions, and also provides for new
                                                   mobilehome developments on thoughtfully
                                                   considered lands. Projects developed under
                                                   this designation should be integrated and
                                                   planned developments within a minimum
                                                   planning area of 2.5 acres, although larger
                                                   sites are preferred.
(R-H) High Density Residential (0-14 du/ac)        This designation allows for the greatest
                                                   diversity of residential development,
                                                   including attached single and multi-family
                                                   dwellings. This designation is most suitable
                                                   for planned communities and affordable and
                                                   senior housing, where smaller units and
                                                   higher densities may be appropriate. Duplex
                                                   and multiplex development is the most
                                                   common and provides for PRDs comprised
                                                   of a varying range of residential types,
                                                   including apartments and condominiums.
                                                   Mobile home parks or subdivisions with
                                                   PRDS type development may also allowed
                                            II - 4
                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                       General Plan/Land Use Element
                                                    with the approval of a Conditional Use
                                                    Permit.
(R-VS) Residential-Visitor Serving (varies du/ac) This land use designation recognizes the
                                                    predominant residential character of lands
                                                    which also include numerous spa-type
                                                    hotels. It is meant to foster compatible
                                                    development to serve permanent and
                                                    seasonal residents, as well as the vacationing
                                                    public visiting resorts, hotels and motels. To
                                                    this end, this designation is followed by a
                                                    suffix (L, M & H) designating permitted
                                                    residential densities.
(C-N) Neighborhood Commercial                       This designation provides for neighborhood
                                                    scale shopping centers conveniently located
                                                    near residential areas. These developments
                                                    are typically anchored by supermarkets and
                                                    super drugstores. A wide range of other
                                                    uses, including banking, barbers/beauty
                                                    salons, dry cleaners, restaurants, service
                                                    businesses, offices and other related
                                                    activities are typically found in these
                                                    planned centers. Typical sizes are 8 to 10
                                                    acres providing approximately 80,000 to
                                                    100,000 square feet of gross leasable floor
                                                    area.
(C-G) General Commercial                            These lands includes a wide variety of
                                                    smaller commercial centers, specialty retail
                                                    shops, a broad range of clothing and apparel,
                                                    jewelry stores and a variety of personal
                                                    service businesses. Smaller, moderately
                                                    priced department stores may also be
                                                    appropriate     under      this     designation.
                                                    Development may range from free-standing
                                                    retail buildings, offices and restaurants, to
                                                    planned commercial centers. Typical sizes
                                                    range between 2 to 8 acres with gross
                                                    leasable square footage varying with uses.
                                                    Hotels and motels may also be appropriate
                                                    on these lands.
                                             II - 5
                                                                    TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                   General Plan/Land Use Element
(C-C) Community Commercial                     This designation provides for larger,
                                               community scale shopping centers and
                                               malls, which may be anchored by several
                                               department stores or other large-scale
                                               anchors. A variety of retail outlets, and
                                               restaurant and entertainment uses are also
                                               typical. Hotels and motels may also be
                                               appropriate on these lands. Office
                                               development may also be an integral part of
                                               these developments. Typical sizes range
                                               between 100-300,000 square feet or more of
                                               gross leasable floor area. This type of
                                               development requires approval of a Specific
                                               Plan. While smaller than regional facilities,
                                               the community commercial center will serve
                                               the entire community, as well as the
                                               surrounding market area.
( ---/SP) Specific Plan Overlay                This designation is used in conjunction with
                                               other underlying designations. It requires the
                                               development of a Specific Plan of Land Use
                                               on parcels or groups of parcels of 40 acres
                                               or more. The designation is applied as an
                                               overlay on the General Plan Land Use Map
                                               and can be added to any land use
                                               designation. It is also appropriate as a means
                                               of processing community-scale commercial
                                               and mixed use development proposals.
                                               Specific Plans provide detailed design and
                                               analysis of large scale and/or complex
                                               projects indicating the distribution, location,
                                               and intensity of proposed land uses. They
                                               also examine the required level of public
                                               facilities and services and their availability,
                                               and they should help establish economic
                                               viability of proposed developments. Several
                                               Specific Plans have been adopted and shall
                                               be shown on the Land Use Map.
Pierson Boulevard Specific Plan Overlay        This area-specific land use planning corridor
                                               is limited to that portion of Pierson
                                               Boulevard extending from Atlantic Avenue
                                               westward to Highway 62, and extending
                                               one-half mile north and south of this portion
                                               of Pierson Boulevard. The Pierson
                                        II - 6
                                                    TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                   General Plan/Land Use Element
                               Boulevard Specific Plan corridor encourages
                               the preparation of mixed-use development
                               plans      within    this     planning      area.
                               Development proposals in the corridor
                               requesting approval of more than one type
                               of land use are required to submit Specific
                               Plans for consideration by the City.
                               Development proposals limited only to the
                               underlying land use designation need not
                               prepare a Specific Plan if planning areas are
                               less than 40 acres in size.
(I-L) Light Industrial         This designation provides for business parks
                               and the development of any and all
                               industrial uses operating entirely in enclosed
                               buildings, and those requiring limited and
                               screenable outdoor storage. Examples
                               include clean manufacturing operations,
                               warehousing and distribution facilities,
                               mini-warehouse storage, and a variety of
                               light manufacturing businesses. Siting
                               industrial lands in close proximity to major
                               regional highways is also desirable.
                               Preferred development includes master
                               planned business and industrial parks with
                               integrated access and internal circulation.
(I-M) Medium Industrial        This designation allows development of
                               more intense industrial uses with the
                               potential to generate substantial levels of
                               noise, smoke, dust, glare, traffic vibration or
                               other nuisance. Examples include the
                               manufacturing of durable goods such as
                               appliances, furniture, fabricated metal
                               products, and light electrical and
                               transportation equipment. These uses may
                               also have greater dependence on outdoor
                               storage. Proponents will be required to
                               mitigate any adverse impacts to acceptable
                               or     insignificant    levels,     demonstrate
                               conformance        with      all     community
                               environmental standards, and be compatible
                               with existing and planned land uses.
                        II - 7
                                                                 TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                General Plan/Land Use Element
(I-E) Energy-Related Industrial              This land use designation provides for the
                                             development of energy producing industries,
                                             including windfarms and solar photovoltaic
                                             or thermal arrays on an industrial scale.
                                             Proposed development must demonstrate
                                             compatibility with surrounding uses, and
                                             must be especially sensitive to nearby
                                             residential development. Other appropriate
                                             uses may include those incidental to energy
                                             production or transmission, as well as those
                                             which do not impair development of energy
                                             resources, including plant nurseries and non-
                                             structural recreation such as golf courses.
Institutional Services and Facilities
(P) Public/Quasi-Public                      As noted herein and on the Land Use Map,
                                             this designation provides for City Hall, other
                                             City and governmental offices, libraries,
                                             schools, hospitals, police and fire stations,
                                             utility substations, as well as other
                                             public/quasi-public administrative offices.
(P/CH)                                       City Hall
(P/FS) Fire Station                          Fire Station
(P/PS) Police Station                        Police Station
(P/H) Hospital                               Hospitals and similar in/out patient medical
                                             services. Also may be assigned to
                                             convalescent and skilled nursing facilities.
(P/S)                                        Provides for educational facilities such as
                                             day care, elementary, intermediate, high
                                             schools, special schools and technical
                                             schools.
(P/L)                                        Libraries
(P/PO)                                       Post Offices
(P/U)                                        Utility Substation- designates electric, gas,
                                             telephone, water and other similar facilities.
                                      II - 8
                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                          General Plan/Land Use Element
(T)                    Designated major transportation corridors.
(OS) Open Space        This designation is assigned to those lands
                       which constitute special, important or
                       valuable natural resources that warrant
                       protection. The designation is assigned to
                       such lands as parks, which carry a
                       designation of OS/PP; golf courses/pool
                       areas/landscaped lands are defined as private
                       open space with a designation of OS/PV.
                       Mountainous areas under public or quasi-
                       public ownership are assigned the
                       designation of Mountain Reserve (OS/MR).
                       The designation allows the discretionary
                       approval of trails, trailheads and associated
                       facilities, but does not allow vehicular
                       access.
                       The Open Space designation may also be
                       used to define special resource areas or
                       those that may pose threats or hazards to
                       development. Lands important for their
                       recreational,   biological,      or    regional
                       economic value may also be assigned an
                       open space designation. Examples of
                       resource lands and hazards include ground
                       rupture or liquefaction hazard areas,
                       detention and retention basins, trails,
                       estuaries and large habitat areas for
                       biological resources.
      (OS/PP)          Public Parks
      (OS/MR)          Mountain Reserve
      (OS/PV)          Private Open Space
      (OS/FW)          Floodways
                II - 9
                       TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                      General Plan/Land Use Element
EXHIBIT III-1
              II - 10
                                                                    TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                  General Plan/Land Use Element
                                           Table III-2
                              City Of Desert Hot Springs & SOI
                              Statistical Summary Of Land Uses
                                 GPAC Preferred Alternative
Land Use Category                                Total           Acres        % of Total
                                                 Acres    (Dev.d/Vac.)              Acres
R-E Residential Estates (0-1 du/ac)               2,053      375/1,678                5.5%
R-E Residential Estates (0-1 du/2.5 ac)           1,345      148/1,197                3.6%
R-E Residential Estates (0-1 du/5 ac)               102          0/102                0.3%
R-E Residential Estates (0-1 du/10 ac)              719          3/716                1.9%
R-L Low Density Residential (0-5 du/ac)         14,779    2,908/11,871              40.0%
R-VSL Vis. Serv. Low (0-5 du/ac)                    216         57/204                0.6%
R-M Medium Density Residential (0-8 du/ac)          472        213/259                1.3%
R-VSM Vis. Serv. Med. (0-8 du/ac)                    74          31/43                0.2%
R-H High Density Residential (0-14 du/ac)         1,329      114/1,215                3.6%
R-VSH Vis. Serv. High (0-14 du/ac)                   82          22/60                0.2%
R-MH Residential Mobilehome (0-10 du/ac)            517        275/242                1.4%
R-VS Hotel/Motel Rooms (25 rooms/ac)                417        110/307                1.1%
Residential Subtotal                            22,150    4,256/17,894             59.7%
C-N Neighborhood Commercial                          73          30/43                0.2%
C-C Community Commercial                            128         14/114                0.3%
C-G General Commercial                              841        180/661                2.3%
Commercial Subtotal                               1,042        224/818               2.8%
I-L Light Industrial                                900         31/869                2.4%
I-M Medium Industrial                             1,623      116/1,507                4.4%
I-E Energy-Related Industrial                     1,875        906/969                5.1%
Industrial Subtotal                              4,398     1,053/3,345             11.9%
P Public/Quasi-Public (Institutional)            1,009         581/428               2.7%
OS/MR     Mountain Reserve                        5,316       67/5,249              14.4%
OS/PP     Parks Open Space                          223         22/201                0.6%
OS/PV     Private Open Space                      1,204       42/1,162                3.3%
OS/FW     Floodways                              1,617       214/1,403                4.4%
Open Space Subtotal                              8,360       345/8,015               22.7%
Total                                           36,959    6,459/30,500              100%
                                             III-11
                                                                        TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                       General Plan/Land Use Element
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
As the City of Desert Hot Springs continues to grow, its mix of land uses and its needs can be
expected to change. While the Land Use Element helps to provide a degree of predictability in
how the community will develop, there will be a periodic need to reevaluate the land use plan for
the City and make adjustments. State law provides for regular amendments to the General Plan
and its elements, including the Land Use Map. As future needs change, the community will have
the opportunity to adjust and fine-tune the Land Use Element and map to address changing
circumstances, take advantages of emerging opportunities and remedy potential land use
conflicts.
Consistent with past planning efforts of the City, the Land Use Element continues to support the
logically staged extension of public infrastructure systems and the urban land uses they support.
Therefore, in addition to processing larger master planned development, it is considered
appropriate to encourage in-fill development in those areas which have undergone substantial
development and have under-utilized infrastructure. In-filling along the Palm Drive and Pierson
Boulevard corridors continues to be a priority. Development planning in the City’s Sphere-of-
Influence should also be encouraged.
Putting the Land Use Element into effect is accomplished by enforcing the City’s Zoning and
Subdivision Ordinances, and other ordinances, codes and regulations. The City’s regulatory
environment requires that development proposals meet certain criteria in the General Plan and
undergo development plan review, which may be subject to public hearings. The following are
general policies and programs for land use, followed by discussion of and more detailed policies
and programs for each major land use designation.
GENERAL LAND USE GOALS, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
GOAL 1
A balanced mix of functionally integrated land uses meeting general social and economic needs
of the community through simplified, compatible and consistent land use and zoning
designations.
GOAL 2
A resort residential community of desirable neighborhoods, a complementary employment base
and a variety of community facilities.
Policy 1
The City shall establish and maintain a master land use map designating the appropriate land
uses which implement the goals and policies of the Land Use Element and other elements of the
General Plan.
                                               III-12

                                                                        TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                       General Plan/Land Use Element
Policy 2
The City Zoning Ordinance shall directly correspond to the General Plan land use designations
and shall include appropriate zoning regulations that implement the Land Use Element.
Program 2 A
The City shall adopt and maintain a Zoning Ordinance and designations that directly correspond
to designations set forth in the Land Use Element, and which guide and regulate development
consistent with the General Plan.
Responsible Agency: City Council, Planning Commission, Community Development
Department.
Schedule: 2000-01; Revise as needed
Policy 3
The City shall integrate land use analysis and planning as an essential part of development of a
master strategic plan for economic development.
Policy 4
Enhance the character and viability of the City’s commercial areas, primarily in the Palm Drive
corridor, by integrating nearby higher density residential uses with retail and office commercial
development.
Program 4 A
The City shall incorporate land use and development standards into the Zoning Ordinance that
permit and encourage the appropriate integration of residential uses into mix-use commercial
land use areas and zoning districts.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Planning Commission; City
Council
Schedule: 2000-01
Policy 5
The City shall assign Specific Plan overlay designations to land located in the City’s
incorporated limits and Sphere-of-Influence to guide and assure an effective and integrated mix
of commercial, office, industrial and residential uses.
Policy 6
All land use development proposals shall be consistent with all applicable land use policies and
standards contained in the General Plan.
Policy 7
In-fill development shall be encouraged by prioritizing capital improvements in the developed
areas of the City.
Program 7 A
The City’s capital improvement program shall assign high priority to projects serving the City’s
developed and developing areas.
                                                III-13

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                        General Plan/Land Use Element
Program 7 B
The City shall make available maps and other information showing the location of all available
infrastructures and shall encourage development in those areas where infrastructure is under-
utilized.
Responsible Agency: Public Works and Community Development Departments; City Council.
Schedule: Continuous
Program 7 C
The City shall utilize Specific Plans to assure the phased, logical and cost-effective extension of
infrastructure and buildout in new development.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Public Works Department
Schedule: Continuous
Responsible Agency: Public Works Department; Community Development Department
Schedule: Annually
RESIDENTIAL LAND USES
BACKGROUND
The City of Desert Hot Springs has evolved as a primarily resort residential community. In
recent years the community has experienced slow growth due to regional economic conditions.
In 1999, the City of Desert Hot Springs had approximately 6,563 dwelling units, of which
approximately 3,921 were detached and attached single family units, and about 2,309 were
multi-family units. The City also had 333 mobilehomes.
The prevalence of single family residential development has helped establish the low to medium
density character of the City. This pattern has provided residents with open space and recreation
opportunities on their own individual lots. Planned residential developments (PRDs) are a
relatively new type of development in the City and preserve low densities by transferring
development rights to specific areas and dedicating large areas of a development to community
open space and recreation uses. Both types of development are important to assuring high quality
residential environment of the City.
Seasonal Community
Of the City’s 6,563 dwelling units built by 1999, approximately 5,478 were occupied by
permanent residents, while about 1,085 or 17% serve as second or vacation homes for part-time
residents. The City’s seasonal population increases during the fall/winter/spring months and
decreases during the summer period. The majority of seasonal/second home residences are
located in the City’s planned residential communities.
Projected City Population
The General Plan provides for a range of residential densities ranging up to fourteen (14)
dwelling units per acre within six residential land use designations. Within the City boundaries,
the majority of the area is currently (2000) developed as single family residential dwelling units
                                               III-14

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                         General Plan/Land Use Element
within standard subdivisions. The 1990 permanent population in Desert Hot Springs was 11,668
and had increased to about 15,398 by January 1999.
The City’s 1990 average household size was 2.52 in 1990 and had risen to about 2.787 by 1999.
As the City’s demographics continue to change, the average household size is expected to
stabilize and possibly even fall. For a more detailed discussion of the City’s household and
demographic composition, please see the General Plan Housing Element and Economic
Development Element, as well as the General Plan Program EIR. Based upon the Land Use Map,
the General Plan has the potential to generate approximately 63,889 new dwelling units. Based
upon an average household size of 2.787 persons, the General Plan could add about 178,058
additional people to the City’s population. When combined with the City’s existing population of
15,398 residents, the City’s maximum peak seasonal population could reach approximately
193,456.
Affordable Housing
The City, and all other jurisdictions in the State of California, are required by law to assure the
provision and availability of decent housing and a suitable living environment for all economic
segments of the community, with special attention to very low, low, and moderate income
groups. The elderly are also an identified special group which require special attention when
providing for the community’s housing needs, as do those paying too much for rent/mortgages
and those living in overcrowded conditions. For additional information addressing these and
other related issues of the community associated with housing stock, please refer to the Housing
Element of the City’s General Plan.
                                               III-15

                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                           General Plan/Land Use Element
RESIDENTIAL GOALS, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
GOAL 1
Preservation and enhancement of the predominantly low density, resort residential character of
the City.
GOAL 2
A variety of all housing types and densities that will accommodate existing and future residents
of the community.
Policy 1
Areas of existing residential development and surrounding vacant lands shall be planned in a
manner which preserves neighborhood character and assures a consistent and compatible
residential land use pattern.
Program 1 A
The City shall assign and periodically review residential land use designations to assure that
related General Plan goals, including preservation of low density neighborhoods, are met.
Responsible Agency: City Council, Planning Commission, Community Development
Department.
Schedule: On-going; every five years.
Program 1 B
Consistently apply the City’s discretionary powers and development review process to assure
that subdivision and development plans are compatible with existing residential areas.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department.
Schedule: Continuous
Policy 2
Encourage in-fill development on subdivided lands located adjacent to existing residential areas
and utilities to maximize the efficient utilization of land and infrastructure.
Policy 3
The City shall discourage the discontinuous or leap-frog development of residential subdivisions
by requiring necessary improvement and/or extension of intervening roadways and infrastructure
to serve new development.
Policy 4
Future development within existing or approved planned unit developments shall not exceed the
overall density initially approved for the development.
                                                 III-16

                                                                       TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                      General Plan/Land Use Element
Policy 5
Density transfers may occur in planned residential developments in conjunction with the
provision of common area amenities and open space. Golf courses, greenbelts, pool areas and
other open space uses incorporated into these developments shall be designated as Open Space
areas to assure their preservation as such.
Policy 6
In addition to other policies set forth for open space and hillside designations, additional
development parameters to be addressed include slope disturbance, development area and lot
coverage, renaturalization and revegetation, and access roads.
Policy 7
Residential development standards shall incorporate set backs, height, pad elevations and other
design and performance standards which assure privacy while preserving scenic viewsheds from
adjoining properties.
Policy 9
Low income/affordable housing shall not be located within one area of the community, but shall
be dispersed where feasible, appropriate, and compatible with surrounding land uses.
Program 9 A
The City shall monitor the amount of low income housing available and make best efforts to
meet State requirements for providing such housing types.
Responsible Agency: City Council; Planning Commission; Community Development
Department; Redevelopment Agency
Schedule: Continuous
COMMERCIAL LAND USES BACKGROUND
Desert Hot Springs has seen the slow evolution of its commercial land uses initially from small-
scale retail and service providers located along Palm Drive and Pierson Boulevard to
community-scale centers serving a broad market area and typified by the K-Mart center. As the
community has continued to grow, neighborhood shopping centers have developed to serve the
City’s residents. While the City has not attempted to become a commercial powerhouse, certain
opportunities such as existing hotels and planned resort development place the City in a position
of potentially substantial growth.
While historically commercial development has occurred primarily along the Palm Drive
corridor, the City’s recent success with the annexation of lands and expansion of the City’s
Sphere will allow it to tap the markets provided by U.S. Interstate-10 and State Highway 62
traffic. With commercial development growing at the Indian Avenue/I-10 interchange, this area
of the City will be an important contributor to the broadened economic base.
The planned provision of neighborhood shopping in the western portion of the City will address
the needs of the City’s residents as new homes are built and the resident population continues to
grow in this area. Future neighborhood centers should be sited to provide convenient access to
                                                III-17

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                         General Plan/Land Use Element
supermarkets, drugstores and ancillary commercial services. The General Plan provides
thoughtfully sited existing and future neighborhood centers located at nodes on arterial
roadways, which are expected to satisfactorily meet the neighborhood shopping needs of the
community.
Another of the City’s important commercial strengths is the spa hotel market. In 2000, the City
hosted about 47 hotels, including the Spa Hotel, Mirage Springs and Mineral Springs hotels. The
Two Bunch Palms Resort is a world famous, world-class resort that caters to a wide range of
client, including the entertainment industry. Planned projects that will make major contributions
to resort development include Cornerstone, Rancho Morongo and Rancho Royale. Transient
occupancy tax (also termed bed tax) is generated by the City’s hotels and is an important
component of the City’s general fund operating revenues.
The relative importance of the City’s various commercial lands is more fully discussed in the
Economic Development Element and the General Plan Program EIR.
The General Plan recognizes existing commercial land uses, as well as vacant lands appropriate
for commercial development. The Plan provides three (3) commercial land use designations
allowing the development of general, neighborhood, and community commercial. The Plan also
establishes Specific Plan overlays, which are used to provide control and coordination of
commercial development, providing detailed design and analysis of complex projects, indicating
the location and intensity of proposed uses.
The thoughtful location, distribution and assigned intensity of commercial development is
expected to provide residents with a wider range of choices and services, while greatly
enhancing the City’s economic base. Commercial designations also recognize the City’s
comparative advantages in the highly competitive Coachella Valley market, and are consistent
with the City’s efforts to preserve the predominant low density, resort residential character. The
land use plan must position the City as the commercial service district for the greater Desert Hot
Springs market area.
COMMERCIAL GROWTH POTENTIAL
The General Plan provides substantial additional lands for future commercial development.
These include lands within existing commercial developments and lands where development has
yet to occur. Each of the commercial land use categories and their development potential in
approximate gross leasable square feet (gla) are set forth in the table below.
Of the 1,042 acres of commercially designated lands in the planning area, approximately 818
acres, or more than 78%, are currently (2000) vacant. The General Commercial category
comprises the largest block of undeveloped commercial lands (661± acres), with Community
Commercial comprising the next largest block of vacant land (114± acres). The General Plan,
therefore, provides more than ample commercial lands for future development.
                                               III-18

                                                                        TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                       General Plan/Land Use Element
                                             Table III-3
                         Commercial Land Use Development Potential
   Commercial Designation                      Total Acres      Estimated Square Footage1
   C-G General Commercial                            841                  8,059,471
   C-N Neighborhood Commercial                        73                   699,574
   C-C Community Commercial                          128                  1,226650
   Total                                            1,042                 9,985,695
   1
     All square footage calculations assume 22% lot coverage.
COMMERCIAL GOALS, POLICIES
AND PROGRAMS
GOAL
A responsive range of commercial land uses conveniently and appropriately distributed
throughout the City, meeting the community’s needs and taking full advantage of emerging
development and economic opportunities.
Policy 1
Sufficient lands shall be designated to provide a full range of commercial services to the
community and surrounding areas for present and future years.
Program 1 A
Maintain the Land Use map on an on-going basis to assure sufficient lands are designated for
commercial uses to support the needs of the community and surrounding areas in a manner
consistent with economic opportunities and the resort residential character of the community.
Responsible Agency: City Council, Planning Commission, Community Development
Department
Schedule: Continuous
Program 1 B
Make available market information to developers and realtors, which identifies the City’s service
needs and potential sites suitable for those commercial goods and services.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Redevelopment Agency
Schedule: Continuous
Policy 2
Development standards for commercial land uses shall include setbacks, pad elevations, massing
and height limitations, and other requirements, which provide adequate visibility and
                                                III-19

                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                           General Plan/Land Use Element
accessibility, while preserving the scenic viewsheds from adjoining properties and public rights-
of-ways.
Policy 3
Encourage lot consolidation and integrated development planning along the Palm Drive and
Pierson Boulevard corridors as well as the old Town district to reduce fragmentation and
encourage in-fill development.
Program 3 A
The City shall development and implement incentive programs for selected lands along Palm
Drive and Pierson Boulevard to encourage a cohesive and coherent development pattern, which
reduces fragmented development and promotes infilling.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; City Council; Redevelopment
Agency
Schedule: Continuous
INDUSTRIAL LAND USES
BACKGROUND
The City’s industrial lands are one of the most important and yet least exploited resources in the
community. Heretofore, these lands have been limited to an area south of Hacienda Boulevard
and east of Little Morongo Road, with the exception of a 160 acre windfarm located in the
western extreme of the City. While these lands are well situated and investment by the City
Redevelopment Agency has enhanced their accessibility, these lands still subject to flooding and
lack essential services such as natural gas and sewage collection.
In addition to industrial lands within the city limits, a substantial portion of the City’s Sphere-of-
Influence is already under windfarm and light industrial development. The City’s wind resource
area is generally located west of Indian Avenue and extends from Pierson Boulevard south to
Interstate-10. City Sphere lands located along Indian Boulevard, just north of I-10, have already
seen substantial industrial development and the potential for expansion in this area is fueled by
the availability of services and quick and easy access to I-10.
In addition to the range of industrial uses that have successfully developed in the Coachella
Valley over the past few decades, the large scale development of windfarms has presented
another opportunity for industrial and service industrial development. As the regional economy
continues to grow, it also generates a broader base for industrial and service industrial
development and jobs. Nonetheless, the City and the Coachella Valley have seen limited
industrial development over the past 15 years.
The Land Use Element provides for industrial land uses which can be best characterized as
“light” and “medium”, as well as those associated with energy production and transmission.
Light industrial development includes industrial and business parks, and other uses conducted
entirely within enclosed buildings and with limited and screenable outdoor storage. Industrial
uses with the potential to generate excessive noise, dust or smoke, glare, traffic or other
                                                 III-20

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                        General Plan/Land Use Element
significant environmental impact are considered appropriate for siting on “Medium Industrial”
lands. The appropriateness of these and other issues are taken under consideration when
reviewing industrial development plans.
Energy-related industrial uses can include a wide range of development types, including wind
turbine and solar energy arrays, but may also include gas turbine and biomass conversion
technologies with low pollutant emission profiles. Similar types of development may also
include energy-related component manufacturing, ranging from wind turbine elements to
electrical transmission component manufacturing and assembly. Regionally, alternative energy
efforts now include the expanded use of compressed natural gas technologies and technical
training programs primarily associated with transportation applications.
Development proposals for industrial uses must include site plans and building elevations,
descriptions of machinery, processes, and products, and specifications for the mechanisms and
techniques to be used to mitigate impacts from industrial operations. Such proposals must
provide a complete characterization of activities, processes and waste/pollutant management
technologies to be utilized during the user’s operation.
The potential for industrial development in the City will rest primarily on the ability of the City
to exploit local and regional industrial service needs, as well as the availability of land, public
services and access to highways and other major transportation links. Continued growth in the
Desert Hot Springs area will continue to generate its own limited demand for light industrial
development. A broad range of industrial development is provided for through appropriate
designations and the development of significant sites (10 acres or larger), and should be
processed as master planned or specific planned industrial parks. These should be established
through development guidelines that assure provisions for roadway and infrastructure
improvements.
INDUSTRIAL GOALS, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
GOAL
Lands that provide for the development of non-polluting, energy-related and other clean
industrial development that broadens the economic and employment base of the City, and assures
compatible integration with other, non-industrial land uses.
Policy 1
Provide adequate and appropriate lands designated for industrial uses to provide a broad range of
industrial development.
Policy 2
Industrial lands shall be located in areas that maximize all available and planned infrastructures,
including but not limited to water and sewer service, electric and natural gas service, and major
transportation corridors, and should minimize the impact on public health and safety.
                                                III-21

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                        General Plan/Land Use Element
Policy 3
To enhance the efficient use of industrial lands, the City shall encourage the preparation of a
Specific Plan on larger industrial areas, which master plans the extension of roadways, drainage
facilities, utilities and other infrastructure.
Program 3 A
Prior to or concurrent with the issuance of development permits, the City shall require the
develop of Specific Plans on larger assembly of lands designated for industrial development,
which shall address circulation, infrastructure, drainage and development standards and
guidelines to assure efficient industrial development consistent with the character and quality of
the community.
Responsible Agency: City Council, Planning Commission, Community Development
Department
Schedule: Continuous
Policy 4
The City of Desert Hot Springs shall seek to attract appropriate industrial users for which the
area is particularly suited and encourage those industries to take advantage of the local labor
force and markets with which the City has a comparative advantage.
Program 4 A
In cooperation with property owners, windfarm developers, the Chamber of Commerce, as well
as other private interests, the City shall promote development of industrial lands through
coordinated joint efforts.
Responsible Agency: Private Owners; Community Development Department; Redevelopment
Agency; Chamber of Commerce
Schedule: Continuous
Policy 5
The City shall encourage and support the relocation of inappropriately located industrial or
quasi-industrial land uses, which are incompatible with existing and planned land uses.
Program 5 A
The City shall evaluate existing industrial and quasi-industrial land uses and encourage the
formation of industrial parks appropriate for relocating existing inappropriately located industrial
uses.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department, Redevelopment Agency,
Developers
Schedule: 3-5 years
Policy 6
The City shall require adherence to applicable development standards and guidelines to assure
aesthetically acceptable industrial developments for all new industrial sites.
                                                III-22
                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                           General Plan/Land Use Element
Program 6 A
As an integral part of industrial park planning, the City shall require thoughtful site planning and
extensive use of landscaping to enhance the appearance of industrial areas.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: Continuous
Program 6 B
The City shall review all industrial development proposals with a special regard for public health
and safety issues to ensure that the type and intensity of the use is appropriate for the proposed
location and compatible with surrounding land uses.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: Continuous
PUBLIC SERVICES AND FACILITIES
BACKGROUND
The provision of adequate levels of public facilities and services is one of the principal concerns
or functions of local government. Land uses for public facilities include such governmental
functions as City Hall, fire stations, water wells and storage tanks. Others include schools,
hospitals and other medical facilities, utility facilities, and libraries.
The extent and intensity of various land uses determines the level of public services and facilities
needed to support them. Residential, commercial, institutional and industrial development each
generate specific demand for public services and facilities. The planned, logical extension of
urban areas cannot occur without careful planning for the extension of public services and
facilities. This includes the maintenance of adequate staffing of City departments responsible for
regulating land use and development, assuring adequate and appropriately designed and
constructed streets and drainage facilities, and the provision of economic development
assistance.
Several service providers are not under the direct regulatory jurisdiction of the City. For instance,
the Mission Springs Water District (MSWD) and Coachella Valley Water District (CVWD),
rather than the City, are responsible for domestic water and sewer facilities. The Riverside
County Flood Control and Water Conservation District is responsible for assuring the provision
of regional flood control facilities. Nonetheless, the City has the essential responsibility to
cooperate and coordinate with the appropriate agencies to assure that public services and
facilities complement and are compatible with other land uses.
PUBLIC FACILITIES POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
GOAL
Public facilities which are located to efficiently serve the community and are compatible with
surrounding land uses.
                                                  III-23
                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                         General Plan/Land Use Element
Policy 1
The City of Desert Hot Springs shall encourage the development of public facilities in a manner
which assures adequate levels of service, while remaining compatible with existing and future
land uses.
OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
BACKGROUND
Open spaces in the City of Desert Hot Springs are important areas of environmental, aesthetic
and recreational value. These areas constitute a critically important part of the community
environment. Open space areas within the City include lands designated for the preservation of
natural resources (plant and animal communities), desert washes, mineral deposits, parks and
recreational facilities, and areas where the presence or existence of hazardous conditions prohibit
development.
As discussed with regard to residential land uses, standard and long-standing subdivisions have
provided the context for much of the City’s residential development pattern. Recently, however,
with the approval of a variety of master planned communities, planned residential developments
(PRDs) could become the predominant residential land use in the City for the foreseeable future.
These types of developments benefit from the transfer of development rights or permitted
densities onto smaller areas, with the remainder dedicated to open space and recreation facilities,
including pools, tennis courts, golf courses and passive landscaped open space areas. These areas
are required to remain as open space for the life of the development and are not available for
further residential or other non-open space uses.
There are four types of open space categories described in the Open Space element, which
include open space for public parks (OS-PP), private golf courses and private open space areas
(OS-PV), mountainous reserves (OS-MR) and floodways/washes/channels (OS-FW). Each of
these is discussed in more detail under the General Plan Element of Open Space and
Conservation. Below are policies and programs for Open Space and Conservation which will
assist the City in implementing the Land Use and Open Space elements.
OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION GOALS, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
GOAL 1
Open space areas which protect environmental resources, guard against environmental hazards,
provide recreational opportunities and enhanced aesthetic character of the City.
GOAL 2
A land use pattern which preserves the City’s resort residential atmosphere, including scenic
resources such as hillside and mountain vistas, waterways, and native desert communities.
                                                III-24

                                                                   TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                  General Plan/Land Use Element
Policy 1
Lands suitable and appropriate for preservation as open space areas shall be maintained and
enhanced.
Program 1 A
The City shall review and update land use maps and information on the various types of open
space and conservation lands in the community.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: Continuous; every five years.
Program 1 B
The City shall evaluate all development proposals and identify their impact upon and
compatibility with designated open space and conservation lands.
Responsible Agency: City Council; Planning Commission; Community Development
Department
Schedule: Continuous
                                             III-25
                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                       General Plan/Circulation Element
CIRCULATION ELEMENT
PURPOSE
Continuing development in Desert Hot Springs and the Coachella Valley will result in continued
growth in traffic on local streets and regional arterials and highways. In order to protect the
City’s character as a residential and spa resort community, careful planning of the roadway
network is essential. As the City’s road system nears its capacity for handling traffic in a safe and
efficient manner, the potential for delays and the risk of traffic accidents increases. In order to
preserve the City’s unique character while providing the safest and most efficient roadway
system possible, the Circulation Element documents the current status of the City’s road system,
identifies problems and proposes solutions. In addition, the Circulation Element analyses future
traffic impacts to the City due to inevitable growth in the City and region. The purpose of the
Circulation Element is to develop an efficient, cost-effective and comprehensive transportation
management strategy consistent with regional plans, local needs to maintain and improve
mobility, and in a manner consistent with the goals and character of the community.
BACKGROUND
Due to its close interrelatedness, the Circulation Element is an outgrowth of City and regional
land use planning. The element and roadway system also affects and is affected by a variety of
community and environmental factors. The Circulation Element has a direct relationship to the
Land Use, Housing, Air Quality, Noise, Public Services and Facilities, and Economic
Development Elements. The Community Design, Parks and Recreation, and Flooding and
Hydrology Elements are also related to the Circulation Element. The types and intensities of land
uses in the City will predictably influence the types and volumes of traffic traveling the City’s
roads now and in the future.
Specific implementation programs are provided in the Circulation Element which address the
existing traffic conditions in the General Plan study area, and are designed to prevent future
deterioration of roadway capacity in the community. California Government Code describes
conditions and data to be researched, analyzed and included within a General Plan Circulation
Element. Government Code Section 65302(b) states that the General Plan shall describe the
general location and extent of existing and proposed major thoroughfares, transportation routes,
terminals, and other local public utilities and facilities.
The City is also required to coordinate its Circulation Element provisions with the applicable
regional transportation plan, as set forth in Government Code Sections 65103(f) and 65080. In
the General Plan study area these regional agencies include the California Department of
Transportation (CalTrans), the Coachella Valley Association of Governments (CVAG), the
Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) and the Sunline Transit Agency. In
addition, federal and state transportation planning must be coordinated with local planning
                                                 III-26

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                      General Plan/Circulation Element
pursuant to Section 134, Title 23 of the U.S. Code and California Government Code Section
65080(a), respectively.
Protection of air quality is also associated with growing traffic volumes and infrastructure
demand, and requires careful analysis and planning to protect the community from unnecessarily
high levels of locally generated pollutants. Vehicular emissions will increase with expanding
population, miles traveled and less efficient travel conditions. However, the maintenance of
adequate traffic flows, the prevention of traffic congestion caused by inadequate and/or failing
roadways, and enhanced vehicle efficiencies will help preserve the air quality in the community.
The Circulation Element has been developed as a comprehensive transportation management
strategy based upon an analysis of existing conditions within the City, and future development as
set forth by the General Plan Land Use Map (see Land Use Element). Growth in regional traffic
has been based upon statistical trends, an assessment of long-term regional growth potential and
the regional transportation model, CVATS, prepared by CVAG.
In order to characterize existing traffic volumes and conditions along roadway links, a variety of
data were used to quantify levels of use and capacity. Traffic counts were collected by the City,
CVAG and CalTrans to gauge existing conditions and provide a sound basis for projecting future
traffic volumes. These various data are from the period of 1994 through 1999 and include mid-
block roadway segments as well as counts of intersection turning movements.
In order to analyze circulation and the effects of development on the roadway system a traffic
distribution process was utilized. This process works directly with existing traffic volumes and
existing street geometrics as its starting point. The term “geometrics” pertains to the dimensions
and arrangements of the visible features of the roadway. These include pavement widths, lane
configuration, barriers, slopes, drainage, interchanges, and other design features, which
significantly affect roadway traffic operation, safety, and capacity.
Levels of Service
The “Level-of-Service” is typically characterized as the available and utilized capacity of a given
roadway. Level-of-Service (LOS) is a qualitative measure describing the efficiency of the flow
of traffic. LOS includes a range of alphabetical connotations “A” through “F”, used to
characterize roadway operating conditions. LOS A represents the best/free flow conditions and
LOS F indicates the worst/system failure. Levels of Service are represented as volume to
capacity ratios, or vehicle demand divided by roadway capacity. Therefore, as the ratio
approaches 1.12+, the roadway approaches LOS F. Added travel and turning lanes increase
capacity, as does the inclusion of raised medians and restricted access on a roadway. Raised
medians increase roadway capacity by reducing the number of vehicle conflict points and
improving traffic flows. Restricted access avoids loss of capacity caused by interruptions and
disruptions to traffic flow resulting from vehicles coming onto or leaving the roadway. The table
below defines the various LOS classifications.
                                                 III-27

                                                                                TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                              General Plan/Circulation Element
                                               Table III-4
                                    Level of Service Description
Level of                                                                      Volume/Capacity
Service                     Quality of Traffic Flow                                        Ratio
    A       Low volumes, high speed; speed not restricted by other                      0.00 - 0.66
            vehicles.
    B       Operating speeds beginning to be affected by other                          0.67 - 0.77
            traffic. Some drivers begin to feel restricted within
            platoons of vehicles.
    C       Operating speeds and maneuverability closely                                0.78 - 0.88
            controlled by other traffic; recommended ideal design
            standard. “Design Capacity”. Occasionally drivers may
            have to wait through more than one red signal. Most
            drivers feel somewhat restricted, but not objectionably
            so.
    D       Tolerable operating speeds; often used as design                            0.89 - 1.00
            standard in urban areas. Increasing restriction at
            intersections, but no excessive back ups. Drivers
            frequently have to wait through more than one red
            signal. This level is the lower limit of acceptable
            operation to most drivers.
    E       The maximum traffic volume a roadway can                                    1.01 - 1.11
            accommodate during peak traffic periods. “Maximum
            Capacity”. All drivers wait through more than one red
            signal.
    F       System failure; long queues of traffic; unstable flows;                        1.12+
            stoppages of long duration; traffic volume and speed
            can drop to zero; traffic volume will actually be less
            than the volume which occurs at Level of Service E.
Source: “Highway Capacity Manual,” Special Report 209, Transportation Research Board, 1985.
Capacity is generally defined as the number of vehicles that may pass over a section of roadway
in a given time period under prevailing conditions. Capacities of roadways are most restricted by
                                                   III-28

                                                                                     TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                                   General Plan/Circulation Element
 intersection design and operation, which is discussed further below. Typically, the p.m. peak
hour is the heaviest traffic flow of the day.
The various capacity values assigned for differing roadway sizes and levels of service are
described in Table III-4.It should be kept in mind that the roadway capacity estimates in Table
III-5 below are “rule-of-thumb” estimates, which are affected by site specific factors such as the
number and configuration of intersections, roadway grades, sight distance, the level of truck and
bus traffic, and the degree of access control.
                                                        Table III-5
                                         Daily Roadway Capacity Estimates
  Facility               Number
  Type                   of Lanes          LOS A1             LOS B1           LOS C2        LOS D1         LOS E1
  Arterial                   4              10,000            17,000           24,000         31,000         38,000
  Major                      4              10,000            17,000           24,000         31,000         38,000
  Secondary                  4              10,000            15,000           20,000         25,000         30,000
  Collector 3                2               6,000             9,000           12,000         15,000         18,000
  1
    Source: Estimates developed by Endo Engineering based upon LOS C and LOS E values provided by the
  Riverside County Road Department.
  2
    Sources: Riverside County Road Department, “Information Pamphlet,” 1987.
  3
    Capacities for two-lane arterials, majors and secondaries will be similar.
Acceptable Levels-of-Service
Traffic engineers and transportation planners have in recent years attempted to bridge the gap
between providing ideal roadway operating conditions and the costs of infrastructure to assure
those conditions. While LOS C has long been considered the desirable and optimal level of
traffic volume on any given roadway, it represents a standard that is progressively more difficult
and less cost-effective to achieve in urban areas. For peak operating periods, LOS D and/or a
maximum volume to capacity ratio of 1.00 is now considered the generally acceptable service
level. Where a LOS of E or worse exists along certain roadway segments and intersections, every
measure to improve operating conditions shall be pursued.
Average Daily Traffic Volumes
The total number of vehicles that travel a defined segment of roadway over a twenty-four hour
period is defined in Average Daily Trips (ADT). The most recent (1996-1999) existing two-way
Average Daily Traffic Volumes (ADT) for General Plan designated roadways are graphically
presented in Exhibit III-1. Although the ADT is a useful “benchmark” number for determining
various roadway configurations and design aspects, the peak hour information, which is the
highest volume of traffic to pass over a segment of roadway during an hour period, is also a
useful means of determining a roadway's capacity and, indirectly, intersection levels of service.
Traffic counts at intersections have provided an even more detailed picture of present and future
operating conditions at these intersections.
                                                         III-29

                                                  TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                General Plan/Circulation Element
EXHIBIT III-2 AVERAGE DAILY (ADT) TRAFFIC VOLUMES
                                  III-30
                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                        General Plan/Circulation Element
Refined CVATS Traffic Model
In order to evaluate existing roadway operating conditions and projected impacts associated with
General Plan buildout and regional growth, two separate but interdependent traffic modeling
efforts were conducted during the preparation of the General Plan update. The first involved the
development of a focused version of the traffic model developed by CVAG called CVATS.
CVATS is a large area network model developed for regional transportation planning. It breaks
the Valley study area into relatively large zones (see Zone System, below), and uses a
generalized land use designation system and trip generation/distribution/assignment procedures.
Utilizing the same procedures but on a more refined level, the General Plan traffic modeling
process consists of defining the traffic analysis zones (TAZ) and the roadway network,
establishing efficient/logical traffic routes, collecting land use and socio-economic data on each
TAZ, calculating trip generation in each TAZ, and distributing traffic and its assignment to
individual road segments.
Zone System
Serving as the basis or foundation for General Plan transportation modeling, the City was
subdivided into a system of thirty-four traffic analysis zones (TAZ). Based on the land uses
within each TAZ, traffic volumes were generated and then distributed along the circulation
system. The TAZ system produces a forecast of traffic volumes in the City, which approximates
how actual traffic enters and utilizes the local roadway system. (Please refer to the Circulation
Background Study in the Appendix of the Desert Hot Springs General Plan EIR for an
illustration of the TAZ’s and a complete breakdown of the various land uses within each TAZ).
The TAZ system for Desert Hot Springs was designed utilizing current (2000) land use patterns,
including provisions for approved but as yet unbuilt master planned communities. It is tailored
specifically to the City of Desert Hot Springs in order to provide the most accurate data possible.
The model distributes the projected volume of traffic that will occur due to the buildout of the
General Plan land use plan. From this information, the design requirements to maintain
acceptable traffic flows can be determined.
Trip Generation
Land use data, as designated by existing land uses and the General Plan Land Use Element, were
used to establish levels of trip generation within each TAZ of the modeling area. Average trip
generation rates per the various land uses were derived from the CVAG CVATS model and were
modified for City-specific application. The total number of vehicle trips produced in or attracted
to a geographic area is directly related to the land use and demographic variables found in each
TAZ. The model estimates the number of peak season vehicle trips that will be produced on an
average weekday for each analysis zone.
Four separate “home-based” trip definitions and one “non-home-based” definition are used to
develop the model. Home-based trips either originate or are destined for the home. The non-
home-based trip type refers to trips that do not originate and are not destined for home (e.g.,
traveling from work directly to dinner). The actual trip production rates, that is trips per land use
type, are taken directly from the CVATS model. The model rates and procedures have been
                                                 III-31

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                        General Plan/Circulation Element
tested against the actual CVATS inputs, indicating close correspondence between the two and
validating the trip generation portion of the model.
Trip Distribution and Traffic Assignment
Once the City has been broken down into the various TAZs and the trip generation for each has
been calculated, the next step is to provide a general directional distribution of these trips and
then to finally assign them to specific streets. Trips are either attractions or productions, that is
they are either drawing trips into the TAZ or are exporting trips. Typically, this distribution of
trips is accomplished using a “gravity distribution model”, based on the formula that the
distribution of trips is proportional to the “attractiveness” of the land use and the distance (or
travel time) from the point of trip production. Each type of trip or trip purpose has its own
specific travel time distribution function or curve.
Traffic assignment involves assigning to specific route paths the various trip interchanges
between TAZs identified in the trip distribution process. The end result forecast of daily traffic
volumes yields the aggregate assignment of trips to roadways between and connecting TAZs
throughout the City. The traffic assignment process for the General Plan traffic model has also
been adapted from procedures used in the CVATS model.
CURRENT CONDITIONS
The City of Desert Hot Springs, unlike other communities in the Coachella valley, is somewhat
isolated from other urban development patterns. While intra-community transportation is
provided by arterial and collector-sized roadways, Desert Hot Springs is connected to the rest of
the Valley and the region by state and interstate highways, including U.S. Interstate-10 and State
Route 62. Regional Arterials, including Palm Drive/Gene Autry Trail, Indian Avenue, Dillon
Road, Date Palm Drive and Mountain View Road further connect City traffic to other Coachella
Valley communities.
The General Plan Circulation Element is the result of extensive baseline data collection, analysis
of street design, and the identification of present operating conditions. The existing roadway
network is further described in the General Plan EIR and its Traffic Study Appendix.
Regional Roadways
There are two regional routes serving the City, State Highway 62 and U.S. Interstate-10.
Highway 62 extends from its juncture with Interstate-10 in the City’s southwestern Sphere-of-
Influence, northward into San Bernardino County. It connects the upper Coachella Valley with
the communities of Morongo Valley, Yucca Valley, and Twentynine Palms, as well as Joshua
Tree National Park. Interstate-10 connects the Los Angeles region with Arizona and other cities
and states to the east, while also serving as the major intra-valley and inter-community connector
in the Coachella Valley. These two important roadways provide regional and interstate
connections for the City and the Coachella Valley.
                                                 III-32

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                       General Plan/Circulation Element
U.S. Interstate-10
In the vicinity of Desert Hot Springs, Interstate-10 is built as an eight-lane divided freeway
accessed from diamond intersections spaced a minimum of one mile apart. I-10 provides
essential inter-city and inter-regional access and is a critical part of the local road network,
moving people and goods into and out of the Valley. Direct City access to I-10 is currently
provided through the Palm Drive, Indian Avenue and Highway 62 interchanges.
State Highway 62
In Desert Hot Springs, Highway 62 has been built near the location of Worsley Road, which
once connected the Coachella Valley and regions to the west with the Morongo Basin. Highway
62 provides important regional access to Joshua Tree National Park and the Twentynine Palms
Marine Corps Air Ground Combat Center, as well as the Colorado River and the Mojave desert
wilderness and recreation areas. Highway 62 access in the City and its Sphere is currently
controlled by stop signs, although signalization and grade separated interchanges may be needed
in the future as traffic volumes increase.
In the City and its Sphere, this roadway has already been improved to four-lanes divided by a
wide and naturalized median. The completion of ultimate buildout will depend upon a variety of
factors and is not expected to occur for many years.
Local Major Roadways
In addition to the two existing regional facilities serving the community, the City has partially
developed and maintains an arterial roadway network which serves both local and inter-city
traffic. Built essentially along a north-south grid, the City road network has direct
interconnections with major arterials and highways providing linkage with adjacent County and
incorporated jurisdictions. The location of trip attractors along these roads or the convenience
they provide in traversing through the City varies with each road.
General Plan Buildout
As a direct result of the analysis conducted on existing traffic and roadway conditions, as well as
projections of future traffic resulting from (current) General Plan buildout, a roadway
classification system has been developed and assigned to existing and future roads. This process
has also taken into consideration special issues of concern and opportunities to enhance
community circulation. Table III-6 lists these General Plan roadways and also provides the
following information:
A. 1994 Average Daily Trips (ADT)
B. 1994 Levels-of-Service (LOS)
C. General Plan Roadway Designation
D. General Plan Buildout Average Daily Trips        (ADT)
E. General Plan Buildout Levels-of-Service            (LOS)
                                               III-33
                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                        General Plan/Circulation Element
                                         Table III-6
                                General Plan Road Analysis
          Roadway Link    1994    1994           Buildout           Build-     Build-
                          ADT     LOS         General Plan            out        out
                                               Designation           ADT        LOS
U.S. Interstate-10
W of Palm Drive            n/a     n/a           Freeway           156,600         D
State Highway 62
N of Pierson Boulevard   19,000     A          Expressway          25,000          A
S of Pierson Boulevard   15,000     A          Expressway             n/a         n/a
Mission Lakes Boulevard
W of West Drive Dr.       2,400     A        Major Collector        13,100         B
E of Indian Avenue        2,200     A        Major Collector        15,500         B
Pierson Boulevard
E of Highway 62           1,100     A         Major Arterial        25,600         B
W of Indian Avenue        2,100     A         Major Arterial        46,000         D
E of Indian Avenue        4,100     A         Minor Arterial       28,200          D
W of Little Morongo Road 4,300      A         Minor Arterial          n/a         n/a
E of Little Morongo Road 5,500      A         Minor Arterial       20,200          C
W of West Drive          6,000      A         Minor Arterial          n/a         n/a
W of Cactus Drive         6,400     B         Minor Arterial          n/a         n/a
W of Palm Drive           7,000     B         Minor Arterial          n/a         n/a
E of Palm Drive           5,200     A        Major Collector       24,700          D
Hacienda Boulevard
W of Palm Drive           3,400     A        Major Collector       17,000          B
E of Palm Drive          6,000      A        Minor Collector        8,200          A
                                  III-34
                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                       General Plan/Circulation Element
                                        Table III-6
                               General Plan Road Analysis
         Roadway Link    1994    1994           Buildout          Build-      Build-
                         ADT     LOS         General Plan           out         out
                                              Designation          ADT         LOS
E of Ocotillo Road       6,700     B        Minor Collector          n/a         n/a
E of Mesquite Avenue     6,700     B        Minor Collector          n/a         n/a
W of Miracle Hill Road   5,800     A        Minor Collector       18,400          C
W of Mountain View Road  6,500     B        Minor Collector       16,700          C
E of Mountain View Road  4,900     A        Minor Collector       27,800          E
W of City Limits         1,900     A        Minor Collector       19,500          C
Two Bunch Palms Trail
E of Palm Drive          6,100     B        Major Collector        6,800          A
W of Palm Drive          6,700     B         Minor Arterial       11,900          B
Indian Avenue
N of Mission Lakes Blvd. 6,000     A         Minor Arterial       10,600          B
N of Pierson Blvd.       7,000     B         Minor Arterial       12,000          B
S of Pierson Blvd.       8,300     B         Major Arterial          n/a         n/a
Little Morongo Road
N of Pierson Blvd.       2,100     A        Major Collector       16,700          B
S of Pierson Blvd.       1,900     A        Major Collector          n/a         n/a
S of Two Bunch Palms Tr. 3,000     A         Major Arterial       39,800          D
West Drive
N of Pierson Blvd.       3,700     A        Minor Collector        1,200          A
S of Pierson Blvd.       3,400     A        Minor Collector        7,500         A
                                 III-35
                                                                                TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                              General Plan/Circulation Element
                                                           Table III-6
                                                General Plan Road Analysis
           Roadway Link                   1994      1994            Buildout             Build-      Build-
                                          ADT       LOS          General Plan              out         out
                                                                  Designation             ADT         LOS
Palm Drive
N of Eighth Street                        6,300       A         Major Collector            n/a          n/a
N of Pierson Blvd.                       10,500       B         Major Collector          20,200          C
S of Pierson Blvd.                       14,600       B         Major Collector            n/a          n/a
N of Hacienda Avenue                     18,800       C         Major Collector          32,100          C
S of Hacienda Avenue                     18,800       C         Major Collector            n/a          n/a
S of Two Bunch Palms Trail               20,600       C          Major Arterial          50,500          E
N of south City Limits                   23,400       F          Major Arterial            n/a          n/a
Miracle Hill Road
N of Hacienda Avenue                      1,000       A            Secondary               n/a          n/a
S of Hacienda Avenue                       400        A            Secondary              4,600          A
Mountain View Road
N of Hacienda Avenue                      1,400       A         Minor Collector          13,800          B
S of Hacienda Avenue                      4,400       A         Minor Collector           9,700          A
n/a = data not available
Source: “Desert Hot Springs General Plan Update Circulation Background Study,” Endo Engineering, March 2000.
                                                    III-36

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                        General Plan/Circulation Element
GENERAL PLAN ROADWAY CLASSIFICATIONS
Based upon existing and projected traffic demands generated by buildout of the General Plan,
each major roadway has been assigned a specific design classification. The need for and
appropriateness of each classification has been based upon projected future traffic volumes and
overall community design goals set forth in the General Plan. Each of the classifications
correspond with the street cross sections illustrated in Exhibit III-5. Certain refinements may be
required when securing right-of-way and constructing improvements at specific locations.
EXHIBIT III-3 GENERAL PLAN BUILDOUT TRAFFIC ASSIGNMENTS
                                               III- 37
                                                TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                              General Plan/Circulation Element
EXHIBIT III-4 ROADWAY CLASSIFICATION MAP EXH.
                                III-38
                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                        General Plan/Circulation Element
EXHIBIT III-5 STREET CROSS SECTIONS
                                 III-39
                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                        General Plan/Circulation Element
SPECIAL ISSUES OF CONCERN
There are additional areas of concern, above and beyond those of increased traffic volumes and
infrastructure needs associated with future traffic, that are also appropriately evaluated in the
General Plan. These include inadequate planned roadway improvements in adjoining
jurisdictions, securing of additional right-of-way for future improvements, provisions for
pedestrians and bicycles, and other issues. Each of these areas is briefly discussed below.
Preservation of Capacity
Roads are generally the most expensive public facilities in terms of initial and on-going
maintenance costs. Roads also make a substantial demand on limited land and can have adverse,
as well as beneficial, impacts on adjoining property. Therefore, roadway design and operation
must be as cost-effective as possible. Along major arterial roadways, such as Palm Drive,
Mission Springs and Pierson Boulevards, access from adjoining property should be controlled
and limited. In more densely developed areas, limited access and median islands will also
improve roadway operation for vehicles and pedestrians.
Specifically, the City should also consider closing certain side streets intersecting with Palm
Drive through the use of cul-de-sacs. The first area of focus may be from Twelfth Street south to
Hacienda Avenue, where numerous opportunities exist to reduce traffic in nearby residential
neighborhoods, and improve the flow of vehicle and pedestrian traffic in this core area of the
City.
All-Weather Access
Mission Creek, Little and Big Morongo Washes and other channels and washes draining local
mountains require the construction of all-weather crossings to assure accessibility during major
flooding. Currently, only Mission Creek at Pierson Boulevard has a bridge providing all-weather
crossings for these roadways, and even this wash does not benefit from channel improvements
which would assure the effectiveness of the crossing in a major storm event. Highway 62
crossings of the numerous washes, including Mission Creek, provide low-flow facilities but do
not address flooding associated with major storm events. As traffic volumes increase at these
locations and elsewhere in the City, it may be necessary to construct all-weather bridges at these
crossings as well.
Pedestrian Issues
Pedestrian and other non-motor circulation is encouraged in the City wherever possible. The
provision of sidewalks, bike lanes and off-street trails are especially important along major
roadways in the community. While sidewalks have been constructed in many parts of the City,
their design and construction has been inconsistent, disjointed and unconnected. The City shall
review, prioritize and plan to construct missing segments of the sidewalk system, which must
continue to correct deficiencies such as compliance with the Americans With Disabilities Act
(ADA). In future development, pedestrian safety and accommodation should be given emphasis
                                               III-40
                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                         General Plan/Circulation Element
equal to that currently given to automobile access. Off-street trails are addressed in greater detail
in the Parks and Recreation Element of the General Plan.
Securing Right of Way
The City has generally been able to secure right-of-way needed to provide full-width mid-block
roadway improvements, and has also been able to secure additional right-of-way along major
arterials designated as scenic corridors. The need for expanded intersection improvements
throughout the City requires that additional right-of-way be secured to provide for additional
through lanes and turning lanes. The greatest demand for additional right-of-way will be at future
critical intersections, where dual left turn lanes and dedicated right turn lanes will be needed.
Roadway Aesthetics and Community Design
The City’s roads and streets make a substantial and highly visible community statement, which
can reflect disregard and degradation or appreciation and enhancement. As entries to the
community, the design and appearance of Palm Drive, Pierson Boulevard, Dillon Road and
others will either detract from or enhance the traveling public’s perception of the City. Quality
roadway design and landscaping help shape the first impressions the community generates. The
dedication of lands and costs of improvements and their maintenance need not be excessive;
quality design need not cost more, and should be expected.
Parking and Access Facilities
While many of the newer commercial developments in the City have been able to provide
adequate parking to serve their customers, some older developments are frequently unable to
provide sufficient off-street parking. This problem is particularly evident along Palm Drive and
is associated with older and smaller retail outlets. The needs for service and maintenance
personnel must also be addressed. It is essential that new development, as well as projects
undergoing redevelopment, provide adequate on-site parking to meet the parking demand
generated. Parking lot ingress and egress should also be more thoughtfully controlled, and
consolidation encouraged, to minimize disruption of traffic flow, facilitate the preservation of
capacity, and assure public safety. The redevelopment of Palm Drive and Pierson Boulevard
provides important opportunities for driveway consolidation.
Public Transportation
The Sunline Transit Agency is the provider of public transit service within the City of Desert Hot
Springs and the Coachella Valley. The Sunline fleet consists of new buses powered by
compressed natural gas. Buses are also equipped with wheelchair lifts and bike racks. One route
currently services the City: Sunbus Route 14 provides service along Palm Drive, Hacienda
Avenue, Mission Lakes Boulevard, West Drive and Pierson Boulevard. Sunline also provides the
“Sun Dial” service, consisting of a fleet of small buses providing curb-to-curb service from home
to destination. The service is wheelchair accessible. Services must be requested at least 72 hours
in advance.
                                                 III-41

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                       General Plan/Circulation Element
Transportation Demand Management
As the Valley and the community continue to grow, transportation demand and systems
management is necessary to preserve and increase available roadway "capacity." Transportation
Demand Management (TDM) involves the development and implementation of policies, plans
and programs designed to encourage the use of a wider range of transportation alternatives,
including public transit and bicycles. In addition to an emphasis on alternative travel modes such
as carpooling, van pooling and mass transit, TDM can also include employee flextime as an
important component that reduces peak hour travel and associated traffic congestion. In response
to state mandates, the Riverside County Transportation Commission (RCTC) prepared a regional
Congestion Management Program, which required Desert Hot Springs and other cities to prepare
TDM ordinances or risk the loss of federal transportation funds. The City adopted its TDM
ordinance in 1992.
Railway Facilities
Rail freight service is provided to the Coachella Valley by the Southern Pacific Railroad (SPRR),
with freight transfer facilities located in Indio and Coachella. There is also current Amtrak
service to Palm Springs and Indio on Southern Pacific’s line. These facilities carry between 30
and 40 trains per day, almost all of which are freight. The rail lines are what SPRR calls
Centralized Track Control (CTC) facilities, which include extensive electronic switching and
communication facilities. While there is neither direct City passenger or freight access to these
facilities, the Palm Springs platform allows passenger boarding, and rail sidings in Indio and
Coachella currently facilitate freight access.
Aircraft Traffic
The primary air transportation link for Desert Hot Springs and the Coachella Valley is the Palm
Springs International Airport. The airport is classified in the National Plan of Integrated Airport
Systems (NPIAS) as a long-haul commercial service airport. It is capable of supporting non-stop
commercial service to destinations over 1,500 miles and is classified as a small hub air passenger
airport based upon the percentage of national airline enplanements it supports. Since 1972, the
airport has increased service from 143,809 passenger enplanements to 486,644 in 1994, with an
average annual growth of about 5.5 percent. Major destination cities include San Francisco,
Chicago, Seattle and New York. Commercial traffic is clearly seasonal, with the peak season
being the January-February-March period and the slowest period occurring during the summer
months. Commercial operations are expected to continue to grow, with passenger enplanements
projected to reach approximately 809,256 by the year 2015.
Major Utility Corridors
Assuring the planned provision of major corridors and easements for the transport of natural gas,
electricity, communications, domestic water and sewerage, and storm drainage is also an
important role of the General Plan. In many instances, the need for utility corridors is met
through the provision of easements in or adjacent to City streets and along common lot lines. The
planning of future land use, the division of land and the processing of development applications
                                                III-42

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                         General Plan/Circulation Element
requires communication and coordination with utility companies and other service providers, to
assure the availability and provision of easements and rights-of-way for the extension of roads
and utility lines and services (Also see Public Utilities Element).
Bicycle Facilities
Currently, the City has only a partially integrated system of sidewalks, bicycle lanes or multi-use
trails within public rights-of-way. Carefully thought out and planned alternative transportation
corridors (sidewalks, bike lanes, and multi-purpose trails) will enhance and give greater
opportunity to use various alternative modes of transportation. Future bike routes will serve as a
safe route for intra-City bicycle traffic. These routes should be clearly marked and striped and
should be designed as one-way bike routes to flow in the same direction as the adjacent
automobile traffic. Combination sidewalk/bikeways require an eight foot width. The multi-use
trails will also serve as links to recreational facilities throughout the community (See the Parks
and Recreation Element for details on design standards of the bike lanes and trails network). The
Coachella Valley Non-Motorized Transportation Element, prepared by CVAG in 1995,
addresses the allocation and extent of existing and proposed bicycle, pedestrian, equestrian and
other trail facilities in the Coachella Valley. The location of these facilities in the Desert Hot
Springs area are illustrated in Exhibit III-6.
                                                 III-43
                                                TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                              General Plan/Circulation Element
EXHIBIT III-6 CVAG NON-MOTORIZED TRANSPORTATION
                                III-44
                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                        General Plan/Circulation Element
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Land use trends and their associated changes in traffic volumes and patterns should periodically
be reviewed and monitored, and periodic adjustments in planning and program implementation
should be made by utilizing roadway improvement and maintenance management programs.
This will be accomplished by regularly monitoring traffic on major roadways and by conducting
ongoing inventories of current traffic and circulation patterns; this should be done at a minimum
of once every two years. The City should continue to coordinate with State and regional agencies
that have jurisdiction over the state highways in the community. Through the implementation of
this Element and involvement with regional, state and federal regulators, the City will
progressively alleviate current problems and avoid future system inadequacies.
Transportation Demand Management (TDM) techniques are widely used to extend or preserve
capacity of existing roadways. These techniques may include efforts to encourage car or van
pooling and the continued utilization and future expansion of public transit services provided by
Sunline Transit.
Special intersection design that allows dedicated right turn overlap signal phasing to provide free
right turns where appropriate, and other system enhancements also provide cost effective
solutions. Detailed analysis is periodically undertaken for the intersections identified in City
engineering studies and the General Plan to refine realignments and design engineering, and to
assure availability of necessary right-of-way to provide for adequate long-term Levels of
Service. Other transportation management techniques that address specific issues of concern
within the City of Desert Hot Springs include limiting, and in some cases restricting access onto
arterials and other major roadways. This can be accomplished by combining driveways,
installing raised center medians to restrict turning movements, adding travel and turning lanes,
and minimizing the number of intersections. Finally, a concerted effort by the City to move
towards a balance between local jobs and housing, and encouraging mixed-use development will
minimize future traffic volumes in City. All of these measures are discussed in detail in the
General Plan Traffic Study and EIR.
CIRCULATION ELEMENT GOAL, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
GOAL
A circulation network that efficiently, safely and economically moves people, vehicles, and
goods using transportation facilities that meet the current demands and projected needs of the
City, while maintaining and protecting its residential and spa resort character.
Policy 1
Establish and maintain a master plan of roads, which sets forth detailed improvement plans and
priority schedules for implementation, to assure minimal levels of mid-block roadway and
intersection operations at LOS C and LOS D, respectively.
                                                III-45
                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                        General Plan/Circulation Element
Program 1 A
Initiate and complete a master plan of roads, which includes targets for ultimate rights-of-way
and pavement width and provides a schedule for securing right-of-way and constructing
improvements consistent with the projected needs and standards set forth in the City Circulation
Element and Program EIR.
Responsible Agency: City Council; Community Development Department, Public Works
Department
Schedule: 2001-02.
Program 1 B
Establish and maintain a roadways pavement management program (PMP) that sets forth
timelines and schedules for the maintenance of existing roads in the community. The program
shall also establish funding levels for each fiscal year.
Responsible Agency: City Council; Public Works Department
Schedule: 2001; update annually.
Policy 2
Coordinate and cooperate with CalTrans, CVAG and Riverside County to assure preservation of
capacity and maximized efficiency along Palm Drive, Highway 62 and other major roadways.
Program 2 A
Maintain a liaison with CalTrans, CVAG and Riverside County planning and engineering staffs
to study and implement effective means of preserving and improving capacity along Interstate-10
and its interchanges, Palm Drive, Highways 62 and other major roadways serving inter-city
traffic. Strategies shall include but are not limited to synchronized signalization, consolidation of
access drives and restriction of access, construction of additional travel and turning lanes, raised
median islands, and improvements to critical intersections.
Responsible Agency: Public Works Department; Community Development Department;
CVAG; Riverside County; CalTrans
Schedule: Continuous.
Program 2 B
Review new and redeveloping projects along Palm Drive and Pierson Boulevard with the intent
of limiting access and aligning and/or consolidating access drives in a manner which minimizes
conflicting turning movements and maximizes the use of existing and planned signalized
intersections.
Responsible Agency: Public Works Department; Community Development Department
Schedule: Continuous.
Program 2 C
Confer and coordinate with CalTrans in efforts to secure state and federal funding sources for
preservation and expansion of capacity on Interstate-10, State Highway 62 and other important
City arterials.
Responsible Agency: Public Works Department; Community Development Department;
CalTrans; Federal Highway Administration
                                                 III-46
                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                       General Plan/Circulation Element
Schedule: Continuous.
Policy 3
Participate and represent the City’s interests in circulation-related regional planning activities,
and encourage acceptance of City policies regarding regional transportation issues.
Program 3 A
Establish and maintain a liaison with CVAG, SCAG and CalTrans and pro-actively represent
City in transportation planning meetings to assure that City policies, programs and strategies are
given priority consideration in resolving regional transportation issues affecting the community.
Responsible Agency: City Council; Community Development Department; Public Works
Department; CVAG; SCAG; CalTrans
Schedule: Continuous.
Policy 4
Encourage expansion of the service area and the ridership of the public transit systems operated
by the Sunline Transit Agency within the City.
Program 4 A
Consult and coordinate with the Sunline Transit Agency and assure vocal representation on the
Agency Board and its decision making process.
Responsible Agency: City Council; Community Development Department; Sunline Transit
Agency; CVAG
Schedule: Continuous.
Program 4 B
When reviewing development proposals, consult and coordinate with the Sunline Transit Agency
and solicit comments and suggestions on how bus stops and other public transit facilities and
design concepts, including enhanced handicapped access, should be integrated into project
designs.
Responsible Agency: City Council; Community Development Department; Sunline Transit
Agency
Schedule: Continuous.
Program 4 C
When reviewing development proposals, consult and coordinate with the Sunline Transit Agency
to encourage the development of rideshare and other alternative, high occupancy transit
programs for employers with sufficient numbers of employees.
Responsible Agency: City Council; Community Development Department; Sunline Transit
Agency
Schedule: Continuous.
Policy 5
As a means of reducing traffic associated with work-related out-migration, make every
reasonable effort to enhance the City’s jobs/housing balance.
                                               III-47

                                                                       TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                    General Plan/Circulation Element
Program 5 A
In order to locate jobs and housing near each other to produce shorter work commutes, make a
concerted effort to increase City-based employment; encourage mixed-use development with a
residential component contiguous with or near to employment and/or commercial centers;
facilitate use of the City’s home occupation ordinance; and encourage major employers to
evaluate telecommuting opportunities, either home-based or at local centers, as well as part-time
options for employees.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Redevelopment Agency; Chamber
of Commerce
Schedule: Continuous.
Policy 6
Promote the use of multi-occupant modes of transportation, and the shifting of employment-
related trips out of current peak traffic periods.
Program 6 A
To the extent practical, prepare a rideshare plan for City employees to serve as an example for
area employers. This plan should include meaningful incentives for employees to walk, bike, or
rideshare to complete their work commutes.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: Continuous
Program 6 B
To the extent practical, the City and the Sunline Transit Agency shall encourage employers to
provide 4 day-40 hour and 9 day-80 hour work weeks, and/or provide start/end times outside of
the 6-8 a.m. and 4-6 p.m. peak periods of traffic.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Sunline Transit Agency
Schedule: Continuous.
Program 6 C
Encourage and pro-actively support the efforts of the Sunline Transit Agency in organizing a
Transportation Management Organization (TMO) among employers to provide an on-going
information network, develop a rideshare plan, and determine opportunities for transit/shuttle
operations.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Sunline Transit Agency
Schedule: Continuous
Policy 7
Develop and encourage the use of continuous and convenient bicycle routes and multi-use trails
to places of employment, shopping centers, schools, and other high activity areas with potential
for increased bicycle use.
                                                 III-48

                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                         General Plan/Circulation Element
Program 7 A
Prepare and adopt a master plan of bicycle-ways, and multi-use trails, and develop or require the
development of secure bicycle storage facilities and other support facilities which increase
bicycle use (Also see Parks and Recreation Element).
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Public Works Department
Schedule: 2001-02; Continuous.
Policy 8
Coordinate with the Riverside County Flood Control District and its consultants to assure the
provision of all-weather crossings along critical roadways.
Program 8 A
Consult and coordinate with the Riverside County Flood Control District, and cooperate in the
planning and development of all-weather crossings as part of the community's Master Drainage
Plan and its implementation.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Public Works Department;
Riverside County Flood Control District
Schedule: 2001-02; Continuous.
Policy 9
Facilitate the design and installation of a community locational/directional signage program to
efficiently direct traffic to high use public buildings, parks, and other facilities.
Program 9 A
Provide clear public signage directing traffic to the City’s park and recreational facilities, and all
public facilities, including but not limited to, libraries, hospitals, police and fire stations, and
civic centers.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Public Works Department
Schedule: 2001-02; Continuous.
Policy 10
Coordinate and cooperate with the Palm Springs Regional Airport Authority to assure that the
airport continues to meet the City’s transportation, commercial and emergency response needs.
Policy 11
Streets within planned residential areas shall be installed and maintained as private streets, and
shall be developed in accordance with development standards set forth in the Zoning Ordinance
and other applicable standards and guidelines
Policy 12
City truck routes shall be designated and limited to Palm Drive, Two Bunch Palms Trail, Indian
Avenue, Little Morongo Road, Pierson Boulevard and Highway 62.
                                                  III-49

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                          General Plan/Housing Element
HOUSING ELEMENT
PURPOSE
The purpose of the City of Desert Hot Springs Housing Element is to provide both the citizens
and public officials with a comprehensive understanding of the housing needs within the City,
and to set forth policies and programs that will enable the City to reach its defined housing goals.
In order to achieve the ultimate goal of ensuring that every Desert Hot Springs resident secures a
safe and decent place to live within a satisfactory environment, the Housing Element promotes a
closer coordination of housing policies and programs at local, state and federal levels since the
attainment of housing goals depends upon the shared commitment of all levels of government.
BACKGROUND
The Housing Element functions as an integral part of a comprehensive growth plan. As it
manages development, the City must balance the need to assure adequate housing for all current
and future members of the community against the need to provide and support existing and
anticipated levels of public services and facilities. The Housing Element, therefore, directly
relates to the amount and location of commercial and industrial development, the type and
intensity of land uses, and the amount of housing development established through land use
designations in the Land Use Element. In addition, the Housing Element relates to the
availability of adequate roadways, pedestrian facilities and transit routes established in the
Circulation, Transportation and Scenic Highways Element, and the protection of sensitive
receptors established in the Hazards Element.
The Housing Element includes a description of existing housing types, condition of existing
units, overcrowding, overpayment, homelessness, and the demand for affordable housing in the
City. The Element also includes an analysis of the progress made since the drafting of the last
Housing Element, and projections of needs for the next five years.
California Law
California Government Code requires that every City and County prepare a Housing Element as
part of its General Plan. In addition, State law contains specific requirements for the preparation
and content of Housing Elements. According to Article 10.6, Section 65580, the Legislature has
found that:
(1) The availability of housing is of vital statewide importance, and the early attainment of
decent housing and a suitable living environment for every California family is a priority of the
highest order.
(2) The early attainment of this goal requires the cooperative participation of government and the
private sector in an effort to expand housing opportunities and accommodate the housing needs
of Californians of all economic levels.
(3) The provision of housing affordable to low and moderate income households requires the
cooperation of all levels of government.
                                                III- 50
                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                          General Plan/Housing Element
(4) Local and state governments have a responsibility to use the powers vested in them to
facilitate the improvement and development of housing to make adequate provision for the
housing needs of all economic segments of the community.
(5) The legislature recognizes that in carrying out this responsibility, each local government also
has the responsibility to consider economic, environmental, and fiscal factors and community
goals set forth in the General Plan and to cooperate with other local governments, and the state,
in addressing regional housing needs.
Section 65581 of the Government Code states that the intent of the Legislature in enacting these
requirements is:
(1) To assure that local governments recognize their responsibilities in contributing to the
attainment of the State housing goal.
(2) To assure that cities and counties prepare and implement housing elements which, along with
federal and State programs, will move toward attainment of the State housing goal.
(3) To recognize that each locality is best capable of determining what efforts are required by it
to contribute to the attainment of the State housing goal as well as regional housing needs.
(4) To ensure that each local government cooperates with other local governments to address
regional housing needs.
Government Code Section 65583 outlines the required content of all housing elements including
identification and analysis of existing and projected housing needs, and a statement of goals,
policies, quantified objectives, and scheduled programs for the preservation, improvement, and
development of housing. Specific requirements include the following:
(1) An assessment of housing needs and an inventory of resources and constraints relevant to the
meeting of these needs. The analysis should include population and employment trends;
documentation of household characteristics; inventory of land suitable for residential
development; governmental and other constraints to new housing development; analysis of any
special housing needs and an assessment of existing affordable housing developments.
(2) A program which sets forth a five-year schedule of actions the local government is
undertaking or intends to undertake to implement the policies and achieve the objectives of the
housing element in order to meet the housing needs of all economic segments of the community.
Evaluation of Existing Housing Element Goals and Policies
The last Housing Element Update was adopted by the City Council in 1993, and certified by the
courts at a later date. The Update contained a number of goals, policies and programs, which
have been implemented since that time. This section of the Housing Element reviews these goals,
policies and programs, and evaluates their effectiveness. Since all programs under each policy
are directly related, their discussion is handled as one block of information after the listing of the
programs.
                                                 III-51
                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                        General Plan/Housing Element
Goal 1
Ensure that a variety of housing types including larger multifamily units, are constructed and
rehabilitated throughout the City in all price ranges.
Policy 1A
The City shall facilitate the construction of renter and owner occupied housing by providing a
range of land use and zoning categories throughout the City.
Program 1A.1: Specific Plans shall incorporate a variety of housing types, and shall provide for
senior and affordable housing within the project.
Responsible Department: Planning
Schedule: Continuous, as Specific Plans are submitted
Only one Specific Plan was adopted since the adoption of the Update. The project, known as the
Rancho Royale Specific Plan, is required to provide 10% of all its 9,000 units for affordable
housing. One Specific Plan Amendment, recently adopted by the City Council, provides that all
units in a 422 unit development be restricted to seniors only. The City will continue to
implement this program as Specific Plans are processed in the future.
Program 1A.2: The City shall encourage infill development wherever possible, to lower the costs
of extending infrastructure.
Responsible Department: Planning
Schedule: Continuous
Infill development in the City continues, although limited development activity has occurred
since 1993. The following Table lists the building permit activity for 1994 through 1999 for new
home construction. In 1994 and 1995, the construction of a new tract occurred in the City. Since
that time, all single family residences have been constructed on existing lots within the City.
                                                III-52
                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                         General Plan/Housing Element
                                              Table III-7
                                     New Residential Building
                                                Permits
                                               1994-1999
                                           Year             Permits
                                   1994                           115
                                   1995                            53
                                   1996                            23
                                   1997                              7
                                   1998                              2
                                   1999                              9
                                   Source: Desert Hot Springs Building
                                   Department.
Policy 1B
The City shall encourage the preservation of its existing housing stock.
Program 1B.1: The Redevelopment Agency shall continue to participate in grant and loan
assistance programs for homeowners in Redevelopment Areas 1 and 2, in order to encourage the
rehabilitation of existing housing units.
Responsible Department: Redevelopment Agency, Planning
Schedule: To be determined each fiscal year, based on budgetary constraints and opportunities.
The City has had a very active Home Improvement Program, which has focused on a number of
activities. First, a sewer connection program was established, to allow low and very low income
households to connect to the City’s sewer system and abandon septic tanks. There has been a
continuing concern for the public health and safety due to failing septic systems in the older
neighborhoods of the City. The sewer connection program was operated as a grant program.
Utilizing CDBG funds, the City completed 15 sewer connections in fiscal 1999-2000, all of
which were very low or low income households. In previous years, the City has assisted an
average of 10 families per year in connecting to sanitary sewer.
In addition, the City established and funded a Home Repair Program, which allowed low and
very low income households to apply for grants to repair roofs, pave driveways, replace or install
HVAC systems, and perform repairs to plumbing and electrical systems in their homes. This
program, active prior to 1998, granted an average of 6 projects annually for very low and low
income households.
Although Redevelopment Agency funds are significantly limited at this time, the City will
maintain this program for use in the future.
                                                  III-53

                                                                        TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                       General Plan/Housing Element
Program 1B.2: The City shall ensure that development which will displace residents through
destruction of housing units shall be required to assist in the relocation of these residents,
through the use of Conditions of Approval or other binding means.
Responsible Department: Planning
Schedule: Continuous
There has been no displacement of low income households due to demolition of units in the
previous planning period. The City will continue this program, to ensure that it is available
should it be needed in the future.
Policy 1C
The City shall encourage the development of larger unit sizes in multifamily rental projects and
second units on single family lots in order to alleviate overcrowding.
Program 1C.1: The City shall encourage multi-family rental and owner-occupied projects
which construct three and four bedroom units s a substantial portion of the overall development.
Responsible Department: Planning
Schedule: Continuous
There has been no multi-family construction during the planning period. The City will maintain
this program for use in the future.
Program 1C.2: The City shall encourage development of second units on single family lots by
providing information packets at City Hall on second unit construction and the conditions set
forth in Government Code Section 65852.1, which allows second unit development.
Responsible Department: Planning
Schedule: Continuous
The City has developed a brochure which is available from the Building Department, relating to
the standards and regulations for second units on single family lots.
Goal 2
The development of affordable housing projects for very low, low and moderate income
households to meet the community’s need.
Policy 2.A
The City shall provide a variety of programs to encourage the development of very low, low and
moderate income housing.
Program 2A.1: For developments which will restrict their units to very low, low or moderate
income households, the City shall allow a density bonus of 25% over the underlying zoning
designation.
Responsible Department: Planning
Schedule: Continuous
                                                III-54

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                         General Plan/Housing Element
No new multi-family apartment construction occurred during the planning period. The City has
granted density bonuses for both the Waldorf and Linda Vista Residences projects, which
provide 94 housing units for very low and low income seniors. Linda Vista also provides some
of its units for handicapped residents over the age of 18.
Program 2A.2: The City Redevelopment Agency shall expeditiously calculate and allocate
Housing set-aside funds to affordable housing programs on an annual basis.
Responsible Department: Redevelopment Agency
Schedule: Annual
The City projects its set aside funds with the preparation of each budget, and assigns the actual
funds immediately upon receipt of the data from the County of Riverside.
Program 2A.3: A Mortgage Assistance Program for qualifying households shall be established
and funded with Housing set-aside funds.
Responsible Department: Redevelopment Agency
Schedule: Fiscal 1993-94
The City established a Mortgage Assistance Program, and assisted an average of 4 households
annually in securing their first home. This program is still active, but has been unfunded in this
fiscal year.
Program 2A.4: The City shall establish and maintain a regular contact with the Riverside
County Housing Authority to ensure that housing assistance programs within the City are
actively pursued.
Responsible Department: Planning
Schedule: 1993
The City maintains regular contact with the County Economic Development Agency, under
which the Housing Authority operates.
Program 2A.5: The City shall actively assist qualified developers in preparation of applications
for State and Federal housing grants and loans as they become available and in finding
appropriate land suitable for this type of development.
Responsible Department: Planning, Redevelopment Agency, City Manager’s Office
Schedule: Continuous
The City assisted with both the Linda Vista Residence project and the Waldorf projects, in
processing applications and assisting with the State review process. No further requests for such
projects have been received.
Program 2A.7: The City shall prepare handout materials for developers and low income
households which detail the programs
available to both parties for assistance in the development and rehabilitation of low income
housing.
Responsible Department: Planning, City Manager’s Office
Schedule: Fiscal 1993-94
                                                III-55

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                         General Plan/Housing Element
A handout is maintained in the Planning Department which provides the development
community with information on programs available at the City. Given the limited building
activity through the previous planning period, that handout was not often utilized. Current and
future requests for documentation will continue to be addressed in an expeditious manner.
Copies of the rehabilitation program guidelines are also available at City Hall for residents
wishing to apply.
Program 2A.7: The City shall work with Angel View Hospital and other private organizations in
assisting whenever possible in the mainstreaming of residents into the community.
Responsible Department: City Manager’s Office
Schedule: Continuous
Since adoption of the last Update, the City worked with Angel View in streamlining permitting
for 7 homes, which each house 6 residents, which were constructed in the City. These residents
are all handicapped, and would have to reside in a hospital or assisted living facility if the homes
were not available.
Program 2A.8: The City of Desert Hot Springs will continue to support and assist in enforcing,
as required, the provisions of the Federal Fair Housing Act. All complaints regarding
discrimination in housing will be referred to the Riverside County Housing authority. The City
will promote fair housing by providing brochures and posting information at City Hall.
Responsible Department: Planning
Schedule: Continuous
The City utilizes fair housing materials and renters’ rights materials supplied by the County for
distribution to concerned parties. In addition, all reception personnel are instructed in how to
refer telephone inquiries regarding such matters. Since the City has only limited staff resources
(2 receptionists and one planner) with familiarity with housing issues, the City will continue to
refer such cases to the County Housing Authority in this planning period.
Program 2A.9: The City of Desert Hot Springs shall consider engaging in a Cooperation
Agreement with the Riverside County Housing Authority, in order to participate in the Hope III
Program to provide additional affordable housing on land owned by the Housing Authority in
the City.
Responsible Department: Planning
Schedule: 1993
The City has continually maintained a contact with County representatives regarding the
Housing Authority project in the City. However, the County has indicated no interest in
expanding the project on the project site.
Program 2A.10: The City of Desert Hot Springs shall consider the use of Community
Development Block Grant funds to assist in the subsidy of handicapped households.
Responsible Department: Planning
Schedule: 1993
                                              III-56

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                         General Plan/Housing Element
The City received less than $100,000 in CDBG funds annually during the previous planning
period. These funds were primarily used toward street maintenance and improvement projects,
and to the low income Sewer Hook-Up program. The funds were not allocated to handicapped
households, because of the limited resources.
Goal 3
Provide additional affordable senior housing projects, and protect existing senior housing
projects from conversion to other uses.
Policy 3.A
The City shall facilitate the development and preservation of senior housing through incentives
and assistance programs.
Program 3A.1: The Redevelopment Agency shall re-establish a program of grants and loans to
senior residents in Redevelopment Areas 1 and 2 to encourage maintenance and rehabilitation of
existing housing units.
Responsible Department: Redevelopment Agency
Schedule: Fiscal 1993-94
The City established a rehabilitation grant program for low and very low income households, and
is also working with the County in qualifying seniors for the home repair program available
through the Economic Development Agency. When combined with CDBG funds, a number of
senior households are being assisted to provide sewer connection at no charge to the
homeowners.
Program 3A.2: The City will provide assistance to developers of senior housing through
Housing set-aside funds whenever possible.
Responsible Department: Redevelopment Agency
Schedule: Continuous
The Agency has not directly funded any projects in the previous planning period. Requests for
fee waivers, and participation in establishing meals on wheels and other senior programs at the
Waldorf and Linda Vista Residences was undertaken during this time.
Program 3A.3: The City will ensure the preservation of existing mobile home units, particularly
since they are often senior-oriented housing, by requiring developers to relocate displaced
residents if a park is to be converted to another use. Existing mobile home parks in the proposed
annexation areas will not be required to upgrade to current City of Desert Hot Springs zoning
standards. New units within existing parks shall continue to be subject to original development
standards.
Responsible Department: Planning, Building and Safety
Schedule: Continuous
No mobile home residents had to be relocated, since no mobile home parks were converted
during the previous planning period. The Annexation 22 area was incorporated into City limits,
but no parks occurred within it. Annexation 21 lands, which were never incorporated into the
                                               III-57
                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                           General Plan/Housing Element
City, had included a number of mobile home parks. No other effort to annex additional land has
occurred in the previous planning period.
Program 3A.4: For developments which will restrict their units to senior households, the City
shall allow a density bonus of 25% over the underlying zoning designation.
Responsible Department: Planning
Schedule: Continuous
Both the Waldorf and Linda Vista Residences utilized the density bonus provision in the
rehabilitation of their units, which are restricted to low and very low income seniors.
Program 3A.6: The City shall work with private organizations such as Desert Hot Springs
Apartments, Inc. in obtaining financing for project expansion.
Responsible Department: City Manager’s Office, Redevelopment Agency
Schedule: 1993-94
No apartment projects were expanded during the previous planning period.
Goal 4
The City shall preserve its character and home town atmosphere.
Policy 4.A
The City shall encourage the preservation of the home town atmosphere through design
standards, pedestrian and public transit access.
Program 4A.1: The City shall require Specific Plan projects to develop design guidelines which
provide for buffers between land uses, small scale development, and appropriate architecture.
Responsible Department: Planning
Schedule: Continuous
The City adopted its Downtown Design Plan, which allows innovated residential uses within its
urban core, including apartments over businesses. The design standards also provide
architectural themes and standards for development in this area.
Program 4A.2: Residential projects shall be required to provide bicycle and pedestrian
facilities, including trails, sidewalks, benches and open space areas wherever appropriate.
Responsible Department: Planning
Schedule: Continuous
All residential projects must provide sidewalks on City streets at the time the project is
constructed. Specific Plan projects also incorporate trails, bicycle facilities and benches
whenever appropriate.
                                                  III-58

                                                                        TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                        General Plan/Housing Element
Policy 4.B
High density, affordable and senior projects shall be located with convenient access to shopping
and public transit.
Program 4B.1: The City shall require developers of affordable and senior housing projects to
confer with the SunLine Transit Agency regarding the provision of service to the project area
wherever feasible.
Responsible Department: Planning
Schedule: Continuous
All applications are routed to SunLine Transit for comment prior to issuance of any planning
permit. In addition, the Waldorf and Linda Vista Residences have worked with transportation
providers to ensure that their residents have access to commercial and medical facilities.
DEMOGRAPHIC INFORMATION
In order to understand the housing needs of Desert Hot Springs, it is important to first look at the
make up of the community and its demographics.
REGIONAL SETTING
This section of the Housing Element contains relevant demographic, household, and socio-
economic data. This information is primarily based on data provided in the 1990 U.S. Census of
Population and Housing, the California Department of Finance and the City of Desert Hot
Springs.
Desert Hot Springs is located in the upper Coachella Valley, a sub region of Riverside County.
The County experienced extremely rapid growth in the 1980's. County population grew from
663,923 in 1980 to 1,110,000 in 1990, an increase of 67%. The California Department of
Finance further estimates that population in the County rose to 1,473,307 in 1999. This rapid rate
of growth brings opportunities as well as the challenges of managing urbanization.
Historic and Current City Population
The U. S. Census estimated a population of 5,941 in Desert Hot Springs in 1980, which grew to
11,668 in 1990, an increase of 96.4%. The population as of January 1, 1999 was estimated by the
California Department of Finance to be 15,398 persons. This represents an average annual
growth rate of just under 4%.
Population by Age Group and Ethnicity
The median age in Desert Hot Springs as of 1990 was 30.0 years. Table III-8 presents the
number of persons in various age ranges and the percent of total population for each group.
                                                III-59
                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                         General Plan/Housing Element
                                              Table III-8
                                          Age Distribution
                              Age          Number             % of Total
                           Under 18           3,390               29%
                             18-24            1,187               10%
                             25-44            3,660               32%
                             45-64            1,759               15%
                              65+             1,672               14%
                             Total          11,668               100%
                                        Source: 1990 U.S. Census
Ethnic Characteristics
Table III-9 displays the ethnic distribution for Desert Hot Springs in 1990.
                                              Table III-9
                                    Ethnic Characteristics, 1990
                                                 Number       % of Total
                            White                     8,513      72.9%
                            Hispanic                  2,278      19.5%
                            Black                        454      3.8%
                            Native                       159      1.3%
                            American
                            Asian                        226      1.9%
                            Other                         38      0.6%
                            Total                    11,668      100%
                            Source: 1990 U.S. Census
Although the community remains predominantly Caucasian, the data shows an increase in
minority population. This is representative of the trend throughout Southern California.
                                                  III-60
                                                                        TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                       General Plan/Housing Element
Household Size and Income
The City had a total of 4,594 households in 1990. In 1999, the Department of Finance estimated
5,478 households, a 19.2% increase in ten years.
The 1990 Census identified a median household income in the City of $20,687, considerably
lower than the County median income, which stood at $36,000 for the same time period. The
following Table demonstrates that 73% of the City’s households in 1990 had an income below
the County median household income.
                                             Table III-10
                           Household Income Distribution,1990
                           Income             No. of HH     % of Total
                           $ 0-4,999                311         7%
                           5,000-9,999              762        17%
                           10,000-14,999            628        14%
                           15,000-24,999            896        19%
                           25,000-34,999            743        16%
                           35,000-49,999            698        15%
                           50,000-74,999            369         8%
                           75,000-99,999            126         3%
                           100,000 +                 61         1%
                           Total                   4,594      100%
                           Source: 1990 U.S. Census
Although the community remains predominantly Caucasian, the data shows an increase in
minority population. This is representative of the trend throughout Southern California.
Household Size and Income
The City had a total of 4,594 households in 1990. In 1999, the Department of Finance estimated
5,478 households, a 19.2% increase in ten years.
The 1990 Census identified a median household income in the City of $20,687, considerably
lower than the County median income, which stood at $36,000 for the same time period. The
following Table demonstrates that 73% of the City’s households in 1990 had an income below
the County median household income.
                                                 III-61

                                                                                 TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                                General Plan/Housing Element
Major Employers
Table III-11 lists the largest employers located in the City of Desert Hot Springs, while Table III-
12 demonstrates the industries in which the City’s residents have been employed.
                                              Table III-11
                                       Major Employers - 1998
                Employers                                   Number of Employees
                Palm Springs Unified School
                District                                              1,400
                Angel View Crippled
                                                                       240
                Childrens’ Foundation
                Miracle Springs Hotel                                   95
                Desert Hot Springs Spa Hotel                            80
                K-Mart                                                  80
                Stater Brothers Market                                  75
                Von’s Market                                            75
                Mission Springs Water Dist.                             33
                Carl’s Junior Restaurant                                33
                McDonald’s Restaurant                                   32
                Agua Caliente Spa Hotel                                 47
                Source: Riverside County Economic Profile for Desert Hot Springs, 1998
                                                  III-62

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                         General Plan/Housing Element
                                            Table III-12
                                   Employment by Industry, 1995
                                              No. Of
                    Industry                  Employees          % of Total
                    Agriculture                     181            3.1%
                    Mining                           7             0.1%
                    Construction                    691            11.9%
                    Manufacturing, Durables         184             3.2%
                    Manufacturing, Non-
                    Durables                        166             2.8%
                    Transportation                  252             4.3%
                    Communications                  160             2.7%
                    Wholesale Trade                 198             3.4%
                    Retail Trade                   1,166           20.0%
                    Finance/R.E./Insurance          368             6.3%
                    Business/Repair Service         408             7.0%
                    Personal Services               520             8.9%
                    Entertainment/Recreation        136             2.3%
                    Health Services                 565             9.7%
                    Educational Services            252             4.3%
                    Other Services                  433             7.4%
                    Public Administration           141             2.4%
                    Source: Urban Decision Systems, Inc.
The retail and service sectors have, and continue to be a major source of employment for
residents of the City.
                                               III-63
                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                         General Plan/Housing Element
Housing Characteristics
Housing needs in Desert Hot Springs are a function of affordability, not supply.
The 1990 Census showed a total of 5,494 housing units in the City.
                                             Table III-13
                                    Housing Characteristics-1990
                                Units in Structure                 Number
                        Single Family                                 3,108
                        2-4 Units, Multi-family                         952
                        5-9 Units, Multi-family                         595
                        10 or more Units, Multi-family                  514
                        Mobilehome, Trailer, Other                      325
                        Total                                         5,494
The State Department of Finance updated this distribution as of January 1, 1997.
                                             Table III-14
                                    Housing Characteristics-1997
                        Units in Structure                         Number
                        Single Family                                 3,902
                        2-4 Units, Multi-family                       1,082
                        5+ Units, Multi-family                        1,224
                        Mobilehomes                                     331
                        Total                                         6,539
                        Source: State Department of Finance
Clearly, the greatest growth in housing type has occurred in the single family home area,
continuing the City’s historic trend as a suburban community.
                                                  III-64

                                                                              TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                              General Plan/Housing Element
Age of Housing Stock
75.8% of the City’s housing was built less than 30 years ago, while 24.2% of the housing pre-
dates 1970, as demonstrated in the Table below
                                               Table III-15
                                         Age of Housing Units
                        Year Built            No. of Units             % of Total
                  1991-99                                 815           12.9%
                  1989-90                                 169            2.6%
                  1985-1988                             1,440           22.9%
                  1980-1984                               839           13.3%
                  1970-1979                             1,518           24.1%
                  1960-1969                               829           13.2%
                  1950-1959                               366            5.8%
                  1940-1949                               180            2.8%
                  Before 1940                             153            2.4%
                  Total                                 6,309           100%
                  Source: 1990 U.S. Census, City of Desert Hot Springs
Condition of Housing Stock
Prior to the preparation of the last Housing Element Update in 1993, a City-wide housing survey
was conducted. Conditions in Desert Hot Springs having changed little since that time, the same
housing survey can be expected to be representative of current conditions in the City.
Housing was rated on a scale of 1 to 5, with the following definitions applied to each numerical
category:
1. Very good condition, no maintenance necessary.
2. Good condition, minor aesthetic
        maintenance necessary.
3.      Acceptable condition, aesthetic and
        structural maintenance necessary.
4.      Poor condition, major aesthetic and
        considerable structural maintenance
        necessary.
5.      Unacceptable condition, considerable
        dilapidation; health and safety a concern.
                                                    III-65

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                         General Plan/Housing Element
Of the 4,157 units surveyed, 1,492, or 35.9% were in very good condition; 1,409 or 33.9% were
in good condition; 878 or 21.1% were in acceptable condition; 325, or 7.8% were in poor
condition; and 53, or 1.3% were in unacceptable condition. Overall, therefore, the vast majority
(91%) of the City’s housing stock is in acceptable or better condition. However, 9% of housing is
poor or worse condition.
Vacancy Status
The 1990 Census showed an overall vacancy rate of 17%. Correcting for seasonal or recreational
units, which are considered vacant by the Census but are not available or used for permanent
occupancy, the vacancy rate decreases to 5.5%.
                                            Table III-16
                                        Vacancy Status - 1990
                       Unit Type          No. Of Units       % of All Units
                                            Vacant
                    For Rent                  259                 4.7%
                    For Sale                   75                 1.4%
                    Rented or Sold,
                    not occupied               55                 1.0%
                    Seasonal,
                    Recreational or
                    Occasional Use            311                 5.7%
                    Other Vacant              208                 3.8%
                    Total                     908                16.6%
                    Source: 1990 Census
The Department of Finance estimates that the City has a total of 6,563 housing units in 1999,
5,478 of which are occupied, representing an 8.3% vacancy rate. If adjusted for seasonal homes,
which represent approximately 5.7% of vacancies in 1990, the vacancy rate in the City is 2.6%.
                                                III-66

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                         General Plan/Housing Element
Housing Tenure
Housing tenure for occupied units only in 1990 is shown in Table III
                                            Table III-17
                                       Housing Tenure - 1990
                            Unit                    No. Of Units             %
               Owner Occupied                          2,048               44.7%
               Renter Occupied                         2,538               55.3%
               Total                                   4,586               100%
               Source: 1990 Census
Overcrowding
The State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) has set the standard of
1.01 persons per room as the criteria for defining “overcrowded” housing conditions.
Overcrowding is one of the specifically identified issues that must be addressed in the Housing
Element. High rents and home prices in some communities limit low income persons from
obtaining homes with adequate space or bedrooms. The following Table represents the range of
persons per room.
                                            Table III-18
                                         Overcrowding, 1990
                                   Persons/Room         No. of HH
                                       Owner-Occupied Units
                              1.01 to 1.50                          68
                              1.51 to 2.00                          27
                              2.01 or more                          12
                                       Renter-Occupied Units
                              1.01 to 1.50                         219
                              1.51 to 2.00                         216
                              2.01 or more                          82
                              Source: 1990 Census
Based on this data, a total of 624 households in Desert Hot Springs were overcrowded. This
represents approximately 13% of all housing units in the City in 1990. Of the total households
overcrowded, 221 were occupied by very low income households, 200 of which were renters and
                                                III-67

                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                            General Plan/Housing Element
21 of which were owners. Further, 96 households were low income households, 50 of which
were renters, and 46 of which were owners.
Housing Values
The 1990 Census estimated values for owner-occupied single family homes in the City. These
are listed in Table III-19.
                                              Table III-19
                                  Values, Specified Owner-Occupied
                                           Housing Units, 1990
                         Value                                      Number
                         $14,999 or less                                    11
                         $15,000 to 34,999                                  43
                         $35,000 to 59,999                                 349
                         $60,000 to 99,999                               1,017
                         $100,000 to 149,999                               202
                         $150,000 to 199,999                                46
                         $200,000 or more                                   26
                         Source: 1990 Census
The Table clearly shows that in 1990, 83.8% of the City’s single family residences were valued
under $100,000. The median housing value in 1990 was $74,800.00. At the time, this made the
City the sixth most affordable in terms of home values in the six county SCAG regions. Desert
Hot Springs has, and is currently an affordable community in which to own a home.
LAND INVENTORY
Table III-20 shows the available residentially designated land in the City which is located within
one mile or less of all necessary services and infrastructure (including water, electric power,
telephone and City roadways), as well as the total potential units which can be generated on
these lands. The data, originally generated in 1992, has been updated using building activity
reports to reflect 387 new residential dwelling units built since that time, all of which have been
single family homes. At an average of 9,000 square feet per lot, this represents a maximum of 77
acres of low density land which has been developed.
                                                  III-68

                                                                              TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                              General Plan/Housing Element
                                              Table III-20
                                   Vacant Residential Land, 1999
                                                                Potential Units
                             Designation          Acreage
                      Low Density
                      (SP,5 d.u./acre)                 1,743                 8,715
                      Low Density
                      (5 d.u./acre)                      929                 4,645
                      Medium Density
                      (8 d.u./acre)                      192                 1,536
                      High Density
                      (14 d.u./acre)                      65                   910
                      Total                            2,929                15,806
                      Source: Coachella Valley Association of Governments, Land Use
                      Information System, 1992. Terra Nova Planning & Research,
                      Inc. 1999 update.
Multi-family residential units are permitted by right in the Medium Density and High Density
land use designations. A conditional use permit is required under the commercial land use
designations for multi-family residential development.
The City’s fair share of housing for the 1998-2005 period is 233. Sufficient vacant acreage is
available to provide this number of units. There is also sufficient range of allowable densities in
the vacant acreage to permit the development of housing in a variety of types (single family,
multi-family) and costs.
Water and sanitary sewer services are provided by the Mission Springs Water District (MSWD),
an independent taxing district whose service area is wider than the incorporated City limits.
MSWD maintains planning documents, including master water and sewer plans, which are
updated regularly. Water service is available within the City to all lands listed above. Sanitary
sewer service is not required unless available at the site. In the case of the lands listed above,
sanitary sewer is available at the site. MSWD has sufficient capacity, or plans for capacity
increases in the future, to accommodate growth as it occurs.
The City has designated two Redevelopment Project Areas, which together comprise the
majority of the City. Several sites are suitable for development as residential use. The majority
of the project areas are already residential.
In addition to the vacant acreage quantified in Table III-20 a number of infill parcels are
scattered throughout developed areas of the City. No data is available on the number of these
                                                  III-69

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                           General Plan/Housing Element
parcels, but they provide an additional land resource for future housing development. Utilities
and services are readily available to these parcels.
EXISTING AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAMS
It is the responsibility of the City of Desert Hot Springs to assure the provision of a broad mix of
housing types, including and especially for the socio-economically disadvantaged.
In order to implement affordable housing goals and policies established in this Element, the
following housing programs are available.
City Programs
The City’s set-aside funds are utilized to fund a number of housing assistance programs. The set-
aside funds collected by the Agency are only enough to pay debt service on previous bond
issues, due primarily to a 25% drop in property values in the last 5 years. However, the Agency
has programmed, through its AB 1290 Redevelopment Implementation Plan, $160,000 annually
toward housing implementation programs during this planning period. The City currently offers
these programs through its Redevelopment Agency:
First Time Home Buyer’s Program: Offers households earning less than 80% of the County
median income a grant of up to $5,000 to pay for down payments and closing costs on a first
home.
Multi-Family Rental Improvement Program: For apartment projects which house only
households earning less than 80% of the County median, this program will grant up to $3,000 per
unit, to a maximum of $25,000, for repairs and improvements.
Code Compliance Checks: At the request of a property owner or prospective buyer, City staff
will provide copies of all building and related permits for the property so that the owner can
determine whether previous rehabilitation work has been inspected and found in compliance with
codes.
County and Federal Programs
There are numerous programs available to provide rental assistance and to encourage the
construction of new affordable housing. The following programs are available in the City of
Desert Hot Springs:
Section 8 Housing Assistance: The Riverside County Housing Authority provides HUD Section
8 rental assistance to lower income renters within the City. The Authority subsidizes 115 units at
this time, although the total number of vouchers and certificates fluctuates regularly.
Fair Housing Programs: The City has an agreement with the County of Riverside to provide a
wide range of services for City residents. These services are designed to implement fair housing
policies and procedures and to provide information concerning minority rights under existing fair
housing laws.
                                                 III-70

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                           General Plan/Housing Element
Farmers Home Administration
Farmers Home Administration has several programs available for both single family and multi-
family residences within the community. FmHA makes loans and grants to provide rural
residents with decent, safe and sanitary homes. Eligibility is based on adjusted household
income, with low interest loans available to low income and very-low income applicants. An
individual, organization or group organizing to provide housing may apply for a loan through the
local FmHA District Director serving the area where the housing will be located. The City of
Desert Hot Springs is served by the FmHA State office, located in Moreno Valley. The following
programs are offered in the Desert Hot Springs area:
Home Ownership Loans are made to families or individuals who are without adequate housing
and who are unable to obtain loans from private lenders at reasonable rates. Loans may be used
to buy, build, improve, repair or rehabilitate rural homes, including manufactured homes. Loans
can be made for 100 percent of the value of the property as appraised by FmHA. Normally, the
maximum repayment term is 33 years.
Home Improvement and Repair Loans are made to bring substandard houses up to agency
development standards. Loans of no more than $10,000 may be repaid in up to 25 years.
Conditional Commitments for rural housing are assurances to builders or sellers that FmHA
will make loans to qualified applicants if the homes offered meet FmHA standards.
Very-Low Income Repair Loans are made for repairs to make houses safe and to remove
health hazards. Loan limit is $15,000, with a maximum repayment term of 20 years, and interest
rate of 1%. Grants or loan-grant combinations are available to help very-low income elderly
homeowners make necessary repairs to their homes. Grants may not exceed $5,000 with a 20
year repayment period at a 1% interest rate.
Mutual Self-Help Housing Loans are made to a group of families who wish to work together to
build their own homes. Loans are made on an individual basis, but the group must agree to work
together until all houses are completed.
Technical Assistance Grants for Self Help Housing are available for public or private non-
profit groups. Applicants must show a need for self-help housing, the professional expertise to
supervise a project, and a lack of funding for this assistance.
Housing Site Loans may be made to public or local nonprofit groups for housing sites, including
self help housing. Funds are for land, access streets and utilities, and have a repayment period of
two years.
Rural Rental Housing Loans are made to finance apartment style housing, or to purchase and
rehabilitate existing rental housing. Loans can be made to individuals, public agencies,
cooperatives, and profit and nonprofit corporations. Except for public agencies, applicants must
be able to provide moderate-cost rental units with other financing. Loans are repayable in up to
50 years with interest reductions in some cases.
                                                 III-71
                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                         General Plan/Housing Element
Congregate Housing Loans offer persons 62 years of age and older, and handicapped persons
semi-independent living quarters which may include central dining facilities, some housekeeping
help, and other centralized services.
Farm Labor Housing Loans and Grants finance rental units for domestic farm laborers with
an interest rate of 1%. Although farm laborers are scarce in the City of Desert Hot Springs,
grants of up to 90% are available for public or broadly based nonprofit organizations when the
group cannot afford loan payments but has initial operating capital and income to manage the
facility.
Rental Assistance payments are made to owners of FmHA financed rental projects to reduce the
rents (including utilities) paid by low income tenants to no more than 30% of their incomes.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROJECTS
There are several multi-family projects which are currently subsidized by either County, State or
federal agencies for low and very low income residents. Tenants wishing to lease affordable
units must be in the very low or low income categories based on County median household
income, which are defined by persons per household:
                                              Table III-21
                                 2000 County of Riverside Housing
                                      Program Income Limits
                               Persons/       Very           Low
                                 HH           Low
                                   1        $16,600        $26,550
                                   2        18,950          30,350
                                   3         21,350         34,150
                                   4         23,700         37,900
                                   5         25,600         40,950
                                   6         27,500         44,000
                                   7         29,400         47,000
                                   8         31,300         50,050
                              Source: Department of Housing and Urban
                              Development, 2000
The following affordable housing projects are available in Desert Hot Springs:
                                                  III-72
                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                            General Plan/Housing Element
Bella Vista Apartments: is a 216 unit project located at 66950 Ironwood. The project was
constructed in two phases of 120 and 96 units. Phase I (120 units) apartments are restricted to
households earning 60% or less of the County median. In Phase II 70% of apartments are
reserved for households in this category, and 30% of the apartments are reserved for households
earning less than 50% of the County median.
Casa West: is a 42 unit project restricted to seniors and the disabled only. The residents rent is
restricted to 25% of their income.
Country Hills Apartments: is a 200 unit project located at 66900 Ironwood Drive. Forty (40) of
the units are restricted to very low, low and moderate income households.
Linda Vista Residences: is a 72 unit converted hotel which provides studios and one bedroom
apartments to seniors and disabled persons over 18 years of age. All households must be very
low or low income.
Quinto del Sol Apartments: is a 42 unit project located at 13600 Don English Way. The project
is owned and managed by the Riverside County Housing Authority. All rents are restricted to
30% of the household’s income.
Highland Homes is a privately owned 12 unit project located at 13704 Avenida Hermosa. The
project was financed by a FmHA 515 loan, approved in 1971 on a 40 year mortgage. The project
is restricted to low income seniors and the physically handicapped.
Waldorf Residences provides 53 units to very low and low income seniors. The project
converted a hotel into studio apartments, and also provides activities and meals to residents.
CONSTRAINTS TO
THE DEVELOPMENT OF HOUSING
The supply of housing for households of all income levels is affected by a variety of constraints,
some governmental and some non-governmental. These factors may affect the number of units
built, the size and suitability of the unit, and the price of the unit. Some constraints are beyond
the control of local governments, but others may be reduced or eliminated at the discretion of the
local government.
Governmental Constraints
The permit process can have a significant impact on the timely and cost-effective production of
new housing. In Desert Hot Springs, the time required to process residential development varies
according to the scope of the proposal. Planning Commission review and approval has been
traditionally completed in 45 days from receipt of complete application materials. Projects
requiring City Council approval generally are heard within 60 to 75 days of receipt of complete
application materials. Building Department review of building plans is generally completed in 10
to 15 working days for complex projects which involve street improvements and structural
                                                   III-73

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                           General Plan/Housing Element
analysis. The City’s permit processing is rapid and expeditious, and does not pose a constraint to
development.
Application Fees
Different permits are charged different fees, based on the complexity of review involved. The
following Table provides a listing of the City’s planning fees.
                                              Table III-22
                                     City of Desert Hot Springs
                                     Planning Department Fees
                                  Permit Type                   Fee
                             Conditional Use                       $1,175
                             Permit
                             Architectural Review
                             (4 or more d.u.)                         575
                             Initial Study                            375
                             General Plan                           1,800
                             Amendment
                             Zone Change                            1,700
                             Tentative Tract Map                    1,400
                             Final Tract Map                          700
                             Source: City of Desert Hot Springs
The City Council may, and has in the past, waived fees for affordable housing projects.
General Plan Constraints
The Land Use Element of the General Plan designates specific areas for different types of
development and establishes density ranges for residential development. Zoning, which must be
consistent with the General Plan, establishes more specific development standards, allowable
uses, and limitations.
The City of Desert Hot Springs General Plan allows for the development of up to five units per
acre in its Low Density Residential designation, ranging up to 14 units per acre in the High
Density Residential designation. In addition, the Specific Plan overlay, available on a number of
larger vacant areas in the City, has the potential to increase density, based on a master planning
approach. Existing approved Specific Plans in the City, including the Rancho Royale,
Cornerstone, Olympus and Rancho Morongo Specific Plans, have areas of higher density based
                                                  III-74

                                                                             TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                             General Plan/Housing Element
on density transfers from open space or recreational amenities. Finally, the Rancho Royale
includes provisions for the mandatory inclusion of affordable housing in all components of the
residential plan. None of the Specific Plans have begun construction at this writing.
Zoning Constraints
The City's Zoning Ordinance establishes the specific uses allowed or prohibited for each land use
designation, and specific development standards such as required parking and setbacks.
The City's Zoning Ordinance allows for density bonuses in conformance with the state-mandated
25% over the allowable density, in exchange for the dedication of a portion of the project
housing as affordable. This provision is designed to mitigate the perceived constraint to
affordability imposed by lower density designations.
Other provisions in the Zoning Ordinance impact the cost of housing in the City. Development
standards can increase the costs of construction, and thereby increase the cost of the home to the
buyer.
The City’s development standards are listed in Tables III-23 and III-24.
                                                Table III-23
                                   Residential Development Standards
                         Minimum Area Requirements for Residential Zones
                               Livable Area in          Bedroom Maximum          Parking Required
       Zones/Uses                    Sq.Ft.                  Number
 Single Family                        1,200          3
                                      +200           each additional bedroom      2 spaces in garage
 Apartments must be                    600           Studio                     1 1/2, one of which
                                                                                covered
 Must Be                               800           1                          1 1/2, one of which
                                                                                covered
 Must Be                              1,000          2                          1 1/2, one of which
                                                                                covered
 Must Be                              1,200          3                          1/12, one of which
                                      +100           each additional bedroom    covered
 Source: City of Desert Hot Springs Zoning Ordinance
                                                     III-75

                                                                                 TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                                General Plan/Housing Element
                                                 Table III-24
                      Minimum Development Standards for Residential Zones
                                                                         Medium
         Standard                           Low Density                  Density          High Density
Units per Acre                                                      5                8                  14
Lot Area                                                 9,000 sq. ft.            N/A                N/A
Lot Width                                                      60 feet         60 feet             60 feet
Lot Depth                                                     100 feet        100 feet           100 feet
Building Lot Coverage                                            40%              50%                50%
                                    (including accessory structures)
Private Outdoor Living                                           N/A      100 s.f./unit      150 s.f./unit
Space
Building Height                                       1 story/17 feet  2 story/24 feet    2 story/24 feet
Source: City of Desert Hot Springs Zoning Ordinance
    The tables above illustrate that the development standards in the City do not represent an over-
    restrictive condition, and are not a constraint to development of affordable housing.
    Projects including new residential construction are normally required to install all necessary on
    and off-site improvements, including a half-width of the paved width of the street, concrete
    curbs, sidewalks, water connections and sewer connections when available. Roadway standards
    for local or neighborhood streets which allow parking on both sides of the street have paved
    width of 40 feet. Infrastructure improvements are in place at infill lots.
    Actual requirements vary according to each specific site. The requirements for each project, in
    accordance with the City's General Plan, are intended to connect the project site with the City's
    existing infrastructure and provide for the needs of the project's residents.
    The requirements to install infrastructure impact the cost of housing projects. However, the
    projects themselves need the infrastructure improvements. In those instances where the
    infrastructure costs, in combination with other costs of construction, create economic infeasi-
    bility, the City may choose to subsidize the infrastructure improvements through the
    Redevelopment Agency.
                                                        III-76
                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                            General Plan/Housing Element
Accessibility to Services
The location of affordable housing must also take into consideration the proximity of services
and facilities, including shopping, schools, and public transit. In the City’s core, under current
conditions, limited infill parcels are available which are conveniently located in this regard, with
the exception of parcels on Two Bunch Palms Trail, west of Palm Drive. In the Specific Plan
projects mentioned above, a mix of uses is generally proposed, which would encourage
development of differing uses within each project. As development occurs, Sun Line Transit
participates in the review of projects, so as to ensure access to public transit wherever possible.
Building Code Requirements
The City has adopted and enforces the Uniform Building Code (UBC) to ensure all housing units
are constructed to be safe for the occupants. The UBC is updated periodically, and the City
updates its implementing ordinance accordingly. The UBC was developed by the International
Conference of Building Officials (ICBO) and adopted by the State of California. The City
cannot adopt standards that are less stringent than the UBC, which is used throughout California.
Imposition of the UBC does not unduly impact the cost of housing in Desert Hot Springs in
comparison to any other community in the State.
                                                 III-77

                                                                             TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                             General Plan/Housing Element
  Building Permit Fees
  Since the passage of Proposition 13 in 1978 and the resulting reduction in tax revenues,
  California cities have sought new ways to generate revenues. In many instances, cities have
  imposed new fees or increased existing fees to cover the costs of providing services to new
  development. School districts also charge a fee of $1.84 per square foot of residential
  construction to offset the costs of providing new schools.
  Estimated building department fees for residential development in Desert Hot Springs are shown
  in Table III-25. Transportation Uniform Mitigation Fee (TUMF) fees for new construction
  provide exemptions for affordable housing projects.
  It is clear fees raise the ultimate cost of housing to the consumer. However, cities generally have
  no other options for recouping the costs of providing necessary services to residents. Instead,
  cities may increase needed subsidy to achieve affordability.
                                                Table III-25
                          Development Fees - City of Desert Hot Springs - 1996
                             Single                    Family                 Multi-Family
                             1200                      2000                   Twenty Units:
                             sq.ft.                    sq.ft.                 2 Bedrooms/1200 sq.ft.
City Fees:
• Building                   $ 2,592.00                $4,320.00              $ 2,592.00/unit
Non City Fees:
• TUMF1                      838.30                    838.30                 506.30/unit
• School Fee                 2,064.00                  3,440.00               2 ,064.00/unit
Total                        $5,494.30                 $8,598.30              $5,162.30/unit
1
  Fee Waived for affordable housing projects
Source: City of Desert Hot Springs
  Code Enforcement
  The Code Enforcement process is an area of regulation which has the potential to result in the
  loss of affordable units. Conversely, however, the Code Enforcement process provides protection
  to renters and homeowners from issues of public health and safety. In Desert Hot Springs, Code
  Enforcement has effectively been used in the past to force unscrupulous landlords to provide
  decent and safe housing to their low income tenants.
  Code enforcement for structural or maintenance problems in the City are processed as in most
  cities in the Coachella Valley. A notice of violation is sent to the property owner, providing 7
                                                    III-78

                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                           General Plan/Housing Element
days to repair the violation. If the repairs are not begun, an administrative citation can be issued,
followed by an administrative hearing before the Director of Community Safety. If Code
Enforcement is successful at the hearing, the department obtains a warrant to either repair or
demolish the structure. If the City undertakes the repair, the property owner is billed. These
requirements provide the property owner with every opportunity to correct a health and safety
problem, and cannot be considered overly restrictive.
Article XXXIV
Article XXXIV of the California Constitution requires voter approval of affordable housing
developments when they are developed, constructed, or acquired in any manner by a public
agency. Desert Hot Springs voters considered and passed an Article XXXIV referendum. The
authorization was not for any specific site or project. Article XXXIV requirements do not apply
to projects that are owned by a private developer, owned by a private non-profit organization, or
contain less than 50% affordable units.
ECONOMIC CONSTRAINTS
Non-governmental constraints to affordable housing in Desert Hot Springs include the cost of
land, cost of construction, and cost of financing. These factors are determined on a regional or
national basis.
Land Costs
The cost of land is an important component of housing costs. The rapid increase in land costs
throughout Southern California has pushed up housing costs simultaneously. Land in the
Coachella Valley has been, and remains, relatively affordable compared to other Southern
California markets, but increased demand for housing due to population growth and in-migration
will continue to put upward pressure on land costs.
Land in Desert Hot Springs has traditionally been more affordable than in other areas of the
Coachella Valley. Parcels can range from $8,500 to $15,000 for an in-fill improved Medium
Density residential lot, to $35,000 per acre for a larger High Density Residential lot. With a
maximum potential density of 14 units per acre, this represents a maximum potential cost per
unit of $2,500, assuming that no density bonus is involved in the project. Land costs in Desert
Hot Springs, therefore, do not represent a constraint to development.
Construction Costs
Construction costs are the result of the current costs of labor, materials, and short-term financing.
Single family construction costs are estimated to range between $46 and $60 per square foot
depending on home design and materials selected. Multi-family construction costs range from
$40 and $60 per square foot, again depending on design. With a median sale price in 1996 in the
City of $60,000 for a three bedroom home, according to the Multiple Listing Service, the cost of
construction and home purchase in the City is affordable.
                                                  III-79
                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                           General Plan/Housing Element
Financing Costs
Financing costs impact both the purchase price of the unit and the home buyers ability to
purchase. Interest rates fluctuate in response to national factors. Currently relatively low (8% to
9%), they can change significantly and substantially impact the affordability of the housing
stock. However, the City has implemented a First Home Buyer’s program to assist in the
purchase of a home for low and very low income households. There are no known mortgage
deficient areas in the City. Financing for both construction and long term mortgages is generally
available subject to normal underwriting standards.
PHYSICAL CONSTRAINTS
Maintenance of Housing Stock
Housing stock over 30 years of age begins to deteriorate if not properly maintained. Tenants in
rental properties are often unable or unwilling, and should not be expected to make extensive
repairs and rehabilitation. Owners of older single family units and mobilehomes may also not
have sufficient income to make major rehabilitations. Unchecked, this deterioration of portions
of the housing stock negatively impacts the supply of affordable housing.
Although the majority of housing in Desert Hot Springs is relatively new, 24.2% of the units in
the City are 30 years of age or more.
Infrastructure
Although most of the City's infill development sites are not constrained by the lack of
infrastructure, there are a few areas with currently inadequate services, specifically in the area
annexed as Annexation 22. This large area, totaling 8,060 acres, is primarily vacant desert with
limited services. The annexation was undertaken in order to incorporate several master planned
communities planned for the area. These master planned communities are required to extend
services prior to development. The acreage involved in this annexation has not been calculated as
part of this Housing Element as being available for immediate development. It is expected that
this area of the City will see little short-term, and considerable long term growth. There is
renewed interest in the Rancho Morongo Specific Plan, generating a potential for hundreds of
housing units with adjacent commercial. Within the Cornerstone Specific Plan, all needed
infrastructure is available. The project includes multi-family and service housing, as well as
commercial components.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
Flooding
The area between Little Morongo Road and Palm Drive in the City is subject to inundation from
a 100 year storm event, due to its location adjacent to Big Morongo Wash. This area, and other
smaller flood-prone areas in the City, are illustrated in the Flooding and Hydrology Element of
the General Plan. Housing development could be impacted by flooding, and must therefore be
considered a constraint. None of these areas, however, are prevented from developing. The
                                                   III-80

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                           General Plan/Housing Element
standards imposed by the Riverside County Flood Control District must be complied with prior
to the construction of any project.
Seismicity
The City of Desert Hot Springs is bisected by the Mission Creek fault (the Coachella Valley’s
segment of the San Andreas fault), which runs in a southeasterly direction through the eastern
half of the City. An Alquist-Priolo Study Zone has been established for this area. The Banning
fault is also known to traverse the City’s sphere of influence, and its location has been mapped in
some areas. The location of known faults and fault traces is illustrated in the Geotechnical
Element of the General Plan. All requirements regarding setbacks are enforced when
development occurs within an Alquist-Priolo Study Zone, adding to the cost of development.
HOUSING NEEDS
The 1998-2005 Regional Housing Needs Allocation
The Regional Housing Needs Assessment was prepared by SCAG. The following table lists the
1998-2005 allocation for the City of Desert Hot Springs.
                                            Table III-26
                                      Future Housing Needs
                                  by Income Category 1998-2005
                                                            Units
                        Very Low Income                       66
                        Low Income                            37
                        Moderate Income                       47
                        High Income                           84
                        Total Units Needed                   233
SPECIAL HOUSING NEEDS
Within the identified existing and future needs, there are households with identifiable special
needs, as defined by the state. These groups include single parent households, farm workers, the
handicapped and the elderly. Each special needs category is discussed in greater detail below.
Farmworkers
Farmworker housing is not an issue in the City of Desert Hot Springs. The economy in the upper
Coachella Valley has not been agriculturally based in several decades. There is therefore no need
for farm worker housing in the City.
                                                III-81

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                          General Plan/Housing Element
Homeless
Homelessness is a difficult issue to quantify. The homeless are generally mobile, often crossing
from one city or county into another. The mild winter climate in the Coachella Valley may
attract the homeless in those months. Hot summer temperatures encourage the homeless to seek
daytime shelter in air conditioned public places such as libraries, malls, and other public
buildings.
The primary provider of services to the homeless in the Coachella Valley is Catholic Charities, a
non-profit, nondenominational organization. Catholic Charities staff reports that the reasons for
homelessness include sudden job loss, illness and lack of medical insurance, family break-ups,
and seasonal job layoffs or reduction in hours.
Catholic Charities and the County Housing Authority operate a 40 bed emergency shelter for
homeless families. The shelter is located in Palm Springs, but serves the entire Coachella Valley
region.
Shelter From The Storm is a battered women’s shelter with a 60 bed capacity, located in the
Coachella Valley. Women and their children generally stay up to 45 days. The Shelter provides
three meals a day, counseling and other services.
Other groups of homeless individuals not served by the facility at Nightingale Manor include the
mentally ill, those with chemical dependencies, and those who voluntarily choose a transient
lifestyle. These individuals may be served by the Coachella Valley Rescue Mission, located in
Indio, or by the Emergency Cold Weather Shelter, located at the National Guard Armory in
Indio, in the winter months. These facilities provide only emergency shelter and do not deal with
the causes of homelessness. Facilities which provide recovery services as well as shelter are
limited and include the ABC Club and The Ranch. Both are located immediately outside the
City.
The Elderly
Desert Hot Springs has a large senior citizen population. In 1990, the City had 1,695 persons
over the age of 65, or 15% of the population. These seniors were in a total of 1,254 households,
456 of which were renting their housing, and 798 owned their housing unit. Of those who rented,
69% were very low income households, 23% were low income households, and 7% were
moderate or high income households. Of those who owned their housing units, 39% were very
low income households, 26% were low income households, and 35% were moderate or high
income households.
It is anticipated that the aging of the "baby boomer" generation will result in continued growth of
the senior and elderly population.
Affordability can be an issue of special concern to the elderly, who are often on fixed retirement
incomes. In addition, the elderly may require assistance with housekeeping, maintenance, and
                                                 III-82

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                          General Plan/Housing Element
repairs to remain in their own homes as long as possible. Special design features that may be
needed include elimination of barriers such as steps and the provision of recreational and social
amenities for the elderly.
The City of Desert Hot Springs has a number of facilities for the elderly, including several board
and care facilities which house elderly persons who require some level of medical care. As
discussed previously, two vacant hotels have been rehabilitated as senior only residential
facilities. Additionally, the City’s mobilehome parks have traditionally been affordable housing
alternatives for senior citizens.
Handicapped
The 1990 Census identified 1,888 persons in the City with disabilities. No data is available
regarding how many households are disabled households in the City.
Angel View Hospital, located at 12379 Miracle Hill Road, in Desert Hot Springs, provides
residential services to developmentally disabled children and young adults. Angel View operates
7 assisted living homes within the City, each housing 6 clients, for a total of 42. These homes
generally provide permanent housing for handicapped persons. Angel View is a non-profit
organization which accepts private donations as well as medical insurance.
No data is currently available which correlates disability to income, and not all disabling
conditions impact an individual's income or housing needs. Many disabilities, however, lead to
special housing needs such as ramps, wider doors and hallways, lower cabinets and countertops,
and grab bars.
The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requires that all new multi-family construction
include a percentage of units accessible to the handicapped. The City of Desert Hot Springs
Building Department monitors and requires compliance with these standards as part of the
Building Permit review, issuance, and inspection process.
AIDS
The Desert AIDS Project (DAP) reports that as of May, 1997, 51 clients of the DAP reside in the
City of Desert Hot Springs. Although other residents may be HIV-positive, most DAP clients
have progressed into the symptomatic stages of the disease. As the disease progresses, persons
with AIDS (PWA's) often become unable to work, lose their source of income, and lose their
medical insurance. Housing affordable to low income people, including group homes and
hospice care, become special housing needs of PWA's.
Large Families
The 1990 Census indicates there are 515 households in Desert Hot Springs with five or more
members. The Census also shows that there were 242 housing units in the City with four or
more bedrooms, 11 of which had 5 or more bedrooms. Large families have a special need for
                                                III-83

                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                            General Plan/Housing Element
three, four, or more bedroom units. No data is available regarding the relationship of these larger
units to affordability.
Single Parent Families and Female Headed Households
1990 Census data indicates there are 676 single parent families in Desert Hot Springs, 147 with a
male head of household and 529 with a female head of household. The Census further estimates
that 273 of these female-headed families had incomes below the poverty level.
Single individuals with dependent children need housing which is both affordable and located
close to daycare facilities and schools.
Female headed households are predominantly a low income group. Compared to other
households, this group:
•   has low incomes and high poverty rates
•   pay high percentages of income for housing
•   has a low home ownership rate
•   has high rates of overcrowding
•   is younger
The 1990 Census indicates there are 1,024 children under 18 years of age in Desert Hot Springs
living in families whose incomes are below the national poverty level. Of these, 574 live in
female headed households.
Primary housing needs include affordability and units of sufficient size.
Drug and Alcohol Rehabilitation
Desert Rehabilitation Services operates two residential facilities in or near the City of Desert Hot
Springs. Hacienda Valdez, located on Quinto Way, is a women’s program with a 35 bed
capacity. The Ranch, located on Annandale Avenue, just north of the City, is a 46 bed facility.
Affordable Units at Risk
Many of the programs used throughout the Coachella Valley during the past twenty-five years to
subsidize rental and ownership housing included time limits on affordability restrictions. Federal
mortgage revenue bond regulations also have limitations on the number of years affordability re-
strictions remain in effect.
Recently, the earliest of these affordability restrictions have begun to expire. This problem,
which may result from an early payoff of project financing or an "opting out" of Section 8
contracts, can have significant impacts on the communities in which these projects are located.
For rental projects, the elimination of rent level restrictions has recently become particularly
attractive to building owners as a result of several independent factors. The original owners of
many affordable projects invested because of rapid depreciation, which created extraordinary tax
                                                 III-84

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                          General Plan/Housing Element
shelter benefits. Many of those benefits have expired. Additionally, the Tax Reform Act of 1986
altered the federal tax structure for residential income property.
Many projects were re-syndicated after 1981 to take advantage of changes in the tax structure at
that time. Many of these re-syndications were accomplished through short-term financing with
second mortgages. Pressures from rapid growth, and the desirability of the Coachella Valley,
compound the problem by increasing the demand and rental prices for market rate rental units.
The California Coalition for Rural Housing described the ideal candidate for conversion or
opting out as having the following characteristics:
•   The project would be located in a suburban or rapidly urbanizing rural area.
•   It would be in good physical condition and in a good location to command a market rent.
•   The market area would be characterized by high growth, escalating housing costs, and low
    vacancy rates.
•   The project would have rent levels lower than the prevailing rents for comparable units.
•   The current owner would have a deferred second loan that is coming due, or have
    experienced tax shelter burnout either as a result of having accelerated the loss, or having lost
    the shelter through the imposition of tax reform.
Although the City has no units at risk of conversion within the next 20 years, policies need to be
established to ensure all new projects with an affordable component maintain their affordability
for the longest feasible time.
                                                  III-85

                                                                                TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                                General Plan/Housing Element
Riverside County Income Limits
The 2000 median income calculated for Riverside County for a family of four is $47,400. This
is used to calculate very low (50% of median) and low (80% of median) incomes for use in State
and federal subsidized housing programs.
                                               Table III-27
                                Affordable Housing, Income Limits
                                      County of Riverside, 2000
                  # of                       Annual
                  Persons                    Income Standards
                                  Very          Low         Median          Moderate
                                  Low
                  1              $16,600        $26,550       $33,200            $39,850
                  2              $18,950        $30,350       $37,900            $45,500
                  3              $21,350        $34,150       $42,650            $51,200
                  4              $23,700        $37,900       $47,400            $56,900
                  5              $25,600        $40,950       $51,200            $61,450
                  6              $27,400        $43,800       $54,750            $66,000
                  7              $29,400        $47,000       $58,800            $70,550
                  8              $31,300        $50,050       $62,550            $75,100
                  Source: California Department of Housing and Community Development,
                  Income Limits for Riverside and San Bernardino Counties, 2000
                                                    III-86
                                                                             TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                            General Plan/Housing Element
Households Overpaying for Housing
The Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) estimated existing lower income
households (1988) overpaying for shelter as part of the 1989-1994 Regional Housing Needs
Analysis (RHNA). Of the 2,249 total lower income households in the City, the following number
were paying more than 30% of their income toward housing expenses.
                                              Table III-28
                                     Lower Income Households
                                  Overpaying for Housing - 1998
                                                 Total                Very     Low
                                          Overpaying          Low LIHHs      LIHHs
                   Renters                    1,640              1,283        330
                   Owners                      583                286         159
                   Total                      2,223              1,569        489
                   Source: SCAG RHNA, 1998
Preservation of Mobilehome Parks as an Affordable Housing Opportunity
The 1990 Census estimated that a total of 2,249 households in the City are defined as Very Low
or Low income. Traditionally, mobilehome parks have provided an affordable housing
opportunity, particularly for senior citizens. The long term preservation of these mobilehome
parks, therefore, will have a direct positive impact on the City’s lower income residents. Table
III-29 Provides a listing of the City’s mobilehome parks, and their representative rental rates.
                                              Table III-29
                                 Representative Mobilehome Park
                             Market Rates in Desert Hot Springs 2000
                  Project Name                Senior                  Monthly Rental
                  (total units)                Only
                  Quail Hollow (260)           Yes                           $199.00
                  Hogan’s (10)                 No                             Varies
                  Mountain View (105)          No                            $275.00
                  Sky’s Haven (191)            Yes                            Varies
                  Desert Willows (43)          Yes                         Ownership
                  Source: Terra Nova Planning & Research, Inc. 2000
                                                  III-87

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                           General Plan/Housing Element
Apartment Rental Rates
The median monthly rental rate for Desert Hot Springs was $498 in 1990. Based on the 30%
gross household income standard, a monthly income of $1,600, or annual income of $19,200, is
needed to afford a rent of $495 per month. In order to gauge the affordability of housing in the
City, a telephone survey of representative projects was conducted.
Clearly, the City’s market rate housing is at a level which is a far greater value than other
Coachella Valley cities, and represents an affordable housing opportunity for most households.
                                           Table III-30
                                   Representative Apartment
                            Market Rates in Desert Hot Springs 2000
             Project Name (total units)                Unit Size            Rental Rate
             Sandy Palms (46)                          1 1 Bdrm                  $415.00
                                                      45 2 Bdrm                  $525.00
             Bella Vista* (216)                          1 Bdrm                  $350.00
                                                         2 Bdrm                  $395.00
                                                         3 Bdrm                  $495.00
             Casa West* (48)                          48 1 Bdrm                  $312.00
             Casa del Sol (108)                          1 Bdrm                  $332.00
                                                         2 Bdrm                  $361.00
             Country Hills*(200)                         1 Bdrm                  $365.00
                                                         2 Bdrm                  $410.00
             Desert Horizon*(44)                      20 1 Bdrm                  $365.00
                                                      16 2 Bdrm                  $415.00
                                                       8 3 Bdrm                  $465.00
             Quinto del Sol*(42)                                                  30% of
                                                                                  income
Energy Conservation
The hot summer climate in Desert Hot Springs and the need for cooling makes energy
conservation particularly important. Title 24 and Building Code regulations require energy
efficiency in all new construction of housing through design features, insulation, and active solar
devices.
An undesirable side effect of requiring energy efficient new construction is an increase in the
cost of construction of new housing. When evaluating energy efficiency standards above and
                                                III-88

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                         General Plan/Housing Element
beyond the State-mandated Title 24, local jurisdictions must balance the increase in the cost of
housing with the reduction in monthly utility bills for the user.
Land use patterns also impact energy conservation. Infill and concentrated land use patterns
minimize travel time and distance to work and shopping destinations. Mass transit is most
efficient when traveling major corridors that link population centers and employment centers.
More rural land use patterns discourage mass transit and alternative modes of transportation
such as buses in favor of automobiles, contributing to energy consumption.
The City’s development regulations, building regulations and General Plan enforce the standards
required in Title 24, as well as providing encouragement for the use of energy efficient
construction techniques.
QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES
                                            Table III-31
                                   Quantified Objectives Matrix
                                             1998-2005
                                     Very
             Income Category         Low       Low     Moderate High              Total
             New Construction             66       37           7    84             233
             Rehab.                       10       15          20      0             45
             Conservation                  5        5           0      0             10
PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
Public participation was included in every phase of the development of this Housing Element.
The General Plan Advisory Committee held publicly noticed and advertised workshops to
discuss the Element and its goals, policies and programs. Members of community groups which
serve low income and senior households attended these workshops regularly, including
representatives from the Senior Center and others. The Element was also reviewed in public
workshops and hearings before the Planning Commission and City Council.
                                                III-89

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                         General Plan/Housing Element
HOUSING GOALS, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
GOAL 1
A variety of housing types that meet the diversity of needs within the City.
GOAL 2
Expanded housing opportunities for all residents of Desert Hot Springs.
GOAL 3
City housing stock which meets the needs of the City’s lower income households.
GOAL 4
The preservation and maintenance of the City’s affordable housing supply in a safe and sanitary
condition.
Policy 1
The General Plan shall provide for a mixture of residential densities dispersed throughout the
City.
Program 1 A
The City shall monitor and assure the adequate supply of vacant land in all residential zoning
categories.
Responsible Agency: Planning Department
Schedule: Immediate, On-going
Program 1 B
The City shall review and revise its residential development standards as needed, to ensure that a
variety of housing types are provided which meet or exceed the City’s standards.
Responsible Agency: Planning Department
Schedule: On-going
Policy 2
The City’s residential development standards shall adhere to the General Plan’s Community
Design Element policies.
Policy 3
Affordable housing developments shall be encouraged in all areas of the City. Clustering of
affordable housing shall be discouraged.
Program 3 A
The City shall require an annual Community Reinvestment Act report from local banks. Efforts
at equal opportunity housing loans should be documented.
                                                III-90

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                          General Plan/Housing Element
Responsible Agency: Redevelopment Agency
Schedule: 2001, Annually
Policy 4
The City shall continue to allocate set-aside funds to Redevelopment Agency programs to meet
the State-mandated special shelter needs of first time home buyers, large families, female headed
households, single parent families, senior citizens, handicapped and homeless individuals, and
shall work with new developments to expand the opportunities for these households.
Program 4 A
Continue to support and assist in enforcing the provisions of the Federal Fair Housing Act.
Information on the Fair Housing Act, as well as methods for responding to complaints, shall be
available at City Hall. The materials shall also be provided to the City Library and Post Office
for distribution.
Responsible Agency: Planning Department
Schedule: Immediate, On-going
Program 4 B
The City shall work with private organizations in assisting whenever possible in the housing of
handicapped residents, through continued participation by the Redevelopment Agency, Senior
Center, and other appropriate agencies, and through allocation of set-aside funds when available,
.
Responsible Agency: Redevelopment Agency, Senior Center; Angel View Hospital
Schedule: Immediate, On-going
Program 4 C
Maintain provisions for the development of homeless shelters and transitional housing as a
conditional use in the Zoning Ordinance.
Responsible Agency: Planning Department
Schedule: 2001
Policy 5
The City shall emphasize the protection of existing affordable senior housing units.
Program 5 A
The City shall monitor existing mobilehome parks, and shall consider the allocation of housing
set-aside funds to correct health and safety concerns as they arise.
Responsible Agency: Redevelopment Agency
Schedule: Immediate, On-going
Policy 6
There shall be equal access to housing regardless of race, color, religion, national origin, sex,
age, family status or sexual preference.
                                                III-91
                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                          General Plan/Housing Element
Policy 7
The City’s existing and new affordable housing shall be maintained through the use of resale and
rental restrictions, applicant screenings, and other appropriate mechanisms established as
conditions of approval.
Program 7 A
The City shall keep in regular contact with the Riverside County Housing Authority to ensure
that Section 8 housing assistance within the City is actively pursued.
Responsible Agency: Planning Department
Schedule: 2001, On-going
Program 7 B
Should any affordable housing project, as enumerated in this Element be considering conversion
to market housing, the City shall contact non-profit corporations which might consider
purchasing the project. The City and its Redevelopment Agency will also support these
organizations in securing financing for such purchases.
Responsible Agency: Redevelopment Agency
Schedule: On-going
Policy 8
The City’s Redevelopment housing set-aside funds shall be used for all types of affordable
housing, but shall be focused to provide moderate income housing within the City.
Program 8 A
The Redevelopment Agency shall annually allocate funds to eligible projects as they are
presented to the Agency for review and consideration.
Responsible Agency: Redevelopment Agency
Schedule: On-going
Policy 9
Any project considered for assistance must:
  1. Provide a minimum of 20% equity or financial contribution to the project by the developer.
  2. Designate a minimum of 25% of the units for very low income households.
  3. Restrict all of the units to remain affordable for a period of 20 years.
Program 9 A
The City shall standardize its qualifications and application materials for private developers
seeking City financial assistance for the development of affordable housing.
Responsible Agency: Redevelopment Agency
Schedule: 2001
Program 9 B
Provide a Housing Incentive Package which describes for developers the types of incentives
available, including land write downs, Mortgage Revenue Bonds, and/or the use of CDBG funds
for the provision of necessary public facilities or design costs.
                                                 III-92

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                         General Plan/Housing Element
Responsible Agency: Redevelopment Agency
Schedule: 2001, On-going
Policy 10
The City Council shall consider, as an additional incentive, the reduction, subsidizing or
deferring of development fees to facilitate the development of affordable housing.
Policy 11
The City shall apply density bonus provisions to affordable housing projects, as allowed by State
law.
Policy 12
The City shall encourage low and moderate income ownership projects, which provide for either
self-help incentives, or first-time homebuyer incentives.
Policy 13
The City shall encourage the rehabilitation of existing housing units.
Program 13 A
The Redevelopment Agency shall maintain its grant programs, funded through the allocation of
set-aside funds, for affordable housing, as enumerated in this Element, and shall consider
adoption of programs for aesthetic and structural maintenance of existing housing units.
Responsible Agency: Redevelopment Agency
Schedule: 2001, On-going
Policy 14
State law regarding the relocation of displaced lower income households shall be strictly
enforced.
Policy 15
Promote the development of housing with convenient access to commercial land uses and
employment centers to provide for special needs households, particularly elderly and
handicapped households.
                                                III-93
                                                                             TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                 General Plan/Parks and Recreation Element
PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT
PURPOSE
The purpose of the Parks and Recreation Element is to describe the City’s existing public parks,
trails, bikeways and other public and private amenities, and to identify the need for additional
lands and establish goals, policies, programs, and implementation strategies. The goals, policies
and programs for parks and recreation are an expression of the community's needs and desires
for active and passive recreation opportunities. Many of the residents and visitors of Desert Hot
Springs choose to spend their leisure time outdoors in some form of recreation or exercise
activity. Parks provide easily accessible open space areas, recreational facilities, and organized
sports areas, allowing people to have direct contact with the natural and man-made environment.
In addition to attracting all types of users within the City, parks and recreational facilities play an
important role in attracting new residents and tourists, a key to economic growth.
BACKGROUND
The Parks and Recreation Element has a direct relationship with the land use map in the Land
Use Element of the General Plan. Existing and future park sites and trails are shown on the land
use map and have a bearing on the suitability of adjacent land use designations. The Parks and
Recreation Element also has connections to the Open Space and Conservation Element with
regard to trail usage in open space corridors and mountain environments. The recreational
functions of City parks also relates to the Arts and Culture Element and to Public Buildings and
Facilities Element.
The statutory references for park land dedications are found in the Subdivision Map Act.
Specifically, Government Code Sections 66477 and 66479 require park site dedications, or fees
in lieu of dedication, to relate to local population estimates and general plans. Recreation uses
are included in the description of land use elements in Section 65302(a). Trail designations are
also required as part of Section 5076 of the Public Resources Code.
In 1994 the City prepared a Parks and Recreation Element for the General Plan (from a 1977
Master Park Plan), which became the basis for the current Parks and Recreation Element. The
Park Master Plan included an assessment of local park needs, with a focus on playing fields,
athletic courts, meeting rooms, and sheltered picnic areas. A supply and future demand analysis
formed the basis for proposed additional park facilities to serve residents of Desert Hot Springs.
An important ingredient in the 1977 park needs analysis was the inclusion of park facilities in the
northern, southern, and southeastern portions of the City.
The three types of parks serving the Desert Hot Springs area are community, neighborhood, and
mini- (pocket) parks. Mini-parks are considered either passive (parks meant for the enjoyment of
sitting, picnicking, and hiking) or active (parks with sports fields, exercise equipment and
playground areas). In addition to these traditional park facilities, there are additional types of
facilities utilized in Desert Hot Springs, including an interpretive park, and golf courses.
                                                 III-94

                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                General Plan/Parks and Recreation Element
Types of Parks
According to the National Recreation and Parks association, there are three types of parks that
can serve the immediate community: community parks, neighborhood parks or playgrounds, and
mini-parks. A balanced mix of these facilities will address the need/demand of the City and its
changing demographics.
Existing Parks and Trails
There are seven existing parks in Desert Hot Springs. Arroyo Park is a 3.97-acre park located
between West Drive and Cactus Drive on Arroyo Drive. The park includes two tennis courts, one
basketball court, a roller hockey area, a tot lot and picnic areas. Built facilities in the park include
restrooms, outdoor shuffleboard area and an indoor shuffleboard building. The indoor
shuffleboards are used every weekday and have been resurfaced, but the exterior courts are not
used.
Wardman Park is a 6.6-acre park located at the northwest intersection of Eighth Street and
Cactus Drive. Wardman Park includes a Recreation Building, a ball field, a playground, a tot lot,
a Youth Center and a swimming pool. It also provides picnic tables, turf, tennis courts, and a
sand volleyball court. The facilities are well used by residents because of the wide variety of
activities that can be provided.
The Mission Springs Park is located on the south side of Park Avenue, east of Palm Drive and
behind the Agua Caliente Hotel. Encompassing 12 acres, this park has recently (1997) been
expanded to include one dedicated ball field with lights, one dedicated soccer field with
permanent goals, one large multi-use field with two permanent baseball backstops, and room for
2 additional soccer fields, a tot lot, restrooms, off-street parking and a snack stand building. As
of 1997, Mission Springs Park will host the annual “Big Bang” celebration, a popular local
Fourth of July fireworks display, previously held at Wardman Park.
People’s Park, provided by Desert Hot Springs Cablevision as a public amenity, is a
neighborhood mini- or pocket park located on the northwest corner of Palm Drive and Yucca
Street. Only a half acre in size, it provides a grass and tree area with concrete paths and picnic
tables.
Corsini-Eastside Park is a 21.02-acre park located behind Corsini Elementary School on
Hacienda Avenue and Don English Way. This park provides picnic tables, mature trees and turf,
and an extensive system of nature trails. This park is intended to serve as the City’s original
General Plan goal to integrate nature trails into the City.
Hot Springs Park, a 3-acre park completed in 1996, was developed as an interactive or
interpretive park and is located on the northwest corner of Palm Drive and Eighth Street.
Celebrating the hot springs resort tourist industry, this park contains two adjoining sets of hot
springs that have been routed for display to passers-by on the sidewalk and the street. It provides
information describing the physical aspects of the hot springs, a pathway, and a plaza with a
“participatory” fountain, and a fairly large turf area.
                                                  III-95

                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                General Plan/Parks and Recreation Element
Constitution Park is a .25-acre park that lies between and has been integrated with the Multi-
Service Building/Senior Center, the Carl May Community Center/Council Chambers and the
City Library on West Drive. It is a pocket park with mature trees and turf, a permanent outdoor
chess table and benches.
In addition to park and recreational facilities, reciprocal privileges have been coordinated with
the Palm Springs Unified School District at the high school site for recreational use by the City
Parks and Recreation Department. The Desert Hot Springs Boys and Girls Club also has a
facilities use agreement with the District, which allows the Boys and Girls Club to use the
District’s facilities for various youth programs.
Hiking and equestrian trails in Desert Hot Springs are primarily located along the wash areas and
the foothills, providing access to trails in Joshua Tree National Park area and the Morongo
Canyon Preserve. A trailhead exists at the mouth of Long Canyon and provides parking for cars
and horse trailers, as well as providing handicapped access. An information kiosk is located one-
half mile northeast of Hacienda Drive and just east of the existing city limits.
The Morongo Canyon Preserve and
Area of Critical Environmental Concern (ACEC)
The Morongo Canyon Preserve and ACEC is managed by the Bureau of Land Management
(BLM), and is located in the Little San Bernardino Mountains north of the Coachella Valley.
Limited portions of the ACEC are located within the Desert Hot Springs northern sphere-of-
influence. The ACEC was expanded in 1998 from 3,705 acres to 29,000 acres, and includes both
public and private lands. Big Morongo Canyon ACEC has been designated to protect a desert
oasis where perennial surface water supports an extensive willow and cottonwood forest. A
considerable trail system is incorporated into this Preserve; the Desert Hot Springs area is most
locally served by the Big Morongo Trail, located at the mouth of the canyon. A number of
important resources exist in the ACEC, the most important being the year-round availability of
water supply that supports habitat for several sensitive wildlife and plant species, and has
historically attracted native peoples and pioneers to the area.
This forest provides habitat for the endangered least Bell’s vireo, and attracts birds to what has
become an internationally famous bird watching site. Big Morongo also serves as a “way
station” for large mammals, such as desert bighorn sheep and mountain lions, which migrate
between the San Bernardino and Little San Bernardino Mountain ranges.
Parks and Trails Funding
The extent to which the City of Desert Hot Springs will plan and implement parks and trails
facilities is related to the availability of funding sources. The Quimby Act was established as
state law in 1965 to provide a funding mechanism for park land acquisition. Residential
subdivisions must dedicate park land or pay an in-lieu fee to enable the City to acquire park land
on a ratio of three (3) acres of parklands and facilities per 1,000 residents. Based on the City's
anticipated growth and population characteristics, it is expected that the Quimby Act
                                                 III-96

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                               General Plan/Parks and Recreation Element
requirements will provide sufficient land for the City to satisfy its projected park needs. The
Quimby Act does not provide dedication or fees for the City's trail system.
A variety of funding sources are being pursued for the construction of parks and bicycle paths in
Desert Hot Springs.
The sole source of parks maintenance funding is the Citywide annual assessment, Currently
(2000) set in Zone “B” at $.88 per linear foot of street frontage, and in Zone “A” at $40.57 per
parcel. This assessment will presumably increase when additional parks are added to the system.
PARKS AND TRAILS PLANNING
The parks and trails planning process should include a local needs analysis, taking into account
the particular demographic characteristics of Desert Hot Springs residents and visitors. The
needs analysis should be adjusted for any unique opportunities and constraints that exist or may
occur in the future. The following park and trail categories should be considered in the
preparation of the City's parks and trails plan.
Mini-Parks
Mini-parks, or pocket parks, are very popular in new housing developments. They are sometimes
called “tot lots” or “sitting parks”. For this reason they are considered specialized facilities that
serve a concentrated, limited population, or specific group, such as very young children or
seniors. They are generally less than one acre and are intended to complement adjacent uses.
Mini-parks can often substitute for private open space in employment centers or high-density
residential areas. Frequently, mini-parks are located inside a neighborhood, within or in close
proximity to apartment complexes, townhouse developments, senior housing or any other
complexes that require added recreational space. Because of their small size and limited activity
areas, mini parks do not count towards meeting the active recreational needs of the community
and are not included in the license tax or Quimby fee calculations.
In Desert Hot Springs, People’s Park and Constitution Park represent City-owned mini- parks.
Mini-parks often are sited on property leftover from development and, therefore, are not
designated for specific sites in the City's Parks and Trails Plan. Mini-parks add to the
community's design and local quality of life and should be encouraged as opportunities arise.
                                                 III-97

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                               General Plan/Parks and Recreation Element
Neighborhood Parks
                           Neighborhood parks are intended to provide for the active and passive
                           recreation needs of nearby residents in the vicinity of the park.
                           Neighborhood park facilities typically include such features as picnic
                           areas, large playgrounds and apparatus areas, game fields, wading
                           pools and limited parking. Special landscaping and public art may also
                           be featured in neighborhood parks. Pedestrian and bicycle access is
                           important for neighborhood parks to serve nearby residents. The
                           design of neighborhood parks must carefully consider their physical
                           proximity and relationship to adjacent homes to avoid any adverse
                           impacts from noise, traffic or lights. Neighborhood parks can be
                           developed as shared facilities between schools and the community as a
                           whole.
                           The usual size of neighborhood parks is in the five to ten acre range.
The ultimate size will depend on available land and its relationship to neighborhood residences.
Although neighborhood parks should usually be within walking distance, the low residential
densities and population characteristics justify a theoretical service radius of approximately 1.5
miles. The actual service area for a neighborhood park is often a function of the ease with which
residents can access the park.
Neighborhood parks typically serve a population of approximately 5,000 residents. Based upon a
Desert Hot Springs buildout population of approximately 193,456 permanent residents, the City
would ultimately be well served by 30 to 40 neighborhood parks. This estimated demand should
also consider the average age of the City's population.
For both Desert Hot Springs residents and visitors, neighborhood parks are an important asset.
Neighborhood parks should be located on local public streets to facilitate safe and convenient
access. One of the concerns often raised, however, is the fear that parks will attract outside
influences and crime to the neighborhood. The design of neighborhood parks must consider
safety and security issues to assure that they become and remain assets to the neighborhood.
Wardman Park and Mission Springs Park are the City's current existing neighborhood parks. As
such, they attract residents and visitors from throughout the City and surrounding community.
Community Park
Community parks are best suited for areas planned for intense development. Their uses include
recreational facilities, or areas of natural quality for outdoor recreation such as walking and
picnicking. This type of park should be easily accessible to the community it serves.
Community-scale parks serve residents and visitors alike, and are typically associated with a
central place or major pubic facility such as a school or civic center.
                                                 III-98
                                                                             TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                 General Plan/Parks and Recreation Element
                                                  Community parks provide active and passive
                                                  recreation opportunities on a larger scale than
                                                  neighborhood parks. The desirable size for
                                                  community parks ranges from 20 to 40 acres.
                                                  Given the low population density of Desert Hot
                                                  Springs the appropriate service radius for a
                                                  community park is about five miles. Community
                                                  parks typically include fields for organized
                                                  baseball, softball, soccer and football. Tennis
                                                  complexes and a large swimming pool are often
                                                  included in community parks. A community
                                                  recreation building may also be provided for
indoor sports as well as educational and cultural activities.
Passive recreational activities may include picnic areas, formal gardens and open space areas.
Adjacent neighborhoods also utilize community parks; children's play equipment may also be
incorporated into community park facilities. They can also serve as starting or rest points for
multi-use trails.
Although of a smaller scale at 12 acres, Mission Springs Park also serves Desert Hot Springs’
community park needs.
Bikeways
Bicycle facilities are categorized in I, II, or III classifications. The Class I bikeway is a bicycle
path completely separated from any street or highway. Class I bikeways only serve a recreational
purpose for bicyclists. Their inherent pedestrian-bicyclist conflicts limit the use of the City's
Class I system to relatively short non-commuter trips. The system of bikepaths/sidewalks is
proposed to be expanded along arterials as roadway widening and development projects occur.
Class II bikeways are signed and striped bicycle lanes within the paved section of the street.
Bicycle lanes are for one-way travel by cyclists, generally for longer recreational or commuter
purposes. Class II bikeways are considered to be safer than Class I facilities due to fewer cyclist-
motorist conflicts at driveways and intersections. It is possible for both Class I and II facilities to
be located along the same street. This would allow for a choice based on cyclists' preference.
Currently (2000) most of the City's arterial streets are not sufficiently wide to allow for a four-
foot wide Class II bike lane along the curb. Inclusion of bike lane facilities in the General Plan
will help implement CVAG's Non-Motorized Transportation Element for the Coachella Valley, a
plan that is intended to facilitate alternatives to automobile traffic.
Class III bikeways are designated but unmarked bike routes on the street within vehicular travel
lanes. Due to the inherent potential conflict with vehicular traffic, Class III bike routes are not
recommended for Desert Hot Springs except where Class I and II facilities are not feasible and
where an essential regional bicycle route connection is desired.
                                                   III-99

                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                General Plan/Parks and Recreation Element
Hiking and Equestrian Trails
Existing hiking facilities in Desert Hot Springs utilize non-paved trails in wash areas and the
mountains. The public's use of mountain trails must be balanced with the need to protect wildlife
habitat; mountainous water sources are critical to wildlife, and human disturbance should be
limited during summer months.
Regional Facilities
The City is fortunate to be located in a region containing several recreational facilities serving
not only the local area but much of Southern California as well. Regional facilities include
Joshua Tree National Park, the San Bernardino National Forest, Palm Springs Aerial Tramway,
Mt. San Jacinto Wilderness State Park, Big Morongo Canyon Preserve/Covington Park, Willow
Hole/Edom Hill Reserve, and Coachella Valley Reserve.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
As future parks and recreational facilities are planned, consideration must be given to those who
will utilize park facilities. If the senior population is increasing rapidly, consideration must be
given to facilities that serve seniors and physically impaired members of the community. The
Carl May Community Center houses a Senior Center, which organizes senior activities and
informational services. According to the Americans With Disabilities Act, all areas accessible to
the public must also be accessible to disabled persons, including seniors. Issues include
wheelchair accessibility, restrooms, and other special facilities needed to enhance accessibility
for the elderly and disabled. Accessibility to parks and open spaces for these special groups must
be taken into account when designing and developing parks within the City.
Parks also play an important role in attracting families with children, retirees, and tourists. As
parks are developed, these areas should reflect the needs of the residents they serve. The City’s
park and open space areas shall reflect the pride and respect residents have for Desert Hot
Springs’ desert and mountain environment. Desert Hot Springs rural environment does not,
however, replace the need for these vitally important recreational facilities, which are essential to
encourage social interaction and community cohesion.
The City's parks and trails plans should regularly be reviewed for their relevancy to demographic
and cultural trends in the region and Desert Hot Springs. The demand for traditional park space
in Desert Hot Springs is affected by the recreational preferences of today's residents. Several
major developments have been approved which will generate more part-time residents in private
communities, with golf and tennis as the primary recreational activities. While it may be argued
that such a demographic group will generate a lesser need for public parks with facilities for
organized sports, public parks and open space provide the venue for social development and
community cohesion. The City will continue to experience an increase in school age children,
which will affect both school and park planning in the future. The City's recreational facilities
planning should keep in step with these projected population trends.
                                                III-100

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                             General Plan/Parks and Recreation Element
PARKS AND RECREATION GOALS, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
GOAL
A balanced quality system of parks, trails and recreational areas that support a broad range of
activities, as well as cultural, and passive open space enjoyment opportunities for current and
future residents.
Policy 1
Update and maintain the City’s Master Parks Plan to assure adequate parklands, trails and open
space lands meeting or exceeding developed parkland acreage standards as stated in the Quimby
Act.
Program 1 A
Initiate a comprehensive study and analysis to result in an updated Master Parks Plan. The plan
shall define the types, amounts and amenities planned for current and projected needs. It shall
also detail Quimby Act requirements and other feasible financing scenarios.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; City Parks Commission; City
Council
Schedule: 2001-02
Program 1 B
On a neighborhood level, the City shall conduct an analysis of current and future park/open
space needs and incorporated analysis, conclusions and programs into the City Master Parks
Plan.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; City Parks Commission; Planning
Commission; City Council
Schedule: 2001-02.
Policy 2
The City shall plan, develop and maintain quality outdoor recreational and open space areas,
which utilize and enhance the unique aspects of the desert environment and are properly
developed for the enjoyment of residents and visitors.
Program 2 A
The City shall investigate the broad range of possible sources of purchase financing and
operation revenue, including park development fees and donated lands, as collected in
accordance with the Quimby Act, and other financing programs offered by the State.
Responsible Agency: City Council; Planning Commission; Public Works Department
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Program 2 B
Implement a standard parks-per-population ratio of five acres per 1,000 new residents.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Planning Commission; City
Council
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
                                              III-101

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                               General Plan/Parks and Recreation Element
Policy 3
The City shall institute a Parks Improvement Program to provide improvements needed for the
park system to meet current and projected requirements.
Program 3 A
The City shall develop and implement a Parks Improvement Program based upon the updated
Master Parks Plan, which provides expanded and enhanced parks, trails and other facilities
including adequate security lighting, grass areas, structured game areas and other improvements
for optimized and safe recreating.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; City Council
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Program 3 B
Install proper landscaping and irrigation systems, and institute proper turf management, in
accordance with City water conservation strategies, on all playing or open areas, per the updated
Master Parks Plan to enhance use and to make parks cooler and more comfortable.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Public Works Department
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Policy 4
Review and positively respond to the requirements in the Americans with Disabilities Act and
special interest groups to assure provision of enhance accessibility in the planning and design of
park areas, recognizing the needs of the disables, senior citizens, and those with special needs.
Program 4 A
Enhanced accessibility shall be included in the planning of park areas, in accordance with the
Americans With Disabilities Act, including increased wheelchair accessibility, restroom, and
other requirements needed for the elderly and physically handicapped.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Public Works Department
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Policy 5
The City shall evaluate alternative revenue sources, and use other forms of park financing and
acquisition methods, to fund the purchase, improvement, and maintenance of the City park
system, in accordance with the Quimby Act.
Program 5 A
The City shall coordinate the establishment of an “Adopt a Park” or comparable program,
allowing volunteer groups and individuals, such as the Rotary Club, the Hotelier’s Association,
utility companies, and others to take charge of maintenance, funding, and equipment needs for a
developing park.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Public Works Department; City
Council
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
                                               III-102

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                              General Plan/Parks and Recreation Element
Program 5 B
Vigorously pursue grant programs sponsored by public agencies, private groups, and foundations
for park or open space purchases, development, and maintenance.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Policy 6
The City shall consider and determine the feasibility and appropriateness of developing the full
range of active and passive park space and facilities, including a community sports and aquatic
complex, ball fields, nature parks, and other facilities.
Program 6 A
As part of the planning process for the update of the Master Parks Plan, determine the feasibility
and appropriateness of a community sports and aquatic complex, and estimate primary costs and
possible financing.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Public Works Department
Schedule: 2002-03
Program 6 B
In the updating of the Master Parks Plan, consider the development and/or enhancement of
public open space areas as passive nature facilities using interpretive nature trails to educate
visitors on flora and fauna of the areas by developing nature trails with signs and markers.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Public Works Department
Schedule: 2002-03
Program 6 C
Parking areas should be developed in an aesthetic manner, integrating native plant materials to
the greatest extent practical and appropriate. Native or complementary building materials shall
be used to preserve the natural qualities of Desert Hot Springs parks.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Parks commission
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Program 6 D
Evaluate the feasibility of establishing active joint-use agreements with all private non-profit
organizations, which have recreation facilities such as playfields and multi-purpose rooms. These
agreements can help alleviate demand on existing parks and add flexibility to program
scheduling while mandatory parkland is being developed.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Program 7
Parklands development will be accomplished in a manner that remains consistent with the Open
Space and Conservation Element, promoting water conservation and the preservation of the
City’s natural resources.
                                               III-103

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                             General Plan/Parks and Recreation Element
Program 7 A
The Community Development Department shall confer with the MSWD and other specialists,
developing and implementing water conservation measures that use xeriscape techniques, and
desert landscaping.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Mission Springs Water District
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Policy 8
Encourage the addition of parks in areas relatively isolated from existing community and
neighborhood park facilities.
Program 8 A
The City shall identify, designate, and promote the development of parks and other appropriate
recreation/open space amenities in the Parks Master Plan neighborhoods identified as being in
need. Implementation strategies shall also be developed to secure land and assure that identified
needs are met.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: 2002-03
Program 8 B
Consult and coordinate with Riverside County regarding the location and development of
regional parklands serving the entire western Coachella Valley.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Riverside County Parks and
Recreation
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Policy 9
Participate in promoting parks events within the City to encourage public participation in sports
and other community service activities.
Program 9 A
Publish a Park Brochure, showing the location of all parks, the facilities they offer, and
information on multi-use trails and access to other open space areas.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Chamber of Commerce
Schedule: 2002-03; Continuous.
                                               III-104
                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                 General Plan/Community Design Element
COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT
PURPOSE
The Community Design Element defines, directs and guides coherent and satisfying patterns of
development in the City of Desert Hot Springs, and is meant to assure that new development is
balanced with the existing built and natural environments. The element provides consideration of
all facets of urban design and planning and the natural spaces around them that subtly and
profoundly shape the image of the community. This element helps to establish basic criteria,
promote good and thoughtful design, and enhance community cohesiveness and coherence. The
City’s essential values should be reflected in the design of the community and its physical
development, which should enhance the lives of residents and visitors alike. In this regard, the
Community Design Element provides a general set of principles that will guide decision makers
in the design review process.
The Community Design Element is intended to describe and define the essential design issues
particularly relevant to the City of Desert Hot Springs. These include the high value placed on
the City’s image as a destination spa resort residential community and the valuable natural
resources and their continued preservation and enjoyment.
BACKGROUND
There is a direct relationship between the Community Design Element and the Land Use,
Circulation, and Open Space and Conservation Elements. Attitudes toward land use, traffic,
community safety and appearance, and the desert environmental reinforce cohesion and
continuity, uniqueness and a special sense of place. On a more basic level, the Community
Design Element reflects sensitivity to community quality, environmental sensitivity and a desire
to preserve the best qualities of this spa resort residential community, while addressing the more
practical and functional needs of it’s residents, businesses and visitors.
Community design standards and criteria for development within the community is clearly
recognized in California law as necessary and appropriate. California Government Code Section
65302(a) addresses standards that affect population density and building intensity. Also
applicable are laws providing local empowerment for preservation of open space lands as set
forth in Government Code Sections 66477 and 65470. Most relevant is Government Code
Section 65302, which states that “the General Plan shall consist of a statement of development
policies and shall include diagram or diagrams and text setting forth objectives, principles,
standards, and plan proposals”.
Other legislation reinforces the adoption of community design standards, including the 1990
California Legislature enactment of Assembly Bill 325, the Water Conservation In Landscaping
Act, which recognizes the state’s responsibility in mitigating the effects of urbanization on its
finite water resources, and the potential savings from water conserving landscape practices. In
accordance with the act, the City has adopted a water conservation-oriented landscape ordinance,
which meets conservation targets and addresses community design concerns.
                                                III-105

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                               General Plan/Community Design Element
In sustaining and enhancing the quality of life in the City of Desert Hot Springs, the community
clearly declares and puts into effect the essential goals and policies of the General Plan.
Environmentally and aesthetically sensitive design is essential to the preservation and
enhancement of the resort residential character and property values of the community. The scale
and scope of land use patterns, management of transportation, flood control facilities and
community open space and conservation areas must respond and complement the human and
greater environment to reflect the City’s long-term community character envisioned in the
General Plan.
Natural Systems and a Basic Strategy
Substantial environmental effects result from development and population growth, which can be
best addressed through a thoughtful integration of the natural environmental systems with those
of the built environment. By developing and projecting a holistic picture of the mature City, and
with a sensitivity to site-specific design/development, these ideas provide the basis for
innovative uses of old and new approaches.
For instance, flood control channels are viewed not only as storm drains but also as opportunities
for development of wildlife corridors and as enhanced open space for hikers, equestrians and
biking enthusiasts. The City General Plan also espouses resource conservation practices such as
building designs that conserve energy, recycling valuable resources, reducing exposure to toxic
chemicals in the environment, and reducing demand for water by integrating the desert landscape
with the built environment. Combined, these strategies value and preserve essential resources
while expanding economic growth and opportunity (See Public Utilities Element).
Foundations of the Community Design Element
The technical and philosophic basis for community design is most important in its actual effects
on the design, development and build-out of the City. With major local, state and interstate
roadways passing through the City and its Sphere, and the associated dependence on and
commitment to automobile travel, enhancing the character and quality of life in Desert Hot
Springs depends on three major areas of focus: continuity, uniqueness and “peacemaking”.
Continuity
The continuity of Desert Hot Springs is recognition and continuation of characteristics handed
down over time that creates connections to the natural and historic features of the City and the
Coachella Valley. The challenge of living in the desert is undeniable and demands respect for the
larger environment and the history and character of the community. The City’s established
tradition of integrating the desert into design and development, a sense of elevation and
perspective, attention to environmental conditions, and predominant neighborhood scale of
development are the backbone and the reflection of community life.
Continuity in design can be maintained through an adherence to the essentials of scale and
proportion, materials and color, and site and setting. The integration of the natural desert
environment into the urban fabric also extends the continuity in design of the community. Within
these essential principles, a variety of architectural styles can be supported, including adobe,
mission style and modern derivations of each, as well as modern designs ranging from the
International Style to fantasy architecture.
                                              III-106

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                General Plan/Community Design Element
The desert provides a dramatic and flexible palette for design, as well as clear constraints and
opportunities to living in a dry and sunny climate. The use of native and other drought tolerant
landscaping also extends the continuity of the desert into the built environment. The use of
gravels, rocks and boulders further enhances the continuity of the built and natural environments.
Uniqueness
Desert Hot Spring’s natural setting and its elevated position at the top of the Coachella Valley
are highly recognizable characteristics that define the City as a unique and special place. A
distinctive feature of Desert Hot Springs is the spectacular mountain and desert vistas as viewed
from throughout the community. By integrating the natural environment through thoughtful
grading and re-vegetation, and the use of building and landscape materials indigenous to the
area, the character of the community and its setting can be preserved and enhanced. With world-
class natural and built environs that attract vacationing visitors, second home residents from all
walks of life, artists, professionals and others that value Desert Hot Springs’ special
environment, the City has unique and valuable assets upon which to build.
The uniqueness of Desert Hot Springs can be preserved and enhanced through adherence to
quality design standards, including thoughtful and controlled grading and site development.
Encouraging the re-integration of native desert and other appropriate drought-tolerant
landscaping materials will also preserve and enhance the City’s uniqueness.
A wide variety of native and introduced plants make up the local landscape palette; ocotillo,
barrel cactus, encilia, agave, date palms, California fan palms, and a wide variety of cactus and
succulents and are essential symbols of the community and provide endless design opportunities.
The emulation of the natural landscape and the enhancement of wildlife habitat furthers the
unique and marketable qualities of the community.
Placemaking
With extensive opportunities to improve the sense of continuity in the community, the City’s
unique environment can serve as an important basis for making Desert Hot Springs a special
“place” or “destination of distinction” in the Coachella Valley. Existing and future design shall
continue to emphasize quality planning, design, materials and craftsmanship essential to assuring
structures and other aspects of the built environment of which the City can be proud. Moreover,
quality design standards in most thoughtful development need cost no more, and can cost the
community much less than poorly conceived and insensitive design. The near and long-term
benefits to the community of well-conceived design and quality development are significant.
Desert Hot Springs, the Coachella Valley and the local environs of the Sonoran and Mojave
Deserts are destinations for millions of visitors each year. With the effective creation of a
regional sense of place, the City can host developments and environs that are local attractions
that already include world-class resorts and many unique and desirable residential developments
and sites. Nonetheless, many opportunities must be pursued, including commercial and other
types of non-residential development that can also provide an important basis of “peacemaking”
in Desert Hot Springs.
                                               III-107

                                                                              TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                   General Plan/Community Design Element
Opportunities for Variation in Community Context
The beauty and delicacy of the background desert and mountain environments, and those
portions of the built environment that we cherish and hope to preserve are the primary context
within which community design judgments are made. The sharp contrast between the natural and
built environment is a unique opportunity for community design. The level of assessment and the
appropriate perspective will vary with the land use and location being considered. For instance,
residential development proposed on highly exposed slopes, and industrial development plans
require distinctly different design review criteria. In every instance, new development is required
to respect its location and the scale and character of the surrounding built environment, while
other concerns will stand out when considering various types of proposals.
Harmony and Disharmony
The character of Desert Hot Springs is reflected both in the high degree of harmony between the
built and natural environment, and the limited but highly visible disharmony of development
within parts of the City. A wide range of siting and architectural design opportunities are
available and should allow the City to retain the low intensity resort-residential community
character in new development. Adhering to height limits, the use of natural materials, and
complementary colors and tones for building surfaces, and the generous integration of open
space into community design concepts are more in keeping with the essential character of Desert
Hot Springs.
Nonetheless, flexibility and sensitive design evaluation, and the ability to see the positive
qualities of various architectural styles are also essential to a responsive design review process. If
quality design is lacking and cannot be secured from the developer or architect, then
unsatisfactory development proposals should not be approved. Sensitive design harmonizes with
surrounding buildings, avoids excessive disruption and does not overtly compete for attention.
Contrasting design approaches should avoid being abrasive and seek a civilized and lively
integration with the existing and planned built environment. It is equally important not to
homogenize the design elements of a neighborhood, leaving it a boring repetition of elevations,
rooflines and building materials and colors, or to promote an eclectic collection of styles.
Criteria for Evaluating Building and Site Design
Evaluation of building and site design should focus on the relationship of new and in-fill
development to other structures and the larger environment. Scenic, architectural, landscape
architectural resources, and the established character of a neighborhood provide a basic frame of
reference for proposed development. Planning and design criteria assist in determining a
project’s compatibility with the surrounding area. These criteria include:
                                                 III-108

                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                 General Plan/Community Design Element
            •   Site Analysis and Development Planning
            •   Building Height
            •   Building and Structural Setbacks
            •   Proportions and Massing
            •   Pattern and Rhythm of Structures
            •   Roof types and Materials
            •   Surface Color and Texture
            •   Building Projections
            •   Architectural Details
            •   Landscape Architectural Treatment
Site Analysis and
Development Planning
In all development, site analysis provides one of the most important and frequently under
exploited opportunities to understand the limitations and possibilities of the site. Interest
regarding development on highly exposed sites with valued scenic resources may conflict with
the scenic, open space, and/or community design goals of the community. Site analysis and
efficient development staging can help limit the amount and cost of grading, can maximize lot
and building orientation, and provide a site and structure that optimizes the opportunities and the
constraints of the development site
                                                    Building Proportions, Height and Setbacks
                                                    New structures should be similar in height to
                                                    and compatible with other buildings in the
                                                    vicinity, and with the goal of preserving and
     Proper Massing of Building Preserves           enhancing design qualities of the built
                  Scenic Views
                                               III-109

                                                                             TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                  General Plan/Community Design Element
environment while preserving viewsheds. Setbacks should be compatible with those of
surrounding structures and scenic resources, providing building presence without allowing the
structure or development to dominate other buildings, the streetscape or the natural scenic
viewshed.
The proportions of proposed residential, commercial or industrial structures will also affect their
compatibility with site and surrounding conditions. Establishing a relationship between existing
and planned development must be carefully considered. New development may set a standard
that is meant to rejuvenate a neighborhood, giving it greater influence in establishing future
design criteria for that neighborhood. Occasionally, it may be more appropriate for new
development to be equivalent or subordinate to older structures and the prevailing development
pattern. Generally, however, height and width of building elevations should not be dramatically
out of character with existing neighborhood development or natural scenic viewsheds.
                                                      Pattern and Rhythm in Community Design
                                                      Nature makes and human communities strive
                                                      to adopt natural and instinctively pleasing
                                                      patterns and rhythms of motifs and massings
                                                      in community development. How well these
         Improper Massing Blocks Views
                                                      elements are handled can range from
harmonious to dissident or clashing relationships. The recurrent alteration of peaks and slopes of
the hills and the mountains can be emulated and complemented in the design of building roof
lines, and in the space and solids of buildings. The development of pattern and rhythm
establishes a theme when viewed in the context of surrounding development. At close quarters,
pedestrians should be provided with a varied integration of structure and landscaping to soften
and tie the structural elements to the natural ones.
Roof Types and Materials
                                                           The rhythmic patterns in new buildings
                                                           and landscape architectural treatments
                                                           should complement and integrate with the
                                                           established structures and surrounding
    Building Massing, Roof Lines and Mountain              natural environment. Roof types and
                                                           materials can play a critical role in either
complementing or degrading the natural scenic viewshed.
                                                        Roof types, from flat to multiple arrays of
                                                        hipped roofs, provide a range of
                                                        possibilities for contrasting or imitative
                                                        treatment. Unnecessary building heights are
                                                        frequently related to roof design and the
                                                        desire to create a particular type of space
                                                        within the structure. Roof design must be
                                                        balanced with the building elevation it helps
Roof Types and Roof Lines, and Mountain Backdrop
                                                III-110
                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                 General Plan/Community Design Element
to create. The same design concerns of scale, pattern and rhythm are applicable to the
compatibility of roof design and materials.
Surface Texture and Color
Prevailing sunny conditions in conjunction with the light color of the surrounding desert and
light vegetation make the selection of surface texture and color especially critical to
compatibility issues. Surfaces that emulate the coarse, warm tones of the surrounding valley and
hills are highly desirable, while slick and shiny finishes produce glaring surfaces that do not
integrate well with the viewshed or are not pleasing to the eye. However, the emergence of post-
modern and other hybrid architectural styles, with their juxtaposition of architectural motifs and
the use of contrasting, unusual colors and building materials, are examples of how contrast can
be made compatible within broader standards.
Surface texture differs from patterns and rhythm in that texture is provided on a substantially
reduced scale and seldom acts as a strong design element that is equal in effect to architectural
pattern or massing. Styles change with time and while the use of strong color may play a
dominant part in the design of structures, color is easier to change once development has
occurred. The use of texture ranges from smooth adobe-type stucco or plaster to fluted, split-face
concrete aggregate block. As with other elements of design, texture must be used carefully so as
to complement the overall design while being compatible with surrounding materials.
Building Projections and Architectural Details
Much of a building's design is expressed in the detail and projections that grow out of the
building envelope. Building projections and other architectural details play important functional
and aesthetic roles in a building's efficiency as shelter and appearance. Providing privacy and
screening from the elements, projections and architectural detail also affect how well the
building harmonizes with surrounding development. The use of porches and verandas can further
enhance residential living space and provide protection from sun and wind. While simple and
ornate architectural detail may each represent legitimate design principles, buildings of each
style may clash or contrast with surrounding development, and suffer from the comparison. The
appropriateness of a particular building design must be viewed within the context of the
building's natural setting and man-made environment.
                                                III-111
                                                                             TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                  General Plan/Community Design Element
                               Site Planning and Community Design
                               Site planning involves the distribution of buildings, parking,
                               driveways and landscaped open space areas over a site. It
                               establishes the development's relationship to the street and
                               surrounding lands. The impacts of site design are not always easy
                               to visualize and assess without the development of a detailed site
                               plan. Frequently, the complexity or importance of a proposed
                               development may make it appropriate to require the preparation of
                               perspective renderings of the plan and structures.
                               Care should be taken not to allow artistic applications of color,
landscaping and graphic “eye wash” to obscure or misrepresent the final product as it will
actually appear on the development site. Together with building architecture, site planning is the
critical design parameter determining the compatibility of proposed development with the
existing development in the area and the character of the community.
Special Design Areas
In addition to the architectural character of community design, other elements must be addressed
when considering the community as a whole. These include areas with important
landmarks and focal points, which lend identity and character to the community. Landmarks or
focal points may include natural, historic, architectural, or cultural areas of interest.
                                           Examples of developed landscape architectural elements
                                           include the Hot Springs Park on the corner of Eighth
                                           Street and Palm Drive, which provides a public park
                                           environment profiling the unique conditions that
                                           produce our hot mineral waters. Landscaping elements,
                                           monumentation, signage, site furnishings, and open
                                           space areas should all be considered in the development
                                           standards and policies for landmark or focal point
                                           enhancement.
Other special design areas include major entry points to the City and its neighborhoods.
Important opportunities exist for the noticeable and distinctive transition into the incorporated
boundaries of the City of Desert Hot Springs. Entry points offer the opportunity to incorporate
many of the elements of community design into a quality entry statement. The provision of
adequate area for significant landscape or architectural treatment, City entry signage, special
paving, and other identifiable treatments all lend character and identity to City entry and other
focus points (also see Scenic Highways discussion in this element).
                                                III-112

                                                                             TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                  General Plan/Community Design Element
Faced with a broad range of community design issues, development design details should be
given careful attention, and include street signage, entry point monument signage, commercial
signage, street lighting levels and fixtures, bus turnouts and shelters, curb and pavement
treatments, median islands, roadway reflectors and guardrails, on-road graphics, streetscape
treatment and landscaping, and utility structures and facilities.
Signage and Viewsheds of Public Rights-of-Way
The Palm Drive commercial corridor is the most frequently traveled, and is most impacted by
signage of businesses attempting to make their existence and location known. It may be
appropriate in some instances to encourage the retirement of existing signs inconsistent with the
goals, policies and programs of the General Plan and applicable ordinances. Enhancing
commercial signage should be conducted in a manner that minimizes the adverse economic
impact on business, while assuring a restoration of the viewshed along existing and planned
commercial corridors. Businesses located within Redevelopment project areas may be able to
participate in and benefit from RDA sponsored sign renovation programs.
                                     Transportation and Community Design
                                     A broad range of transportation-oriented community design
                                     issues must be faced as the community continues to grow.
                                     Development design issues and details that must be given
                                     careful attention include street signage, entry point monument
                                     signage, commercial signage, street lighting levels and
                                     fixtures, bus turnouts and shelters, curb and pavement
                                     treatments, median island and parkway design and
                                     landscaping, roadway reflectors and guardrails, bike lanes and
other on-road graphics, and utility structures and facilities. Such items as sidewalks must be
given careful attention to assure pedestrian safety while preserving the resort residential
character of the community.
The Palm Drive corridor is an essential and critical component of community design in Desert
Hot Springs, providing arterial circulation in the City while effectively linking the City with
other Coachella Valley communities. Many functional and community design goals can be
achieved through the detailed design and planning for Palm Drive ultimate buildout south of
Two Bunch Palms Trail. Revitalizing Palm Drive is essential to establish and communicate
Desert Hot Springs assets, character and identity. The safe, functionally efficient and
aesthetically pleasing design and buildout of Palm Drive is a key element in the City’s overall
economic health and prosperity.
Neighborhood Design
The City of Desert Hot Springs prides itself on having a wide variety of neighborhood settings.
Attributes that can make a neighborhood or private community unique include:
                                                 III-113

                                                                             TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                  General Plan/Community Design Element
Architecture: Architectural commonality can be established throughout the neighborhood
through the coordinated and complementary use of various design components, including
building colors, roof design and tile color, window and garage door treatment and architectural
building accents and details. These components should be mixed to create a balance of variety,
compatibility and conformity or cohesion.
                             Perimeter Wall/Fence Treatment: Perimeter walls and fences are
                             now being more widely used in residential design in the City. Walls
                             and fences define the borders of residential communities and are used
                             in perimeter landscape treatments for a variety of other development
                             types in the City. Designs may consist of wrought iron, stucco
                             concrete block, plain and painted slumpstone, split-faced block,
                             plastered, brick-capped or tile accented, and intermittent columns or
                             pilasters. Walls and fences may be straight, stepped or meandering.
                             Interspersing solid walls with wrought iron fencing provides views
                             into development open space areas and relieves the closed in feeling
                             that walls can engender. While walls may vary in height, they are
                             generally not to exceed six feet above grade.
In addition to closing off developments from the public right-of-way, continuous solid walls can
create the above-mentioned canyon effect. Wider parkways provide additional wall set backs and
landscape treatment that reduces the enclosed feeling. The integration of wall breaks and
fenestration along public rights-of-way help to integrate private community open space and
viewsheds with those of the traveling public. The City should encourage the continued use of this
type of viewshed window as a means of reducing the tunnel effect and preserving scenic vistas.
Parkway Landscaping: One of the most prominent and visible exterior features of
neighborhoods and private communities is parkway landscape treatments. Design can range from
the formal to the “natural” or combinations of both approaches. Formal design may include
ordered rows of date palms or other distinctive tree, regularly interspersed with equally ordered
shrubs and beds for annuals plantings. More informal designs seek to imitate nature by
interspersing native and non-native desert plantings in more of a free form or random pattern.
Groupings of major elements and the use of lawn areas may also be integrated into both more
and less formal designs.
Community Design in Public Facilities
Community design issues encompass the entire City and include public buildings, utilities, and
street traffic control and safety devises that have the potential to detract from the appearance of
the community. The City must consistently make the quality appearance of the City as one of its
prime priorities. Current efforts include the development of unique and distinctive desert
landscape treatments on major roadways. Desert colors and tones can also been integrated into
                                                 III-114

                                                                              TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                   General Plan/Community Design Element
street signs, traffic signals and lighting standards to soften their impact on the surrounding
viewshed.
Bus shelter design should also be a high priority, making these facilities functionally superior
and aesthetically pleasing. These structures can utilize architectural styles that complement the
streetscape treatment and elevate the appearance of these utilitarian structures. Utility cabinets
located along the street, including traffic signal and telephone-switching facilities are frequently
painfully obvious. Efforts to have these installed in underground vaults have been resisted but
more success has been had with having these highly visible facilities painted more neutral desert
colors. Likewise, overhead utility lines present visual obtrusions to the natural setting and may
pose safety hazards which should be minimized by a program of utility undergrounding.
Scenic Highways and Major Entry Points
Some of the most important community assets are the scenic resources of the Coachella Valley,
including the San Jacinto, San Bernardino and other mountain ranges surrounding and
encompassing the City, and the desert floor. Preservation of these scenic vistas has been an
important goal of the community. However, various types of land development, the construction
of buildings and walls, landscaping, roads and the extension of utility lines and other facilities
have all impacted and threatened to degrade the scenic resources of the community.
The City’s natural scenic beauty, as viewed from public thoroughfares and private lands,
provides residents and visitors with a direct experience of the dramatic landforms that define the
character of the community. The protection and enhancement of the City’s viewsheds is critical
to promoting a quality image of Desert Hot Springs. An essential part of this effort is the
identification of important areas of significant natural scenic value and setting standards to
preserve these resources with continued urban development.
The scenic resources of Desert Hot Springs are most apparent to the traveling public. The natural
vistas visible from City streets cannot be properly viewed or appreciated if screened by
buildings, walls and landscaping or the indiscriminate placement of signage. The City, County
and State are all active players in scenic resources preservation efforts.
Desert Hot Springs has a variety of important entry and focus points, which provide
opportunities for reinforcement of the City’s identification and scenic viewshed enhancements.
The integration of monuments and appropriate signage, as well as special streetscape and
landscape treatments, can be used to reflect the community’s unique character. Focal points can
be located anywhere along major routes, including important street corners, within parks and
other public open space, civic buildings, schools and historic areas.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Community design considerations, including preservation and enhancement of scenic highways,
can subtly and profoundly shape the image of the community. Establishing basic criteria to
promote good and thoughtful design that enhances community cohesiveness and coherence will
allowed Desert Hot Springs to emerge as a thriving and marketable residential resort community,
                                                 III-115

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                              General Plan/Community Design Element
Community Design considerations are directly related to issues associated with land use, traffic,
arts and culture, health and safety, economic development and environmental systems.
The Community Design Element can be implemented by several mechanisms, which include the
thoughtful application of the other Elements of the General Plan, the City Zoning Ordinance, and
through Redevelopment Plans and Specific Plans for individual project areas. The most effective
instrument will be the Zoning Ordinance, which sets forth specific standards and establishes
design parameters and guidelines for site planning and building design. On the zoning district
level, the Zoning Ordinance will assure that development occurs in a manner consistent with the
design goals of the community.
COMMUNITY DESIGN GOAL, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
GOALS
Goal 1
City-wide design and development which enhances the community’s distinctive character as a
desert-oriented resort residential community and preserves and enhances the natural scenic
resources in harmony with the built environment.
Goal 2
Variety of community design, architecture and landscaping compatible with the City’s desert
setting and surrounding development.
POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
Policy 1
Private and public sector development projects shall equally apply City community design
standards, thereby protecting the community's scenic viewsheds, providing community cohesion
and enhancing the image of Desert Hot Springs as a resort residential community.
Program 1 A
Amend and maintain an appropriate comprehensive Zoning Ordinance and other regulatory
documents, which define the design parameters within which public and private development
projects must perform. Comprehensive application packages and document outlines shall be
prepared and maintained to guide the preparation of Specific Plans, Conditional Use,
Development Plan and other permits, and assure a thorough review of all community design
issues.
Responsible Agency: City Council; Planning Commission; Community Development
Department
Schedule: On-going; Review annually.
Policy 2
The planning and design of residential neighborhoods shall provide distinctive and characteristic
design elements along public rights-of-way within the project creating a recognizable sense of
place.
                                              III-116

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                General Plan/Community Design Element
Program 2 A
Encourage the use of site-sensitive planning in new development, varying setbacks with
adequate minimums, and varying designs, elevations and facade articulations.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: On-going
Policy 3
Multi-family residential projects shall provide well-designed and neighborhood enhancing living
space, usable and safe private and common open space areas, adequate parking and appropriate
automobile storage, screened trash enclosures, a comprehensive landscape program, and
perimeter walls and fencing.
Program 3 A
The Zoning Ordinance shall include design standards for multi-family development, including
Planned Residential Developments (PRDs), that assure variety of design, the provision of safe
and secure common open space, adequate parking and appropriate automobile storage, a
comprehensive landscape program, perimeter walls and fencing where appropriate, and
neighborhood-enhancing design.
Responsible Agency: City Council; Planning Commission; Community Development
Department
Schedule: On-going
Policy 4
Commercial development and mixed use projects shall consist of integrated designs that
incorporate safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian-oriented circulation, safe and
convenient ingress and egress, shared parking, screened outdoor storage/loading and other noisy
or unsightly areas, and protected outdoor seating areas, lighting, signage and the planting of
mature landscaping to provide an immediate effect of permanency and quality.
Policy 4 A
Review all commercial development plans to assure pedestrian-oriented circulation, visually and
functionally integrated design safe and convenient ingress and egress, screened loading and other
noisy or unsightly area, protected outdoor seating areas, and the planting of mature landscaping
to provide an immediate effect of permanency.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Planning Commission; City
Council
Schedule: On-going
Policy 5
Detailed landscape architectural and special signage designs, which reflect the character of the
development, shall be required for City and project entries, scenic roadways and other City focal
points.
                                               III-117
                                                                             TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                  General Plan/Community Design Element
Policy 6
Establish vista points with interpretive displays, rest areas, and information kiosks, which could
be developed at key locations along scenic corridors and elsewhere in the City.
Policy 7
Integrate native and other appropriate desert landscape materials and site-sensitive architectural
designs into all public and private building projects to enhance the community's cohesion
between the built and natural environment.
Program 7 A
Take every opportunity to integrate native and other appropriate desert landscape materials and
site-sensitive architectural designs into all public building projects to enhance the community's
environmental and resort residential character.
Responsible Agency: Community Development and Public Works Departments; Planning
Commission; City Council
Schedule: On-going
Policy 8
Walled residential and commercial development projects shall be designed to provide views into
these developments from the public right-of-way through the use of wall breaks or fenestration,
but in a manner that does not compromise privacy, security or interior noise levels.
Program 8 A
Development proposals, which include walls, shall be reviewed for the appropriateness of
integrating wall breaks or fenestration along public rights-of-way.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: On-going
Policy 9
Signs shall be limited to the minimum size, scale and number needed to provide functional
identification and exposure necessary to convey messages, while minimizing impacts on traffic
safety, streetscape and scenic viewsheds.
Program 9 A
The City shall develop and implement signage regulations in the Zoning Ordinance, which
addresses all aspects of sign review and establish finite periods by which existing non-
conforming signage shall be replaced.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Planning Commission; City
Council.
Schedule: 2002-03
Policy 10
Lighting shall be limited to the minimum height, number and intensity of fixtures needed to
provide security and identification in residential, commercial and industrial development, taking
every reasonable measure to preserve the community's night skies.
                                                 III-118
                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                 General Plan/Community Design Element
Program 10 A
Develop a lighting standards ordinance as part of the Zoning Ordinance, which sets specific
standards for lighting levels, acceptable types of lighting and fixtures, and location of lighting
control in relation to adjoining and nearby properties and public rights-of-way. The ordinance
shall include a lighting retirement program, which establishes finite periods by which existing
non-conforming lighting and fixtures shall be replaced.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Planning Commission; City
Council
Schedule: 2003-4
Policy 11
Incorporate the City image/logo or other appropriate City identification into entry features, street
signage, public buildings, planters and median islands, benches and other streetscape furnishings,
City vehicles and other similar applications.
Program 11 A
A comprehensive image development and application program shall be completed to assure the
most effective use of the City logo on all City vehicles, signage, street signs and other
appropriate locations throughout the community.
Responsible Agency: Community Development and Public Works Departments
Schedule: On-going
Policy 12
Development proposed along designated scenic highways, roadways and corridors shall be
reviewed for compatibility with the natural and built environments to assure maximize viewshed
protection and pedestrian and vehicular safety.
Program 12 A
Map and otherwise define those scenic corridors that are designed for scenic roadways and
establish development guidelines to protect and enhance scenic values along those roadways.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Planning Commission; City
Council
Schedule: Immediate: On-going.
Program 12 B
Architectural review within scenic corridors shall include review of building massing and design,
heights and setbacks, and exterior colors and materials for compatibility with the natural
environments. The use of natural materials and appropriate colors shall be encouraged, with
materials such as reflective surfaces to be discouraged.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Planning Commission; City
Council
Schedule: Continuous.
                                                III-119
                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                 General Plan/Community Design Element
Program 12 C
Scenic roadway streetscape designs, which enhance street appearance and provide safer
vehicular and pedestrian movements, shall be programmed into the City’s roadway capital
improvements program. Said program shall also establish development guidelines to protect and
enhance scenic values along these roadways.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Public Works department;
Planning Commission; City Council
Schedule: Immediate: On-going.
Policy 13
Overhead utility lines shall be undergrounded to the greatest extent practical through the
establishment of an undergrounding program and guidelines. Overhead utility lines along scenic
roadways shall have first priority for City and other funding for utility undergrounding.
Policy 14
Water wells, utility substations, switching and control facilities associated with it shall be
screened to preserve scenic viewsheds and limit visual clutter.
Policy 15
Development projects located at sites identified for major and minor City entry and focal features
shall dedicate the required land for the development of these landmark features.
Policy 16
All grading and development proposed within scenic highway viewsheds, including hillsides,
entry and focal points, shall be regulated to minimize adverse impacts to these viewsheds.
                                               III-120

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                           General Plan/Economic Development Element
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
PURPOSE
Economic conditions in the City represent the most basic, essential and constraining aspects of
the community. The purpose of the Economic Development Element is to provide a multi-
dimensional picture of conditions in the City through a broad range of data and information. The
element also explores the relationships between City government and its various activities,
particularly land use policy, and the health of the local economic environment. As the City
regulates development it must balance the need to generate adequate revenues against the need to
support existing and anticipated levels of public services and facilities. This Element is also
intended to examine the economic characteristics and opportunities of the community, and
outlines a programmatic approach. It provides policies and programs that will help create a more
viable commercial and industrial base, enhance development of a tourist-oriented community,
broaden employment opportunities, and facilitate development of adequate public services and
facilities.
BACKGROUND
The Economic Development Element is directly related to all other elements of the General Plan.
It is based upon California Government Code Section 65030.2, which mandates that all cities and
counties develop economic goals and an analysis of fiscal implications on which to base land use
decisions. The Element also examines issues set forth in Government Code Sections 65863.6 and
66412.3, which require cities and counties to balance the available fiscal and environmental
resources against the housing needs of the region and the needs of their residents for public
services. The health and vitality of the City’s economy is particularly dependent on the
opportunities and constraints identified and addressed in the General Plan. The economic activity
of the community grows out of the complex interrelationships of the physical and economic
environments, and the City and its regulatory and public service functions.
There is a direct but not all-encompassing relationship between the amount and implied value of
housing established in the Housing Element, and the amount and location of commercial and
industrial land and development set forth in the Land Use Element. In the resort-residential
market of the Coachella Valley, the utilization of open space through the Open Space and
Conservation, and Parks and Recreation Elements is also important to economic development.
The policies and programs of these and other General Plan elements will have a direct and
indirect effect on the long-term economic prosperity of the community.
The earliest economic activity in Desert Hot Springs was the promotion of the healthful and life-
enhancing effects of the City’s hot mineral water, and available development sites with
spectacular valley and mountain views. On the heels of the discovery of this marketable
commodity followed real estate developers who saw the potential of the area’s many assets.
Residential and spa-related development increased in the City after World War II and created the
base or foundation for a self-sufficient commercial/business district to prosper and grow. The
City became an established resort-residential community, providing affordable housing and
quality of life amenities but has continued to lack an employment base of adequate size or
                                              III-121

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                            General Plan/Economic Development Element
diversity.
An Independent Path
The Desert Hot Springs Planning Area is unique in the Coachella Valley in that it lacks
meaningful adjoining or nearby neighboring cities and the economic stimulation they can
provide. While development of the “cove communities” has followed a sequence of development
starting in Palm Springs, and while Indio and Coachella have built upon a stable and broad-based
agricultural industry, Desert Hot Springs has had to cultivate its assets and opportunities on its
own.
However, out of adversity comes diversity, and a wide range of opportunities should be pursued
now and in coming years to build an independent and solid economic foundation for the City and
surrounding community. The obvious place to start is with the community’s strengths. The hot
mineral water resource, and the spas and hotels that exploit it, have a global market. But it must
be made marketable and appealing. This means new and upgraded facilities and supporting
commercial and business services.
Desert Hot Springs has served as an important provider of housing for all socio-economic sectors
in a unique and breathtaking setting. While the City has been an important provider of affordable
housing, a second and retirement home market is recently emerging which will broaden the
City’s economy and market appeal. A wide range of employment opportunities must also be
developed to keep both residents and their taxable expenditures in the community.
DEMOGRAPHIC TRENDS
In order to map the City’s economic future, it is necessary to know where we are and what have
been the trends that have gotten the City to this point. A variety of data and information must be
considered, including current conditions and trends in population, income, housing, retail sales,
tourism, industrial development and employment.
Population
From its incorporation in 1963, the City has grown from a population of 2,738 in 1970, to 11,668
in 1990, and 15,398 in 1999. The general trend has been for the City population to double every
decade, as seen from the chart below. Population growth has slowed in the 1990s, with the
general slowdown in economic activity in Southern California and the Coachella Valley.
However, the City far outstripped Coachella Valley Association of Government (CVAG) growth
projects made in the early 1980s.Annexations have been very modest contributors to population
growth, which has come from job growth in other parts of the Valley.
                                               III-122

                                                                                   TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                    General Plan/Economic Development Element
                                              Chart III-1
                                     City of Desert Hot Springs
                                               Population
                                         1970 Through 2000
                            18000
                            16000
                            14000
                            12000
                            10000
                             8000
                             6000
                             4000
                             2000
                                0
                                    1970       1980        1990       1997      2000
                                                           Years
                                                 Population     Households
                                Source: Urban Decision Systems, Inc., Area Profile
                                1990-2000 for the Desert Hot Springs City Limits, Area
                                Summary and the California Department of Finance.
Household Size
Household size defines the average number of people living in a dwelling and does not include
those living in-group housing, although these numbers are not always segregated in the data and
their effect on the average is very limited. The average house size in the City has increased
substantially over the past few decades. In 1970, the City’s average household size was
approximately 1.9 persons. With continued population growth and increasing number of families
with children, the average household size continued to increase, reaching 2.25 persons by 1980
and 2.52 persons by 1990. The average household size was estimated to have increased in 1999
to 2.81 persons. These numbers are comparable to the state of California’s average household
size, which were 2.8 persons in 1990.
Median Age of City Population
Initially, Desert Hot Springs attracted retired residents and modest second homeowners due to its
superior environmental amenities, including hot mineral waters, spectacular scenery, clean and
dry air, and rural life style. Since 1970, following the trend in family household formation, the
median age of the community has decreased rapidly from 59.5 years of age in 1970, to 45.3 years
in 1980. By 1990, the median age had fallen to 30 years and is projected to again drop modestly
by the year 2000. The median age has significantly decreased since the City’s incorporation but
has recently stabilized. The median age in 1990 was 13 years younger than that for Palm Springs
and slightly less than that of the County (31.5 years).
                                                  III-123

                                                                                     TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                      General Plan/Economic Development Element
Per Capita and Median Household Incomes
Along with the expansion of housing units and population has come a steady increase in the per
capita and median household income. The per capita income levels increased from $3,343 in
1970 to $7,062 in 1980. From 1980 to 1990, the per capita income again rose to
11,257, a 59.4% increase. The per capita income level is Currently (2000) estimated at $12,406,
a 10.2% increase from the 1990 income level.
The median household income in the Desert Hot Springs area has also shown increases over the
last twenty plus years. In 1970, the median household income was approximately $4,726, but had
reached $20,888 by 1990 and was estimated at $26,264 in 1995, approximately a 25.7% annual
increase since 1990. The following graph shows the increase in both income levels and provides
projections for the year 2000, with per capita and median household incomes estimated to be
$13,876 and $29,839, respectively.
The median household income in the City have been consistently below that of Riverside County
on the whole, being 30% lower in 1980 and falling to a level 60% lower by 1990. In 1990, there
were approximately 2,469 (21%) people living below the poverty line in Desert Hot Springs,
with the most notable group being children (<18 years), which made up 41.1% of the total. Also,
10% of the City’s seniors were living below the poverty line. These characteristics of the City
population are similar to those of the County population as a whole (also please see the Housing
Element).
                                                Chart III-2
                                          Desert Hot Springs
                      Per Capita and Median Household Income Trends
                                       from 1970 through 2000
                           30,000
                           28,000
                           26,000
                           24,000
                           22,000
                           20,000
                           18,000
                           16,000
                           14,000
                           12,000
                           10,000
                            8,000
                            6,000
                            4,000
                                    1970      1980        1990       1995     2000
                                               Per Capita  Median HH
                            Source: Urban Decision Systems, Inc., Area Profile
                            1990-2000 for the Desert Hot Springs City Limits, Area
                            Summary and the California Department of Finance.
                                                     III-124

                                                                                  TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                   General Plan/Economic Development Element
The median household income for 1990 of $20,888 was still considerably lower than that of
Riverside County and the State of California, which were estimated to be $33,081 and $39,598,
respectively. It is, however, evident that although Desert Hot Springs has not had a
comparatively high income level, the rather constant increases in both the per capita and median
household incomes add significantly to the economic development potential of the community.
The increase of buying power and the expansion of the commercial base in the community has
helped the City to expand its role as the commercial service district for a wide area.
Housing Market Trends
It is estimated that in 1970 there were approximately 1,431 housing units within the City
boundaries and 3,123 units by 1980, for an increase over this ten-year period of 118%. From
1980 to 1990, the housing stock grew to about 5,494 units, increasing the number of dwelling
units by 76%. The housing growth rates in the Desert Hot Springs area would appear to indicate
an active and steadily growing economy over this period; however, this has not been the case as
discussed below. By January of 1999, the City is estimated to have a total of 6,563 units. Also,
please see the Housing Element for additional information on this subject. The following graph
illustrates the housing unit trends for the City from 1970 to 2000.
                                               Chart III-3
                                     Housing Unit Trends for the
                                City of Desert Hot Springs 1970-2000
                              7000
                           N
                           u
                              6000
                           m
                           b 5000
                           e
                           r 4000
                           o
                           f 3000
                           U 2000
                           n
                           i 1000
                           t
                           s     0
                                      1970     1980       1990     1997     2000
                                                         Year
                          Source: Urban Decision Systems, Inc., Area Profile 1996
                           for the Desert Hot Springs City Limits, Area Summary and
                          the California Department of Finance.
In addition, the following table shows a comparison of housing units in Desert Hot Springs in
1990 and 1999. It is evident that the majority of structures in the City are single-family
dwellings, which is to be expected in a suburban community.
                                                    III-125
                                                                              TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                               General Plan/Economic Development Element
                                              Table III-32
                            Housing Characteristics for Desert Hot Springs
                                        1990-1997 Comparison
                                                                   MH,
         Year             1 Unit    2 to 4 Units      5+ Units   Trailers             Total Units
         1990             3,035         961            1,204        294                  5,494
         1999             3,921        1,085           1,224        333                  6,563
   Source: CA. Dept. Of Finance.
It is evident that most residential construction activity continues to be single-family home
development. These housing characteristics again emphasize the relatively low density and even
rural character of the City, which is preserved through the high ratio of single-family homes in
relation to apartment complexes and mobile home parks.
Desert Hot Springs, with its unique character and environment, is being considered more and
more as an exceptional opportunity for the development of a full range of residential products
from affordable housing to master planned resort residential development. Home prices are
lower than those found in most of Southern California and 35% lower than other communities in
the Coachella Valley. Many residential areas are located on steep hillsides and expansive and
elevated alluvial fans, which provide spectacular and highly marketable views.
Employment and the Jobs/Housing Balance
Desert Hot Springs is predominantly a bedroom community providing affordable and preferred
residences for many who are employed outside the community. In 1990, about 20% of the City’s
employed worked within the city limits; stated another way, almost 80% of the City’s employed
must leave the community to find employment. Palm Springs provides nearly 34% of the jobs
held by City residents, followed by the City of Desert Hot Springs and then Palm Desert, which
employs 10.3% of the City’s labor force. While the 1990 City employed labor force totaled
approximately 4,517, there were only approximately 1,883 jobs available in the City, nearly non-
City residents held 60% of which.
In 1990, two-thirds of the City population between the ages of 16 and 64 were in the local work
force. As shown in the table below, most employed residents (51%) worked in the service sector
(sales, administrative support, household services, protective and other services). County
residents on the whole hold slightly more professional or managerial positions. While the
number of employed doubled between 1980 and 1990, the percentage with jobs in each
employment category did not change appreciably.
                                                 III-126

                                                                               TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                General Plan/Economic Development Element
                                            Table III-33
                               Occupations of Residents in the
                               City of Desert Hot Springs 1990
                                              Desert Hot Springs              Riverside County
Occupation                                      Number       Percent        Number              Percent
Executive or Administrative
Management                                            339         7.3         56,732               11.6
Professional Specialty                                332         7.2         55,646               11.4
Technicians and Related Support                       145         3.1         15,127                3.1
Sales                                                 593        12.8         62,315               12.8
Administrative and Clerical Support                   839        18.1         73,474               15.0
Household Service                                       26        0.5          2,156                  .4
Protective Services                                     78        1.7         10,002                2.0
Other Services                                        828        17.8         53,023               10.9
Framing, Forestry, and Fishing                        180         3.9         20,496                4.2
Precision Production, Craft and
Repair                                                784        16.9         70,492               14.4
Machine Operators and Assemblers                      109         2.3         26,075                5.3
Transportation an Material Movers                     195         4.2         21,576                4.4
Handlers and Equipment Cleaners                       195         4.2         21,143                4.3
Total                                               4,663      100.0        488,257               100.0
Source: Urban Decisions Systems, Inc. Area Profile; Desert Hot Springs Proposed City Limits, Area
Summary, based on the US Census Bureau’s 1990 Census, and the California Department of Finance.
                                                 III-127

                                                                              TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                               General Plan/Economic Development Element
                                              Table III-34
                                      Major Employers - 2000
                    Employers                                           Number of
                                                                        Employees
                    Palm Springs Unified School District
                                                                               1,400
                    Angel View Crippled Children’s''                             240
                    Foundation
                    Miracle Springs Hotel                                         95
                    Desert Hot Springs Spa Hotel                                  80
                    K-Mart                                                        80
                    Stater Brothers Market                                        75
                    Von’s Market                                                  75
                    Mission Springs Water Dist.                                   33
                    Carl’s Junior Restaurant                                      33
                    McDonald’s Restaurant                                         32
                    Agua Caliente Spa Hotel                                       47
                    Source: Riverside County Economic Profile for Desert Hot Springs,
                    1998, Terra Nova Planning & Research, Inc.
Construction Valuation Trends
Since 1987, residential construction trends and valuations have varied widely, ranging from a
high during this period of $22.2 million in 1990, which also represents the beginning the latest
recession, to a low of $830,000 in 1999. While the first few years of the 1990s were stable, the
last three years have seen steady decline in new residential development and associated
valuations. While single-family homes have made up the lion’s share of new housing during this
period, prior to 1992 the City realized a greater number of multi-family unit development,
primarily in the affordable range. Over the 1987 to 1996 ten-year period, almost $124 million in
new homes were constructed. Most development in the City, whether subsidized or market rate,
is generally considered “affordable” in comparison to Coachella Valley, County or State housing
costs.
                                                 III-128

                                                                                     TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                      General Plan/Economic Development Element
                                                 Chart: III-4
                  Construction Valuations: Residential and Non-Residential
                                        1990 Thru 1996 (Million)
                               25
                            v
                            a  20
                            l
                            u  15
                            a
                            t  10
                            i
                            o   5
                            n
                                0
                                    1990   1991     1992    1993   1994      1995 1996
                                                           Years
                                             Residential     Non„Residential
                              Source: Building Activity Reports, City of Desert Hot Springs Community
                              Development Department, September 1990-96. Numbers do not reflect residential
                              additions or alterations, which were very minor contributors to overall growth.
Non-residential construction during the past ten years has been a more modest contributor to
overall development in the City. During this period, non-residential development in the City
totaled about $11.75 million, with the best year being 1992 when the City realized a total of
$5.35 million in non-residential construction. As can be seen from the comparison of these two
measures of development, residential development spending outpaced non-residential
development over the last ten years.
While the City has seen steady growth in the residential sector, it has not seen commensurate
growth in either the industrial or commercial sectors. This pattern is consistent with the City’s
role heretofore as a bedroom community providing housing for a population employed
elsewhere. These patterns are further discussed below.
COMMERCIAL TRENDS
Commercial development is an important component of any community, providing goods and
services to residents and other businesses from convenient locations and competitive prices.
Healthy commercial economy and associated sales tax revenues are also an important source of
revenue for local government. Finally, commercial and industrial development is an important
source of employment, which tends to be found outside the community, as discussed below.
Desert Hot Springs should be filling the role as the commercial center for the upper Coachella
Valley, especially that area defined by Painted Hills to the west and Sky Valley to the east, with
a regional population of about 25,000. The area is linked to Interstate 10 and Highway 62, and
could benefit from Valley visitors and highway travelers if commercial services were available
along these major roadways. The most prevalent commercial uses in the community include
                                                      III-129

                                                                             TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                              General Plan/Economic Development Element
general merchandise and retail, transient hotel services, and a wide variety of automobile service
facilities, which play a major role in the economics of the community.
Currently (2000), the commercial core of the community is centered along the Palm Drive
corridor, and includes two neighborhood centers and one community shopping center anchored
by K-Mart. Other commercial development, especially hotel and motel uses, are also located in
the eastern quadrant of the City’s core. Major resort facilities include the Two Bunch Palms and
Mirage Springs Resorts.
Important opportunities have been established along the Highway 62 corridor with the approval
and annexation of the Rancho Royale project area, which straddles this highway. Planned
commercial development includes general, neighborhood, community and regional shopping
facilities, which will service tourists, highway travelers and local resident needs. Other major
approved projects with important commercial components include the Cornerstone and Olympus
Specific Plans. However, these are long-term assets that may not provide meaningful economic
growth for several years. In the meantime, the City must look to effective, if incremental, ways
of building the economic base and enhancing the City’s revenue stream.
City-Based Sales Potential
The 1995 aggregate and per capita sales potential for permanent residents of Desert Hot Springs
are provided in the table below. This analysis takes into account such factors as average
household size and income, costs of housing, and verified comparative purchasing patterns. The
table illustrates that the largest existing expenditure categories are grocery stores, restaurants and
automotive (fuel and oil) stores. The table also breaks down the per capita sales potential in
relation to the various types of stores within the City, with individual residents spending up to
$1,230 per year on groceries, and $745 at restaurants.
                                                 III-130

                                                                              TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                              General Plan/Economic Development Element
                                            Table III-35
                                1995 Annual Expenditure Estimate
                                 for Desert Hot Springs Residents
                       Store Type          Aggregate $       Per Capita $
                   Variety Stores              488,000                         34.89
                   Grocery Stores            18,190,000                     1,230.28
                   Auto (Fuels, etc.)         8,570,000                       579.32
                   Apparel Stores             7,990,000                       539.54
                   Jewelry Stores             1,200,000                        80.89
                   Furniture, Related         4,630,000                       312.96
                   Appliance Stores           1,090,000                        73.47
                   Electronics                2,250,000                       152.49
                   Restaurants               11,020,000                       745.17
                   Drugs/Med.Equip.           1,960,000                       132.34
                   Personal Care              2,650,000                       179.20
                   Alcoholic Beverages       1,441,000                         95.62
                   Tobacco                    1,490,000                       100.58
                   Hardware/Garden            3,620,000                       244.88
                   Entertainment              1,440,000                        97.36
                   Miscellaneous              5,230,000                       353.30
                   1995 Total                $73,258,00                    $4,952.39
                   Source: Urban Decision Systems, Inc., Area Profile 1996 for the
                   Desert Hot Springs City Limits, Area Summary, California
                   Department of Finance and Terra Nova Planning & Research, Inc.
For 1995, the total sales potential of City residents was estimated at $73,258,000. The 1995
population of 14,787 persons at that time can be applied to these per capita calculations to
approximate the annual per capita sales potential for the year, which is estimated at $4,952.29.
However, actual per capita sales total only $3,383.58, and total taxable sales within the City were
only $50,033,000. The difference of $23,225,000 represents the approximate retail sales potential
of City residents not being spent within the city limits. This figure represents a major loss of
revenue for local businesses as well as the City. While not all sales listed are taxable, if the
resident spending lost to surrounding communities were taxable and was captured by the City, it
would add about $232,250 annually to the City General Fund.
                                                 III-131
                                                                                 TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                  General Plan/Economic Development Element
Taxable Sales and Sales Tax Revenues
Taxable sales data for the City is available and was reviewed for the period 1985 through 1995,
to compare with the sales potential discussed above. These taxable sales figures, provided in the
table below, indicate a steady if modest increase over this period, with some stagnation and one
period (1994) of decreased taxable sales. Also, over this period taxable retail activity did not
keep pace with City population, which based on 1985 population and sales ratios, should have
generated total taxable sales of about $54,401,000 in 1995. In 1986, approximately 208 taxable
sales generators/ outlets existed in the City. By 1990 this number had increased to 305, and in
1994 to approximately 342.
The bottom line is that about one-third of the City retail spending capacity is being lost to other
communities. This has been clear for some time and is attributable to several factors. First, the
majority of the City’s labor force works outside the City (see below), which provides many
opportunities for shopping while traveling to and from work. The City also lacks a full range of
retail outlets or has smaller outlets that find it hard to compete with larger chain stores located
elsewhere. K-Mart is currently one exception.to this pattern. Neither does the City have malls or
other large clusterings of retail that would enhance retail synergies within the City. While the
core commercial area of Palm Drive is planned for this type of synergistic and complementary
type of retailing, physical and financial constraints have limited City efforts.
Taxable sales in the City for 1998, the last year that full year data is available, show that the 280
locations collecting sales tax generated a total of $52,998,000 in taxable retail sales.
                                                Table III-36
                     Taxable Sales for Desert Hot Springs1985 Through 1995
                   Year             Retail Stores($000)              Total Outlets($000)
               1985                        26,102                           29,070
               1986                        28,757                           31,868
               1987                        30,085                           34,082
               1988                        33,707                           37,364
               1989                        37,476                           40,584
               1990                        40,192                           44,183
               1991                        40,848                           44,390
               1992                        43,236                           46,919
               1993                        45,762                           50,228
               1994                        43,840                           48,924
               1995                        45,164                           50,033
               Source: California State Board of Equalization Taxable Sales in California (Sales
               and Use Tax), 1985-1996
                                                    III-132

                                                                                     TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                     General Plan/Economic Development Element
                                                 Chart: III-5
                                 Taxable Sales for Desert Hot Springs
                                            1985 Through 1995
    60000
    50000
 V
  a 40000
  l
  u
  a 30000
  t
  i
  o 20000
  n
    10000
          0
              1985    1986       1987     1988       1989      1990      1991     1992    1993     1994      1995
                                                              Years
                                              Retail Stores         Total Outlets
        Source: The California State Board of Equalization Taxable Sales in California (Sales and Use Tax), 1996
The City has the potential to broaden and solidify its role as the commercial center for a growing
and diversifying region. However, it is clear that all components of the local market must also be
grown to establish critical levels of commercial activity that will attract larger retail outlets and
developments. The City currently (2000) offers a basic combination of retail stores. It is also
faced with a broad range of commercial and industrial opportunities that can be exploited in
concert with its unique character and resort residential potential. The City’s potential is,
therefore, dependent upon the development and cultivation of the full range of economic
activities, including residential and industrial, which can provide the basis for far stronger
economic growth than can currently be realized by continued population growth only.
Tourism and Traveler Revenues
The Desert Hot Springs economy is supported and strengthened by tourism, which has generated
a steady increase in transient occupancy (bed) tax and also contributes to a wide range of retail
sales. The City’s hot mineral waters provided the initial impetus for hotel and resort development
in the City, and have continued to be an identifying characteristic of the community. The City’s
hotels range from the modest family-run facility to the world-class Two Bunch Palms Resort,
representing a very wide market potential to be exploited. The City is uniquely positioned to
cultivate these resources for enhanced economic development. Currently the City has 970 hotel
rooms, which have generated the following revenue trend shown in the table below.
                                                      III-133

                                                                             TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                              General Plan/Economic Development Element
                                            Table III-37
                                 Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT)
                                        Desert Hot Springs
                       Fiscal Year                  Total TOT Collected
                    1987-88                               $368,272
                    1991-92                               $471,186
                    1992-93                               $382,114
                    1993-94                               $451,682
                    1994-95                               $492,587
                    1995-96                               $548,235
                    1996-97                               $533,758
                    1997-98                               $597,620
                    1998-99                               $600,000
                    Source: City of Desert Hot Springs Annual Budgets and Finance
                    Department.
Traveler-based revenues are nearly non-existent for the City, due to the distance between
regional roadways and the City’s commercial district. The City’s lack of highway-serving
commercial development either along Interstate-10 or Highway 62 should be a priority of any
future economic development strategy. A similar focus should also be applied to the Indian
Avenue corridor. The City may consider a more aggressive approach in facilitating development
of highway-serving commercial along Highway 62.
While plans have been approved for major development along Highway 62, the City has been
unable to extend its incorporated boundaries south to the interstate. Major annexation efforts
along the Palm Drive corridor have met with substantial resistance. However, other opportunities
that may be more successful include the expansion of the city limits to the northeast corner of
Interstate-10 and Indian Avenue, which is in the City Sphere-of-Influence. An aggressive and
well-orchestrated annexation effort in this direction could yield important short-term and long-
term benefits from accessing this substantial drive-by market. This area also includes a
substantial nucleus of industrial development that could be cultivated and expanded.
                                                III-134

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                          General Plan/Economic Development Element
Hotel/Motel Trends
While the City is well known for its hot mineral waters and unique desert environment, there are
much larger domestic and foreign markets to develop. In addition to the growing appreciation for
“taking the waters” in the United States, in Europe and Asia this tradition goes back centuries
and millennia. No other community in the Coachella Valley has this unique resource, which can
be expanded through effective marketing and through the development and redevelopment of the
City’s spa hotels. Some of the City’s hotels are obsolete and several are being converted into
senior care and “single room occupancy” facilities.
The development of new spa hotel facilities with all of the amenities expected today in quality
resorts should also be encouraged. The City has made major investments in promoting the hot
mineral water resource and its origins, and these efforts should be joined with those of the
Hotelier’s Association, the Palm Springs Desert Communities Convention and Visitors Bureau
and others to market the City on all fronts.
Open Space: A Valuable Economic Resource
In the past decade, natural resources and open space lands have become increasingly important
attractions for the traveling and vacationing public. The expanded interest in eco-tourism
provides an important opportunity for the City. The community has a unique potential, due to its
location, to promote itself as the “Entrance to the Coachella Valley” and now, with the Long
Canyon Trailhead, to also cultivate an image as a “Gateway to the Joshua Tree National Park”.
The City and the immediate vicinity also have other important and marketable natural resource
areas, including the Morongo Canyon Preserve, the BLM’s Devil’s Garden, County Ecological
Preserve, Willow Hole Preserve, the Coachella Valley Preserve and other unique natural
resource areas. This emerging market may offer important opportunities to the City, and
complement the character and values of the community.
Tourism and Gaming Opportunities
A variety of new and emerging trends in tourism may provide important opportunities for
economic development. In addition to the growing interest in hot mineral spas and holistic
therapies, there has been a tremendous growth in legalized gaming. While most of this
development has taken place on Indian Reservations and in Nevada, several California cities,
including Desert Hot Springs, have enacted ordinances to permit gaming. The City should pro-
actively encourage the use of existing and appropriate future permits that allow the City to
exploit this market, consistent with the community’s values and character.
                                             III-135

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                            General Plan/Economic Development Element
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT
Industrial Park Development Criteria
Industrial park development criteria include economic as well as social needs. Physical factors,
including location and environmental constraints and opportunities, are essential parameters. So,
too, are the social, technological, and community design standards supportable by industry.
Commodity and resource issues, including the availability of an appropriate labor force, water
and the cost of energy, are also important measures of site suitability.
Industrial developers generally rely on the following factors: materials, labor, market,
transportation, energy, and public policy. Added to these should be the less concrete notion of an
attractive location, quality design and community context, important intangibles by which
location decisions are also made. Each of these considerations is briefly discussed below.
Materials
The relative importance of the availability of manufacturing materials varies greatly from one
industry to the next. Instances where low value/high volume commodities are essential, and the
high markup associated with transporting commodities may adversely affect the cost-
competitiveness of the operation. Hence the close physical relationship between agricultural
industries and the commodities that supports them. In contrast, many manufacturing processes
relying on large volumes of feed stock deliverable in equally high volumes, such as polymer
resins, and the high value added through processing or manufacturing make materials availability
less critical to siting decisions.
Labor
The labor needs of industry vary greatly. High technology industries, including computer chip
manufacturing, machine tool operations, chemical/bio-chemical/bio-medical and other complex
industrial processes typically require highly skilled labor. However, associated industries, such
as electronics or medical technology assembly may be able to take advantage of semi-skilled
labor. In contrast, many other operations can either make do with a less sophisticated labor force
or rely on greatly automated operations. Automation has been pervading most industries and has
resulted in greatly increased per capita production. A sufficiently large and reasonably well-
educated labor force may allow industry to train and develop skills that meet its needs.
Markets
Markets range from the business or consumer next door, to those located in Europe or Asia.
Industries that support local or regional markets may have a competitive advantage being located
within or adjacent to these markets. For instance, supermarket warehousing/distribution
operations are typically located close in to their markets, while high value high technology
operations can be located anywhere, other operational constraints permitting.
Generally, the more widely distributed an industry’s market, the less critical is that operation’s
location, assuming transportation criteria are otherwise satisfied. If manufacturers support other
industrial operations, for instance box, bottle or plastic container manufacturers supporting
consumer product companies, their ability to cost-competitively provide these support services
may require their location close to their primary customers.
                                               III-136

                                                                              TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                               General Plan/Economic Development Element
Transportation
The ability to cost-effectively transport raw or manufacturing materials, as well as finished
product, is an essential part of market competitiveness. An integral part of these criteria is the
interstate highway system, and access to land or air shipping facilities. Potentially important in
this regard is access to air cargo facilities at regional, national, and international airports.
Industry-serving “airparks” cater to firms producing small-sized, lightweight and high value
products that can be cost-effectively shipped by air. Many high technology industries are
effectively served by locations at or near airports.
Energy/Utilities
In the past two decades, energy and utility costs have become an increasingly important factor in
industry cost-competitiveness. Many industries generate large electricity and natural gas
demands. As costs of energy have risen since the oil embargo of the early 1970s, industry has
shifted much of its manufacturing capacity to the sunbelt where energy costs and annual
heating/cooling loads are less. These regional differentials have somewhat evened out.
Nonetheless, even within a limited area, the cost of some energy resources can vary substantially
with suppliers having monopolies (districts) within close proximity. In the present case, the
seasonally high cooling loads and the varying demand for different types of energy will impact
the cost-competitiveness of industries differently. Water resources and wastewater treatment
facilities are also important to industrial operations in varying degrees. Currently (1997), the City
industrial park lack sewers and natural gas.
Public Policy
Social factors are sometimes overlooked as a consideration or criteria in siting industrial
operations. However, the social or community makeup can enhance or deter industrial
development, depending on the social goals of the community. These goals are made manifest in
the community’s social, land use, and economic development policies, which may value selected
integration of industrial development, or constitute a total opposition to industry in general. It is
clear that master planned industrial parks fare far better and perform as a more smoothly
integrated part of the urban land use pattern. A more simple and less controlled land use
assignment approach can lead to inefficient use of industrial lands and increase the potential for
significant land use incompatibilities.
Location and Development Context
In addition to the more pragmatic location considerations discussed above, more and more
important is the desire to locate operations in a well-designed and well-located industrial park.
Prominent sites with attractive entries, landscaping, and thoughtfully designed buildings, which
can be seen by the traveling public, constitute an important form of free advertising. More
industrial interests are concerned with projecting a high profile, progressive and forward thinking
public image. As nothing succeeds like success, well-conceived and aesthetically designed parks
attract quality users initially and set a standard for other users to emulate.
Industrial Market: Inland Empire Regional Summary
In recent years, the Inland Empire region has continued to see strength, especially when
compared to other Southern California markets, with a reduction in vacancy of industrial space.
                                                 III-137

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                            General Plan/Economic Development Element
After five years in the doldrums, healthy demand has been keeping lease rates for the largest
facilities quite strong. More than two million square feet of industrial space was under
construction in the region in 1995, with many facilities in the 100,000 square foot range and
larger. The area of highest activity was focused around the Ontario Airport. The addition of
nearly 13,000 jobs in 1995, a 1.6% increase, has made the Inland Empire a leader in the region’s
return to growth.
The region is expected to see a population increase of 440,000 in the 1995-2000 timeframe and
this growth is expected to continue to create a favorable labor market and to fuel continued
industrial development. Warehousing and distribution uses are expected to continue to dominate
demand for space, exploiting the substantial transportation nexus of air cargo, rail, and trucking
routes. Adaptive re-use of military facilities at Norton and March Air Force Bases are also
expected to bolster this market and make it attractive for additional advantageous and cost-
effective industrial development.
The Inland Empire region is still considered the low cost housing alternative in Southern
California, and the local economy is largely consumer-driven. The trend is continuing to be
upbeat, and double-digit percentage increases in absorption of industrial space are expected to
drive lease and sale prices upward through the rest of the decade.
Coachella Valley Industrial Park Development
Industrial park development in the Coachella Valley is more of a mixed affair, with the exception
of the agri-business sector dominating the rail sidings and nearby lands in Indio and Coachella.
Even in these instances, there is only limited use of rail service in these areas. A lumber
wholesaler also receives shipments via rail.
Results of a 1995 survey, while not comprehensive, provide an additional perspective of the state
of the industrial real estate market in the Coachella Valley. A total of 581 business
establishments were identified and recorded within industrial parks from Palm Springs to
Coachella. The survey indicates that service industries (insurance, realtors, tax/ financial
advisors, etc.) comprise more than one-third (37%) of the users, with contractors and
construction companies comprising about 20%, and being a distant second. These are followed
by automotive repair/parts with 12% and the balance of users comprising less than 5% each.
It is clear that the non-agricultural portion of the Coachella Valley industrial real estate reflects
the general services/business district character of the region. Non-agricultural industrial
development is highly dependent upon construction and service users and less on manufacturing
serving a regional, national or international market.
City Industrial Development
Industrial development brings stable and generally higher paying jobs to a community, and can
induce development in a variety of secondary or support industries. To date, industrial
development has been quite limited and has failed to exploit the many advantages that industrial
lands in the City provide. Land costs are low and are available in lot sizes ranging from a few too
many acres. Industrial lands are well serviced with infrastructure and are located along major
arterial roadways, have convenient access to major regional transportation links, and are the
                                                III-138

                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                             General Plan/Economic Development Element
closest Coachella Valley industrial sites to the San Bernardino/Riverside and Los Angeles
markets.
Regional industrial markets that may be attracted to City industrial sites include wind turbine and
electrical power equipment, medical supplies and technologies, as well as solar power and other
alternative energy manufacturers. A wide range of associated businesses, including machining,
plastic fabrication, component assembly and other support industries may also be attracted to
these sites.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The City must implement goals and policies which are designed to balance the ratio of housing
to jobs, to promote economic activities in both commercial and industrial sectors, and to
encourage the balanced and managed growth of the community.
The City of Desert Hot Springs Redevelopment Agency and established redevelopment project
areas must be one area of focused utilization. The funds allocated for redevelopment activities
within these designated areas can be used for tax increment financing, lot consolidation,
participation in development and off-site improvements, and other forms of financial and
regulatory assistance to further economic development goals. The development projects of the
Redevelopment Agency will help revitalize blighted areas, and promote the City’s important
economic resources.
The implementation of the goals of this Element can also take place through adherence to the
Land Use Element, which balances land uses, avoids incompatibilities and assures that land
divisions result in optimal lot sizes for residential, commercial and industrial development. The
Element is also implemented through the City Zoning Ordinance, which should assure that
development is complementary with the goals and policies of the Economic Development
Element.
Economic Development Strategy
Essential programs of this element describe the preparation and implementation of an Economic
Development Program. This strategy and implementation plan must respond to the many new
economic imperatives that face the City of Desert Hot Springs. With the national recession, the
City’s economy has generally slowed over the past few years, yet the regional economy has
generally continued to grow. The broader economic environment in the Coachella Valley
continues to evolve and may further limit the near and long-term economic development options
available to Desert Hot Springs.
Economic development opportunities are driven by an inherent logic based on an understanding
of market conditions, trends, costs of land and infrastructure, physical information on
development areas, and incentive programs available to business prospects. Exploiting
opportunities requires an ability to effectively communicate the advantageous market conditions
and the ability and willingness of the City to facilitate development.
                                                III-139

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                            General Plan/Economic Development Element
The City of Desert Hot Springs, with a viable Redevelopment Agency and reputation as a
mineral spa resort and residential community, is committed to revitalizing and redeveloping its
downtown business district, which focuses on the Palm Drive corridor. The City has also
recently (1992) annexed economically important lands and has the opportunity to broaden its
economic base in a focused, targeted and effective manner.
General Strategy
The economic development program and strategies must leverage the resources and capabilities
of the City and act to coordinate and integrate staff of City departments, the Chamber of
Commerce, Hoteliers Association and other parties of interest. The strategy must be based on a
detailed work program of quantified objectives, and allocate resources that maximize concrete
results. Programmed in a somewhat linear or sequential manner, the strategy should not preclude
and can actually facilitate taking advantage of economic development opportunities that arise in
the near-term.
The market and development needs of each business sector should be defined, and programs that
specifically address each market sector’s needs prepared and implemented. Market segment
analysis should incorporate local business/customer/resident experience and perspective into the
process and lend local insight and expertise to the marketing effort.
In order to pursue this strategy, a variety of resources must be developed and analyzed to identify
prospects in each target market. These include tapping the expansion potential of local service,
retail and restaurant businesses, and those based in California and the west. Various business and
economic development networks should also be exploited, ranging from county and state
resources and agencies, to prospects identified through national industry and business
associations. Research taking advantage of governmental and private sector computer databases
will also uncover a great number of business and development prospects in all target segments.
Advance Technology: The City Web Page
The City’s Web site is one of the most important and cost-effective tools available for interested
parties to access information on the community and its economic development efforts. Internet
and WEB technologies are now easy to use and offer an inexpensive and rapidly growing
communications channel for City marketing and economic development. The Web page can
include color photos or video clips of resorts, parks and residential subdivisions, mountains and
other City resources and amenities.
The Web page should also “hot link” the viewer to other Web pages, such as those established by
City hotels and other businesses and information services. Within a short period of time, many of
even the smaller businesses will have Web pages that can be “hot-linked” with the City’s “Home
Page”. The Web page should also be used by the City to allow prospective land and business
developers to peruse demographic data on the City and the region, or review maps of privately or
City-assembled lands available for negotiation and development.
Retail Trade Focus
An essential measure of the community’s economic health is its taxable sales potential and the
percentage of that potential captured by the City. Further development of the economic
                                                 III-140

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                            General Plan/Economic Development Element
development strategy should include focused research in retail trade, as well as assessment of the
professional office, institutional, and industrial components of the local economy.
As a better understanding of local conditions and opportunities develops, the next step will
involve an analysis of the City’s vacant and under-utilized properties. This should include lots to
be mapped within the Redevelopment Project Areas, and lot consolidation concepts
complementing potential marketing opportunities. Lotting patterns and development planning in
the City’s industrial area should also be assessed.
Development opportunities and constraints must be identified and addressed. Property profiles
should be prepared, utilizing readily available mapping and other graphic resources, along with
land use and other regulatory conditions. Incentive programs and strategies, marketing
information/publication and distribution, business assistance services, and strategic planning
should also be established. Occasional public/Agency workshops should follow the consolidated
strategic planning document that is ready to guide implementation.
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT GOALS, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
GOAL 1
A broadly based, healthy and balanced economy that provides a full range of economic and
employment opportunities.
GOAL 2
Continued growth, which assures the maintenance of a revenue, base adequate to support present
and future public services and facilities needs.
Policy 1
Establish and maintain the City’s role as an important commercial center serving the Desert Hot
Springs area and the upper Coachella Valley.
Program 1 A
Prepare and implement a detailed economic development program that includes strategies to
promote multi-pronged commercial expansion, and which markets to residents of surrounding
communities, and also services the vacationing tourist and traveling public.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Policy 2
Actively solicit employment and revenue generating development, including resort, commercial
and industrial projects compatible and consistent with the City’s General Plan.
                                                 III-141

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                            General Plan/Economic Development Element
Program 2 A
Utilizing the City Economic Development Program, development and implement strategies,
which actively promote and facilitate resort, commercial and industrial developments and
revitalization projects that generate employment opportunities and contribute to City General
Fund revenues.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Policy 3
Encourage and facilitate the development of the tourist/traveler commercial potential of the U.S.
Interstate-10, State Highway 62 and Indian Avenue corridors, the California Desert Conservation
Area, Joshua Tree National Park and the Greater Coachella Valley area.
Program 3 A
Establish and implement strategies that gain and/or expand City access to the I-10 and Highway
62 corridors, and actively promote development of functionally planned and attractive
commercial service facilities to capture a share of these drive-by markets.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Program 3 B
Actively coordinate and cooperate with the Chamber of Commerce, Hoteliers Association, and
appropriate county, state and federal agencies in promoting City-based access to the Joshua Tree
National Park, Morongo Canyon Preserve and Desert Hot Springs desert resources as destination
recreation areas.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Chamber of Commerce; Hoteliers
Association; Riverside County; State Resources Agency; U.S. Department of the Interior
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Policy 4
Encourage and promote protection and conservation of domestic water resources and stable and
orderly growth in permanent and seasonal households within the community.
Program 4 A
Coordinate with the Mission Springs Water District, Desert Water Agency and Coachella Valley
Water District to maximize the availability of safe and plentiful domestic water resources, as ell
as sewage collection and treatment, to allow for continued economic development.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; MSWD, CVWD, DWA
Schedule: Immediate; Annual review.
Policy 5
Assure sufficient infrastructure and capital facilities in order to maintain existing economic
activities and attract new resort, commercial businesses and industries to the City.
                                               III-142
                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                             General Plan/Economic Development Element
Program 5 A
Plan and coordinate the provision of major infrastructure through the development/updating and
implementation of master capital facilities plans that address and enhance resort, commercial and
industrial development needs.
Responsible Agency: Public Works Department; MSWD; CVWD; Community Development
Department; CalTrans; County Flood Control;
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Program 5 B
All development interests, including residential, resort, commercial and industrial project
proponents, shall be responsible for their fair share of on-site and off-site improvements required
to support the development proposal. Improvements required may include, but are not limited to,
street construction and signalization, utility extensions, drainage facilities, parks and other
facilities.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; City Council
Schedule: Immediate, Continuous.
Program 5 C
Cooperate with CalTrans to maximize the efficient use of roadway and interchange capacity on
State Highways 62 and U.S. Interstate-10.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; CalTrans
Schedule: Immediate, Continuous.
Policy 6
Preserve and enhance the community’s marketable and unique qualities through thoughtful
redevelopment and control of new development, protecting and enhancing the desert character of
the community.
Program 6 A
Encourage the maintenance and/or rehabilitation of older residential and commercial
neighborhoods to enhance the quality of neighborhood character and the general quality of life
and level of commercial service in the community.
Responsible Agency: Redevelopment Agency; Community Development Department; City
Council
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Program 6 B
Prepare a Master Plan for the redevelopment of Pierson Boulevard and Palm Drive which
focuses on the preservation and enhancement of this important central business district, the
analysis of existing and future residential land uses within the commercial designation, and the
creation of a strategy for economic revitalization for the area.
Responsible Agency: Redevelopment Agency
Schedule: 2001-2002
                                                III-143

                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                             General Plan/Economic Development Element
Policy 7
Adopt and implement plans and development guidelines, which encourage and enhance quality
development and renovation in the downtown area, and along the Highway 62 and Interstate-10
corridors.
Program 7 A
Actively pursue and, where appropriate, participate in the development of commercial and
industrial projects, which take advantage of existing major roadways, including but not limited to
Palm Drive, State Highways 62 and Interstate-10.
Responsible Agency: Redevelopment Agency; Community Development Department; Public
Works Department; City Council
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Program 7 B
Encourage new commercial development in the downtown area to also explore and consider the
incorporation of residential units.
Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department; Re-Development Agency; City
Council; Planning Commission.
Schedule: Immediate, Continuous.
Program 7 C
Assure development and implementation of Specific Plans that maximize the efficient use of
vacant and partially developed commercial lands and assure development of a mix of
complimentary land uses.
Responsible Agency: City Redevelopment Agency; Community Development Department; City
Council; Private Developers
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Program 7 D
Develop and implement a Community Design Element and Zoning Ordinance, which establish
development codes, standards and guidelines that provide adequate flexibility while assuring
quality planning and design in all development, consistent with the City’s valued desert
environment.
Responsible Agency: City Redevelopment Agency; Community Development Department;
City Council
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Policy 8
Develop and utilize a comprehensive community economic profile, which clearly states the
City’s conditions and establishes goals for future levels of development and economic activity.
Program 8 A
As an integral part of the Economic Development Program, prepare a community economic
profile which shall be used to pro-actively promote all types of development that will enhance
                                               III-144

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                            General Plan/Economic Development Element
the City’s existing desert character and support economic growth and employment opportunities
within the community.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Redevelopment Agency; City
Council; Chamber of Commerce
Schedule: 2000-2001; Continuous.
Policy 9
Work to promote net annual increases in local household incomes for all socio-economic sectors
of the community.
Program 9 A
Through all applicable policies and programs, the City shall pro-actively promote improved
employment opportunities for all socio-economic sectors, and especially lower-income
households within the community, to increase average household and discretionary incomes.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; County Economic development
Agency; California Economic Development Department; Redevelopment Agency; Chamber of
Commerce
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Policy 11
Make every effort to expedite the processing of development proposals, which address the
economic development goals of the community and take the initiative to incubate new programs
and projects.
Program 11 A
Streamline and expedite the development review process through concurrent processing of
applications and facilitating parallel tracking design review and the building permit process
without sacrificing quality development.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Public Works Department;
Redevelopment Agency: City Council
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Policy 12
Encourage and promote special events, activities and uses, which strengthen and promote the
City’s image, prestige and attractiveness as a resort and tourist/visitor destination.
Program 12 A
Promote unique or special events/uses/activities which will enhance the area’s image as a tourist
resort and desert recreation area, which may include appropriately located trailheads to parks and
open space areas, RV parks, fairgrounds, BLM campgrounds, Jeep Tours, Equestrian Centers
and Iron Eyes Cody Days and similar planned events and uses.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Chamber of Commerce
Schedule: Immediate, Continuous.
                                               III-145

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                          General Plan/Economic Development Element
Policy 13
The City shall promote and/or develop programs, which enhance the City’s new role as a
“Gateway to Joshua Tree National Park” and other open space resource areas, and encourage the
expansion of associated tourist/traveler revenues.
Program 13 A
Coordinate with National Park Service staff, Chamber of Commerce, BLM, The Nature
Conservancy and other appropriate entities to develop and promote events which will attract
tourists to such City open space resources the Morongo Preserve and the Park for hiking,
camping, horseback riding and to appropriate annual festivals and other activities.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Chamber of Commerce; National
Park staff; BLM; The Nature Conservancy
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Program 13 B
Pro-actively plan, consult and cooperate with National Park Service and BLM staff to promote
Long Canyon as a major entryway to Joshua Tree National Park.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Chamber of Commerce; National
Park Service; BLM
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
                                              III-146

                                                                                       TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                                                         General Plan
            CITY OF DESERT HOT SPRINGS
       COMPREHENSIVE GENERAL PLAN
                                                CHAPTER IV
                                   ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES
This chapter of the General Plan discusses the environmental resources of the City and surrounding areas. The
elements addressed in this chapter include Biological Resources, Archaeological and Historic Resources, Water
Resources, Air Quality, Open Space and Conservation, and Energy and Mineral Resources. The City of Desert Hot
Springs has substantial environmental resources, which contribute to the quality of life for City residents and attract
a significant tourist trade. This chapter addresses the importance of and need for conservation of these valued
resources.
                                                        IV
                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                               General Plan/Biological Resources Element
BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
PURPOSE
The purpose of the Biological Resources Element is to identify the important and valuable
biological resources occurring within Desert Hot Springs and surrounding area. The Element
establishes goals, policies and programs to utilize and conserve these resources for the benefit of
the entire community. The Element is intended to provide a basis for understanding biological
resource issues, references other sources of information that guide decision makers in regulating
land use and development, while protecting these critical community resources.
BACKGROUND
Several other elements of the General Plan have a direct or indirect relationship to the Biological
Resources Element, including the Land Use Element, Open Space and Conservation Element and
the Community Design Element. It is also related to Arts and Culture and Parks and Recreation
Elements, reflecting the community’s enjoyment of and commitment to its wildlife resources.
Local biological resources, and the desert environment generally, have also proven important
market assets for Desert Hot Springs, which has adopted the desert environment as a central
community theme. In this regard, the Biological Resources Element may influence and
contribute to the effective implementation of conservation, community design and economic
development goals, policies and programs.
Cities and counties in California are required by Government Code Section 65302 (d) to include
an element that addresses the conservation or preservation of wildlife resources in their General
Plan. State law also requires that the element and supporting documentation provide inventories
of natural vegetation, fish and wildlife and their habitat, including rare and endangered species.
Consistent with requirements, this element includes goals, policies and programs, as well as
plans and resource maps showing areas important to the preservation of plant and animal life,
including habitat for fish and wildlife species, and areas required for ecological and scientific
study purposes. Programs, which act to assure the preservation of biological resources, are also
included.
The Desert Hot Springs city limits and Sphere-of-Influence (SOI) encompass lands located near
the western end of the Salton Trough, a fault-controlled valley basin with expansive and varying
geography and habitats, and the complexity of various transition zones, which make the region a
rich resource area. The city limits and SOI include lands owned and/or managed by the City,
state and federal agencies. The community and the vicinity comprise one of the most biologically
unique and diverse regions in the country.
The San Jacinto, San Bernardino and Santa Rosa Mountains effectively isolate the greater
Coachella Valley region from the moderating coastal influences to the west. As a result, the City
is located in one of the hottest and driest parts of the country. Distinguished by its elevation on
major alluvial plains of the Little San Bernardino and San Bernardino Mountains, the City enjoys
mild winters and extreme aridity; only Death Valley is subject to more extreme conditions.
                                                IV - 1

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                              General Plan/Biological Resources Element
Desert Hot Springs is located at the northwestern extension of the Salton Trough and the
Colorado sub-unit of the Sonoran Desert.
The desert floor supports sparse vegetation limited by heat and aridity. However, the climate of
the City and region becomes milder with increasing elevation and supports more vegetation,
including as many as nine species of cacti and a variety of woody plants such as palo verde and
smoke tree, and many herbaceous plants. Canyons and springs support native fan palm
communities and a wide variety of other plants and animals. The various habitat types supported
in Desert Hot Springs and their importance are briefly discussed below.
In the City of Desert Hot Springs and surrounding lands, and within the context of the General
Plan, the Biological Resource Element plays a pivotal role in defining the character of the
community. The varied and unique geographic and geophysical conditions have created an
environment for many diverse and occasionally highly specialized communities of plants and
animals, occupying equally varied ecological niches.
COMMUNITY WILDLIFE HABITATS
Biological resources do not occur in isolation, but are found in and are a part of a habitat, an
ecological system or network of interrelationships between living things and their physical
environment. Habitat values are controlled by tolerable climate, a varied terrain, adequate space,
a dependable food and water supply, soils for healthy plant growth, and shelter and nesting sites.
An animal may live across habitat lines to meet all of its needs. A total of 194 plant species have
been positively identified in the planning area and their varying mix provide differing habitat for
a wide range of birds, animals and insects.
Sonoran Desert Creosote Community
Dune and Sand Field Habitat
The southern-most portion of the planning area comprises the edge of the valley floor, and
generally extends from Interstate-10 northward to the vicinity of Dillon Road. This area is
dominated by habitats comprised of shifting, windblown sand supporting sparse vegetation. The
most common plant community found here in these desert dunes and sand fields is the Sonoran
Desert creosote bush scrub, which includes creosote bush, burro bush, brittlebush and desert
Brickellia. Three separate sub-communities comprise this community, including active but
primarily stabilized and partially stabilized sand dunes, and stabilized and partially stabilized
desert sand fields (south of Dillon Road).
These aeolian or blowsand habitats are critical to a number of special-status wildlife and plant
species, including the Coachella Valley Fringe-toed lizard, the flat-tailed horned lizard, flat-
seeded spurge and the Coachella Valley milk vetch. Active desert dunes are areas of actively
moving sand with little or no vegetation or moisture, while stabilized and partially stabilized
desert dunes retain more moisture just below the surface and support varying amounts of
vegetation, ranging from scattered low-growing annuals and perennial grasses to evergreen and
deciduous shrubs. Stabilized and partially stabilized sand fields are accumulations of desert sand
not in a dune formation, where vegetation ranges widely from scattered herbs and shrubs to
                                               IV - 2
                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                               General Plan/Biological Resources Element
nearly enclosed canopy of shrubs such as dune mesquite. All of these communities are dependent
upon active sand transport. This collection of communities has experienced limited impact from
urbanization in the planning area.
Alluvial Plains Habitat
Nearly all of the Desert Hot Springs planning area consists of alluvial plain habitats occurring on
flood-formed fans and bajadas, which extend from canyon mouths to the desert floor. In the
planning area these habitat are formed by a variety of mountain drainages, including Long
Canyon, Little and Big Morongo Canyons, Blind Canyon, Mission Creek and smaller canyons
forming alluvial fans, terraces and washes. The surface and habitat conditions change on these
plains with increasing distance downslope from canyon mouths.
Plants of the alluvial plain habitat are generally typical of the Colorado Desert and include
upslope extensions of creosote bush joined by species of cacti and a variety of woody and
herbaceous plants. The habitat’s many species of annuals can make up more than half of the
plain’s flora. Cacti are one of the most striking of the plain’s plants, ranging from flat-stemmed
species such as of the beavertail to the stately California (fire) barrel cactus. Other cactus
occurring here include Teddy-bear and diamond and golden cholla, hedgehog cactus, and
fishhook and nipple cacti. Shrubs and sub-shrubs in this community include brittlebush or
encilia, burrobush, apricot mallow, indigo bush, jojoba, New Mexico ditaxis and desert lavender.
Larger woody shrubs also occurring here include the palo verde, Fremont cottonwood and desert
willow.
Sandy Wash Habitat
The extensive alluvial plain habitat of the planning area has been created by the extensive and
largely uncontrolled drainages and sandy wash areas can support a richer array of plants and
wildlife. As washes emerge from canyon mouths they cut a channel into the alluvial plain, which
broadens and branches out into intertwined or braided washes. The largest desert washes in the
planning area include Mission Creek which drains large areas of the San Bernardino Mountains,
Big and Little Morongo Washes, and Long Canyon Wash. Limited channelization and control
has been constructed in these and smaller drainage, which still harbor a variety of plants and
wildlife. Many of these habitat areas are regularly disturbed and/or eliminated in the course of
periodic channel maintenance and major storm events.
A wide variety of species occupy the sandy washes but only a limited number are consistently
associated with this habitat, with trees and large shrubs accounting for many of the characteristic
                                                IV - 3

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                              General Plan/Biological Resources Element
species. Palo verde, with its green trunk and branches, typically dominates desert wash habitat
but is limited in the planning area. Cat-claw is also typical residents of the sandy wash habitat.
Smoketree, a member of the pea family, is more common and has been encouraged in areas
scoured by storm runoff. Honey mesquite and cat’s claw are also common in these habitat.
Common shrubs and sub-shrubs include chuparosa, cheesebush, sweetbush, desert lavender,
dyeweed, New Mexico ditaxis, sandpaper plant and bladderpod. The absence of certain shallow
rooted species, particularly cacti, is due to their easy removal by stormwaters and their slow
growth rate and re-establishment.
Desert Fan Palm Oasis Woodland
Limited but important examples of the desert fan palm oasis woodland are found in the City
planning area. It is a plant community that has been given special status as one of the highest
inventory priority by the California Department of Fish and Game. In the Coachella Valley, the
palm oasis woodland is characterized by open to dense groves of native desert fan palms
(Washingtonia filifera) that can grow to more than 50 feet. Two impressive examples of this
plant community occur within the Two Bunch Palms Resort and at the Seven Palms Valley
Ranch. Other species expected to be found in association with the fan palm oasis include
arrowweed, willows, rushes and mulefat.
A variety of wildlife are also frequently associated with the desert fan palm community,
including the western yellow bat, common kingsnake, desert slender salamander, California
treefrog, hooded oriel, Cooper’s hawk, golden eagle, prairie falcon, Least Bell’s vireo, common
flicker, carpenter bee and the giant palm boring beetle. This large beetle is responsible for the
majority of the damage to these woodlands.
Upland and Rocky Slopes Habitat
Upland areas in the western portion of the planning area and rock slopes occurring within and
near the planning area are associated with the elevated alluvial fans and foothills of the San
Bernardino and Little San Bernardino Mountains, which extend from the edge of alluvial plains
to an elevation of about 800 meters.
The alluvian uplands are primarily composed of the Sonoran mixed wood and succulent scrub
habitat community, which includes a substantial dominance of cacti and other stem succulents
and by shrubs similar in aspect to Sonoran Creosote scrub. This community is found largely on
                                               IV - 4

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                               General Plan/Biological Resources Element
rocky, well-drained slopes and alluvial fans usually between 300 and 1,200 meters. This habitat
type has been identified on lands immediately east of Mission Lakes Country Club and on lands
west of Highway 62 and generally north of Pierson Boulevard.
The rocky slope habitat is typified by unrelieved rock, weathered and fractured as exposed
bedrock and ranging to broken and displaced material as loose debris of stone, pebbles and sand.
While vegetation appears deceivingly sparse, this habitat supports a large number of perennials
and annual species. Plant size and densities increase with elevation and associated increases in
annual rainfall.
Common perennials include creosote bush, brittlebush, burrobush and agave. Agave is a
particularly striking plant with a compact basal rosette of large succulent leaves that send up a
single central flower-bearing stalk bearing yellow flowers and reaching a height of more than 20
feet. Flowers are produced only once in the plant’s life, which dies soon after flowering. Ocotillo
are also common in this habitat, as are spike moss, Parry’s cloak fern, arrowleaf, pygmy cedar,
bushy cryptantha, bedstraw, rush pea and crossosoma. The tall ocotillo is a special plant with a
unique growth form with unusual branched stems topped by bright red flower bracts once and
sometimes twice a year. Annuals may occur in an unevenly distributed pattern, with those of the
greatest relative abundance including wooly plantain, crenulate phacelia, rock daisy and
cryptantha. A wide variety of other annuals occur in unique and condition-specific areas within
the rocky slope habitat.
Willow Hole/Edom Hill ACEC
The Willow Hole/Edom Hill Area of Critical Environmental Concern (ACEC) is located
immediately southeast of the City’s Sphere-of-Influence (SOI) and is an important preserve for
the Coachella Valley Fringe-toed lizard and other sensitive species. Its unique mix of habitat
communities is created by a high groundwater table from diking caused by the San Andreas
Fault, which is also responsible for the elevated terrain of Edom Hill and the Indio Hills. It is
comprised of shifting sand dunes, mesquite thickets, palm oases and sand fields that provide
important habitat for nesting and foraging birds, a variety of mammals, lizards and invertebrates.
The City’s southern SOI area is an upwind extension of the sand dunes and plains making up
much of this habitat.
Sensitive, Rare and Endangered Species
The Desert Hot Springs General Plan study area is
host to a wide variety of sensitive plant and animal
species, some of which have been listed as threatened
or endangered by the state and federal governments.
Animals listed as "threatened" are those whose
numbers have dropped to such low levels, and/or
whose populations are so isolated that the
continuation of the species could be jeopardized.
"Endangered" species are those with such limited                        Desert Tortoise
numbers or subject to extreme circumstances that the
extinction is a real possibility. The following table lists some of the sensitive species known or
likely to occur within the planning area.
                                               IV - 5

                                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                            General Plan/Biological Resources Element
                                                     Table IV-11
                                Desert Hot Springs Species of Special Concern
   Animal and Plant Species                           (Latin Name)                                               Status
   Animals
   Coachella Valley Fringe-toed lizard                (Uma inornata)                                              FT/SE
   Desert tortoise                                    (Gopherus agassizii)                                        FT/ST
   Flat-tailed horned lizard                          (Phrynosoma mcallii)                                      ND/FPS
   Common chuckwalla                                  (Sauromalus obesus)                                       ND/ND
   Golden eagle                                       (Aquila/chrysaetos)                                      ND/CSC
   Prairie falcon                                     (Falco mexicanus)                                        ND/CSC
   Peregrine falcon                                   (Falco peregrinatus)                                        FE/SE
   Burrowing owl                                      (Speotyto cunicularia)                                   ND/CSC
   Southwestern willow flycatcher                     (Empidonax trailii extimus)                                 FE/SE
   Least Bell’s vireo                                 (Vireo bellii pusillus)                                     FE/SE
   California leaf-nosed bat                          (Macrotis californicus)                                  ND/CSC
   Spotted bat                                        (Euderma maculatum)                                      ND/CSC
   California mastiff bat                             (Eumops perotis californicus)                            ND/CSC
   Palm Springs ground squirrel                       (Spermophilus tereticaudus)                              ND/CSC
   Palm Springs little pocket mouse                   (Onychomys torridus ssp. ramona)                          ND/ND
   Peninsular bighorn sheep                           (Ovis canadensis cremnobates)                               FE/ST
   Coachella giant sand-treader cricket               (Macrobaenetes valgum)                                    ND/ND
   Coachella Valley Jerusalem cricket                 (Stenopelmatus cahuilaensis)                              ND/ND
   Crissal thrasher                                   (Toxostoma crissale)                                     ND/CSC
   Le Conte’s thasher                                 (Toxostoma lecontei)                                     ND/CSC
   Yellow Warbler                                     (Dendroixa petechia brewsteri)                           ND/CSC
   Plants
   California ditaxis                                 (Ditaxis californica)                                      FC/ND
   Coachella Valley milk-vetch                        (Astragalus lentiginosus var. Coachellae)                  FE/ND
   Triple-ribbed milk-vetch                           (Astragalus tricarinatus)                                  FE/ND
   Little San Bernardino Mts Gilia                    (Gilia maculata)                                          FC/ ND
   Desert fan palm oasis woodland                                                                              ND / ND
                                                Status Definitions:
   FE: Federally listed as “Endangered”                                         FT: Federally listed as “Threatened”
   FPE: Federally proposed or petitioned as “Endangered”                        ST: State listed as “Threatened”
   SE: State listed as “Endangered”                                             ND: Species not designated
   CSC: California Species of Special Concern                                   FPS: Fully Protected Species
   FC: Federal Candidate Species for Listing. Designation dropped in 1996 by the US Fish & Wildlife Service.
1. Please see the General Plan EIR and Associated Biological Resource Assessment for a comprehensive listing of
   sensitive species and communities.
                                                         IV - 6

                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                General Plan/Biological Resources Element
Both "rare" and "sensitive" species are those determined less sensitive to impacts to their
numbers, and where perpetuation does not appear significantly threatened. The Biological
Resources Sensitive Elements Map identifies sensitive plant communities and wildlife species
known to occur within the City and study area.
Biological Resources in Urbanizing Areas
From on-site and aerial photograph examination of the General Plan study area, it is evident that
almost all urbanization clears the land. Whether one house on a large lot, a large subdivision or a
master planned residential community, the native vegetation and its inherent wildlife habitat
value are typically completely removed. Where landscaping has been introduced, exotic and
other non-native plants may sometimes prevail. These not only have little or no habitat value for
native animals and birds, but they can “escape” and compete with native plants for nutrients and
water in the wild.
As a strategy to address this concern, the City should require that new development, whether
public or private, utilize native trees and shrubs in landscape plans, including plants salvaged on-
site, to the greatest extent practical. This may include encouraging the use of “link” course
designs in new golf courses with non-play areas landscaped with native vegetation. The City
should also prohibit the use of certain non-native and invasive plant species that compete with
native vegetation (see Biological Technical Report in the General Plan Program EIR).
Coachella Valley Multi-Species Habitat Conservation Plan
The difficulty in protecting threatened or endangered species can be effectively addressed
through the development of Habitat Conservation Plans (HCP), and especially those that address
the needs of more than one species or habitat. This approach has become the principle
management strategy for protecting the long-term viability of sensitive biological resources. One
of the first and most successful has been the HCP established for the Coachella Valley Fringe-
toed lizard, which has become a prototype for similar efforts across the country.
The City and the other members of the Coachella Valley Association of Governments (CVAG)
are preparing a multiple species HCP that will address a wide range of species and habitat
protection issues for the region. Sensitive natural communities or habitats occurring in the
planning area to be addressed in the HCP include sand dunes and sand fields, Sonoran creosote
bush scrub and mixed woody and succulent scrub communities, and desert fan palm oasis
woodlands. Approximately 31 plant and animal species are under consideration for protection
through the multi-species HCP.
Regional Wildlife Corridor
The Desert Hot Springs planning area offers important opportunities for the preservation of
wildlife migration corridors. This is due to the size and pattern of major drainages, and the urban
development pattern that has occurred in the past few decades. Major barriers to migration
include urban core development in the City, as well as State Highway 62 and Interstate-10
construction. Several north-south wildlife corridors do exist and include the relatively pristine
                                                 IV - 7

                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                               General Plan/Biological Resources Element
Little San Bernardino Mountains, and the Mission Creek, Little and Big Morongo and Long
Canyon Washes. Cooperative efforts should be made with the Riverside County Flood Control
District, which is responsible for managing the regional storm water flows, to maximize the
habitat and migration corridor value of this area.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The City of Desert Hot Springs is in the enviable position of preserving and enhancing much of
its remaining unique and valuable biologic resources, especially those on the slopes and hillsides
of the San Bernardino and Little San Bernardino Mountains. The City and its residents have
evidenced strong support for these integral parts of the Coachella Valley environment. In every
facet of community planning and development regulation, the City will have the opportunity to
regulate growth and limit impacts. This will be accomplished through the thoughtful
implementation of the General Plan, and the Zoning, Subdivision and Grading Ordinances. It can
also be accomplished through the integration of the biological resource and open
space/conservation principles in public works projects, including road and highway
development, and the design and construction of storm water detention basins and drainage
channels. Development on every level will provide an opportunity to protect and enhance the
City’s biological resources.
BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES GOAL, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
GOAL
Protection and preservation of City and regional biological resources, especially those sensitive,
rare, threatened or endangered species of plants and wildlife and their habitats, and a functional,
harmonious relationship and balance between nature and human development.
Policy 1
Maintain an accurate and regularly updated map and information base on sensitive plant and
animal species and habitat occurring in the General Plan study area.
Program 1 A
The General Plan and related environmental data, as well as the Coachella Valley MSHCP, shall
be periodically updated to maintain an accurate and effective mapping system and information
base on sensitive plant and animal species occurring within the City and vicinity.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department, CVAG
Schedule: Continuous; annual update.
Policy 2
Support all practical efforts to maintain a broad variety of habitats, including suitable habitat for
rare and endangered species occurring in the City and vicinity.
Program 2 A
The City shall participate and be a pro-active partner in the development and implementation of
the Coachella Valley Multi-Species Habitat Conservation Plan with special emphasis on habitat
                                                IV - 8

                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                General Plan/Biological Resources Element
located in or near the San Bernardino and Little San Bernardino Mountains.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department, CVAG
Schedule: Continuous; annual update.
Program 2 B
Establish and maintain a broad range of contacts with local, county, state and federal agencies, as
well as private non-profits, and consult and cooperate in efforts to maintain and broaden habitat
conservation, especially where essential for the preservation of sensitive, rare and endangered
species.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: Continuous
Program 2 C
Until adoption of the Coachella Valley Multi-Species Habitat Conservation Plan, the City shall
continue to require the preparation of wildlife surveys and, as necessary, Habitat Conservation
Plans, for new development in compliance with Federal Section 10a(1)(B) of the Endangered
Species Act and Section 2081 of the State Endangered Species Act.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: Continuous
Policy 3
All development proposals on vacant lands shall be reviewed and evaluated to assure minimal
impacts on existing habitat and wildlife.
Program 3 A
City shall assure a thorough assessment of impacts to habitat and/or wildlife associated with
proposed development, including requiring the preparation of detailed biological resource
surveys and mitigation programs in identified sensitive areas of the City.
Responsible Agency: City Council; Planning Commission; Community Development
Department
Schedule: Continuous.
Program 3 B
City shall encourage developers to salvage naturally occurring desert plant materials for
incorporation into project landscaping to the greatest extent possible and shall indicate utilization
of these indigenous materials on project landscape plans, which provide or enhance wildlife
habitat and serve to extend the local desert environment into the urban design of the City. Plans
shall be submitted to the City for approval.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: Continuous.
Program 3 C
City shall prepare a comprehensive planting materials list, which shall include native and non-
native, drought tolerant trees, shrubs and groundcovers that complement the local environment,
provide habitat for local wildlife, and extend the desert into the built environment. A list of
                                                IV - 9
                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                General Plan/Biological Resources Element
prohibited plant materials shall also be prepared.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: 2001-02.
Policy 4
Assure that sensitive habitat and wildlife areas, as well as state and federal lands, are
appropriately buffered from urban development.
Program 4 A
The General Plan Land Use, Circulation, and Open Space and Conservation Elements shall
recognize, reflect and provide an effective buffer between urban-type development and other
incompatible uses, and the San Bernardino and Little San Bernardino Mountains and other
sensitive wildlife and open space and conservation lands.
Responsible Agencies: City Council; Planning Commission; Community Development
Department
Schedule: Continuous.
Policy 5
Encourage and cooperate in the establishment of multiple use corridors that use drainage
channels and utility easements to provide wildlife corridors and public interconnection between
open space areas in the community and vicinity.
Program 5 A
Consult and coordinate with the Riverside County Flood Control District, Southern California
Edison and other appropriate public and quasi-public agencies, to encourage the establishment of
a system of multiple use corridors for wildlife and public interconnection between open space
areas in the community and vicinity.
Responsible Agency: Riverside County Flood Control District; Community Development
Department; Southern California Edison
Schedule: Continuous.
                                               IV - 10
                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                               General Plan/Biological Resources Element
Program 5 B
Provide developers with detailed information on preservation and re-use of valuable topsoils, use
of locally appropriate xeriscape design concepts, and discourage unnecessary clearing of native
desert landscape.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: 2001-02.
Policy 6
Pro-actively encourage and promote an appreciation of sensitive biological resources and the
integrated local environment.
Program 6 A
Develop or cooperate in the development and promotion of a comprehensive educational
program making the public more aware of the City’s biological resources. In this effort, staff
shall solicit the aid of the Coachella Valley Mountain Conservancy, the Living Desert, The
Bighorn Institute, and The Nature Conservancy and coordinate the program with a similar
educational program for animal control.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: 2001-02.
Program 6 B
City shall investigate the possibility and appropriateness of establishing an interpretive trail
system in the City’s mountainous and other hiking and walking areas that educates users and
enhances their appreciation for this and other wildlife communities in the City and vicinity.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: 2001-02
                                                IV - 11

                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                               General Plan/Archaeological and Historic Resources Element
ARCHAEOLOGICAL AND HISTORIC
RESOURCES ELEMENT
PURPOSE
The Archaeological and Historic Resources Element of the General Plan provides a summary of
the cultural and historical traditions of the City of Desert Hot Springs and vicinity. It also
provides the basis for the identification of and planning for present-day cultural activities and
traditions. The Archaeological and Historic Resources Element is intended to briefly describe the
documented pre-history and history of Desert Hot Springs, and set forth goals, policies and
programs which preserve this heritage and help perpetuate it for future generations.
BACKGROUND
Cultural traditions and artifacts are the most important links between the past, present and the
future. They are the elements that bind communities together and are the common ground that
provide community cohesiveness and historic and cultural perspective. The Archaeological and
Historic Resources Element is directly related to the Arts and Culture, Biological Resources,
Land Use, and Open Space and Conservation Elements, and may influence the Community
Design Element.
Issues addressed in the Archaeological and Historical Resources Element are a part of those set
forth in subdivision (b) of California Government Code Section 65560 and Public Resources
Code Section 5076. Also, the implementation of the California Environmental Quality Act
(CEQA), Section 21083.2(g), empowers and directs the community to require that adequate
research and documentation be conducted when the potential for significant resources exists. A
detailed discussion of resource management requirements and guidelines can be found in the
General Plan Environmental Impact Report (EIR) and its technical appendix. The City currently
reviews and provides comments on development proposals and the potential for impacts to
archaeologically or historically significant resources, and may require additional study if the
potential for resources warrants. As future development proposals are received, they will be
evaluated and the need for cultural resource assessments will be determined.
THE PREHISTORIC PERIOD
Based upon the current knowledge of artifacts and habitation sites dating back approximately
12,000 years, archaeologists have divided the pre-European epoch into five periods: Early Man
Period, Paleo-Indian Period, Early Archaic Period, Late Archaic Period and the Late Prehistoric
Period. Each is discussed below.
Hunting and butchering tools of the earliest prehistoric periods were distinguished by the use of
large stone points to hunt and process large late ice age mammals, and the lack of milling stones
and other food grinding implements.
                                               IV-12
                                                                                    TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                       General Plan/Archaeological and Historic Resources Element
                                      One of the epoch’s important characteristics is the lack of milling
                                      stones and other food grinding implements. It may have been that
                                      these earliest Americans took advantage of the vast numbers of
                                      potential game animals and subsisted primarily on an animal fat
                                      and protein diet.
                                      As climate conditions and available food changed, local inhabitants
                                      started using smaller projectile points on the smaller game; there
                                      was also substantial migration going on during this period. Seeds,
                                      grains and their processing became more important about 4,000
                                      years ago and stone-tools became more sophisticated; there was
The Diamond-backed rattlesnake         also a corresponding increase in cultural complexity and variation.
design was used often by the Cahuilla By about 1500 years ago, the bow and arrow had been introduced
                                       and a wider food base was exploited. Milling of foodstuffs also
continued extensively. By the latest period starting about 800 years ago to just before contact
with Europeans, there is evidence of extensive contact and trade between local tribes and those
of the Colorado River. This included the distribution of pottery across the upper Colorado and
Mojave Deserts. It is from this period that ethnic or tribal affiliations are best known. In the
Desert Hot Springs region, the oldest cultural remains date back about 1500 years and are located
in the Anza Borrego Indian Hill Rock Shelter (also see General Plan EIR). The oldest
radiocarbon dated occupation in the Coachella Valley comes from the intersection of
Washington Street and Highway 111, a site known as Point Happy. The artifact was a Patayan-
style broken pot that dated to about 900 years ago.
Habitation and village sites of numerous types developed throughout the area. These included
villages occupied for extended periods of time, milling sites used seasonally as particular foods
become available, lithic workshops and quarries for making stone tools and weapons, and rock
art sites that were used for artistic/religious expression.
Cahuilla Culture In Historic Times
                                        The most recent identifiable native culture to evolve in the
                                        Coachella Valley region is the Desert Cahuilla. They are
                                        generally divided into three groups: the Pass Cahuilla of the
                                        Banning-Beaumont area; the Mountain Cahuilla from the San
                                        Jacinto and Santa Rosa Mountains; and the Desert Cahuilla from
                                        the Coachella Valley as far south as today’s Salton Sea. Rather
                                        than identified by a single name, membership was in terms of
                                        lineage or clans.
                                        Clans had individually defined territories they called their own
                                        and used for hunting and gathering food and other resource
                                        necessities. The population prior to European contact is estimated
                                        to have ranged from 3,600 to 10,000. During the 1800s, however,
 Olla, or Water Jar, shaped by hand     the Cahuilla population was decimated by European disease, most
 from the exterior only
                                                        IV-13

                                                                             TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                General Plan/Archaeological and Historic Resources Element
notably smallpox, against which the Native peoples had no immunity. The Desert Cahuilla had
many villages throughout the Coachella Valley, including those associated with Ancient Lake
Cahuilla until its last occurrence 500 years ago. With the lake’s disappearance the mountains,
canyons and fault-related mesquite dunes became more important sources of water, food and
fiber. Today, the Cahuilla Indian population closest to the planning area lives on the Agua
Caliente Reservation.
Known Local Prehistoric Resource Areas
Substantial portions of the planning area have been surveyed by archaeologists. Recorded
significant archaeological resources are generally identified by a tri-nomial designation given the
site by the Eastern Information Center (EIC) at the Archaeological Research Unit at the
University of California at Riverside. Numerous archeological surveys and investigation/test
reports have been conducted. Approximately thirty-two (32) prehistoric and historic resource
sites have been recorded within the city limits and sphere-of-influence boundaries, of which 24
are prehistoric archeological sites and 8 are historic sites.
Many prehistoric sites identified in the General Plan study area have been recorded by the EIC,
as well as The National Register of Historic Places, California Historic Landmarks, California
Points of Historical Interest, the California Inventory of Historic Resources, and the Historic
Properties Directory of the Office of Historic Preservation (Department of Parks and
Recreation). These archives include information on prehistoric and historic sites and resources.
In the Desert Hot Springs area, fault zones and associated water and biological resources have
harbored cultural resources in the San Bernardino and Little San Bernardino mountains. There is
a high probability that prehistoric resources will occur in the vicinity of fault-related mesquite
and palms, as well as resources associated with mountain washes, streams and canyons.
Mesquite thickets that generally occur in dune areas are another high probability category since
mesquite and screwbean pods were staples in the diet of the region’s Cahuilla Indians. The
Mission Creek branch of the San Andreas fault passes through the city limits, while the Banning
branch passes through the City’s sphere-of-influence (SOI). Both areas should be considered as
sensitive potential resources areas.
Cahuilla Cultural Heritage Sites
Undiscovered prehistoric sites within the planning area probably exist which could expand our
understanding of prehistoric life of the region. Many of these sites may be situated in Areas of
High Sensitivity for Archeological Resources (see exhibit). It is likely that additional unmapped
areas of high sensitivity are located within the planning area but can no longer be identified
because the mesquite trees have been removed or the water source has disappeared. Other sites
may be situated in Low Probability Areas outside the Areas of High Sensitivity for
Archeological Resources.
                                                IV-14

                                                                                  TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                     General Plan/Archaeological and Historic Resources Element
Prehistoric Resources The Coachella Valley Association of Governments (CVAG) identifies
the Archeological Probability Areas in the Desert Hot Springs area in the subsequent manner as
an effort to conserve and protect these sensitive archeological areas:
                                                                     N - National Register
                                                                     H - High
                                                                     M - Moderate
                                                                     L - Low
Archeological Probability Area Map Source: Coachella
Valley Association of Governments (CVAG)
Of the four designations, only two, H (High) and L (Low), apply to the City and its SOI.
In many cases, it is not possible to determine whether sites include prehistoric archeological
resources without conducting a comprehensive site-specific field survey of the area being
proposed for development.
THE HISTORIC PERIOD
Sites of historical significance are generally more than forty-five to fifty years of age, but range
from the period of the earliest European contacts, around the end of the 1700s, to about the end
of World War II. Types of potentially significant sites range from permanent trails and highways
to living areas and small-scale remains of single activities. The following discusses the historic
period and also identifies significant historical resources.
Earliest European History of the Desert Hot Springs Region
Spaniards making forays northward from Mexico along the coast and the Colorado River were
the first to explore the Desert Hot Springs region. Tradition has it that a Captain Juan Iturbe
sailed a vessel into the Salton Sea and explored westerly as far as the Santa Rosa and Little San
Bernardino Mountains area. No concrete evidence has been located to document this story and
the physical isolation of the Salton Sea from the Sea of Cortez makes such a story closer to myth
than fact. The earliest documented period of Spanish influence began in 1769 when explorers
                                                     IV-15
                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                               General Plan/Archaeological and Historic Resources Element
moved into what was then referred to as Upper California to establish a military, political and
religious foothold. The development of land routes to supply inland missions brought the
Spanish into the region in the 1770s.
Mexican and Post Mexican-American War Periods
Although there is no historical evidence of settlements in the Desert Hot Springs area, by 1821
the region had fallen under the influence of Mexico as it secured its independence from Spain
under the Treaty of Cordova. The issuance of land grants and the establishment of agricultural
enterprises, under the organization of rancheros, dominated the region for the next thirty years.
The defeat of Mexico in the Mexican-American War and the signing of the Treaty of Guadalupe
Hidalgo in 1848 ushered in a new era. With the region under American control and the discovery
of gold in California, the stage was set for admittance of California into the union in 1850, and
led to the influx of peoples from many countries. The first U.S. Government Surveys were made
in the Coachella Valley in 1855-56, by surveyors Henry Washington, John La Croze and James
G. McDonald, who observed a number of trails and roads crossing through the region.
The Bradshaw Trail and Ocean-to-Ocean Highway
The most prominent of these trails was one labeled as a “road” on the U.S. Government Survey
maps and ran along the course of the Whitewater River. It was joined by a trail that skirted the
base of the Santa Rosa Mountains in a more southerly course.
The surveyors also noted an “Indian Trail” apparently passing through a portion of the study area
west of Edom Hill.
By the 1880s, the trail along the base of the Santa Rosa Mountains had become the main route
for travelers passing through the study area. By 1885 it had been identified as part of the road
from San Bernardino to the Colorado River and was to become known as the Bradshaw Trail,
one of the most important desert trails in Southern California during the 1860s and 70s. An
historic route between Los Angeles and the Palo Verde Valley, the Bradshaw Trail was in fact an
ancient Indian trade route variously named the Cocomaricopa Trail or the Halchidoma Trail. In
1862 the William David Bradshaw exploration party had “rediscovered” the route, which for the
next few years served as the primary access to the goldfields along the Colorado River.
By the late 1870s the railroads expanded into the region and eventually connected the coast
directly to Yuma. This completed second transcontinental railroad, authorized by Congress in
1866, and was later known as the Sunset Route. After the turn of the century the Cocomaricopa
Trail was revived as the Bradshaw Highway, ultimately becoming State Highway 111.
In 1926, the federal government established the National Highway System, which included the
Ocean-to-Ocean Highway that ran “along the Southern Pacific Railroad”. Exact dates of
construction are unclear, with archival sources tracing it to the late 1930s. Right-of-way for this
highway was granted by the federal government in November of 1938, which was delineated as
U.S. 60/70/99. Apparently proof of construction was never filed on this segment of the highway.
                                               IV-16

                                                                             TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                General Plan/Archaeological and Historic Resources Element
A segment of Varner Road running through the City SOI was apparently part of the original
Ocean-to-Ocean Highway.
Early Desert Hot Springs
Available historic sources from 1856-1975 indicate that several old roads and Indian trails once
crossed portions of the planning area. The area that was more recently occupied by Seven Palms
Ranch (Desert Dunes Country Club) was recorded as containing an Indian village, with an Indian
trail leading to the village site. U.S. Government Survey field notes of the 1850s describe the
Cahuilla settlement:
“The rancherita at Seven Palms, in the upper Coachella Valley, was situated atop a low sandhill,
surrounded by low, thorny mesquite bushes, and comprised ‘some 8 or 10 huts and about 30
Indians, mostly old men, women, and children’. By the 1850s many were employed, at least
seasonally, at white settlements west of the mountains”.
The arrival of permanent settlers into the area around Desert Hot Springs seems not to have
begun until the second decade of this century. Some took advantage of the Homestead Act of
1862, which allowed settlers access to unclaimed, surveyed public lands in the west. However,
early government surveys recorded very little evidence of settlers in the Desert Hot Springs area
before 1917.
Cabot Yerxa’s Discovery of Hot Mineral Water
Cabot Yerxa is credited for having discovered hot mineral water in the area of Desert Hot
Springs. Born in the Dakota Territories in 1883 to trading post operators, he was a descendant of
John Henry Cabot, discoverer of Newfoundland. As a young adult, Yerxa traveled to the
Klondike in the Yukon Territories in search of gold. While there, he opened a small grocery
business. It was through the grocery business that Yerxa met Vice President Theodore Roosevelt.
As a result of their friendship, Yerxa was appointed Postmaster of Sierra Madre, California. He
served this post from 1906-1913.
Following his appointment as postmaster, Yerxa moved to the Desert Hot Springs area. Around
1912, Cabot Yerxa became one of the Desert Hot Springs area’s first citizens when he began
homesteading a 160-acre tract around the desert oasis of Two Bunch Palms.
 After purchasing a burro that he named “Merry Christmas”, he built his first house known as
“Eagle’s Nest” on the peak of a prominent hill. It comprised a one-room cabin with a fireplace
that was constructed out of cement, wood, and stone. For water, Yerxa and Merry Christmas
were forced to travel to the railway station at Garnet, a round trip of 14 miles.
In 1913 Yerxa discovered the hot springs that gave the community its name. Determined to find
his own water supply, had Yerxa purchased well digging equipment and began an excavation for
a well. He encountered natural hot water with a temperature of 132 degrees. Afraid that the water
might contain arsenic, Yerxa used it only for bathing. He later dug a second well, located
approximately 600 yards away, which produced cold water. Yerxa named the entire areas
                                                IV-17

                                                                             TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                General Plan/Archaeological and Historic Resources Element
surrounding the wells “Miracle Hill”. Sometime later Yerxa learned that he had actually dug
these holes on either side of an earthquake fault.
The Founding of Desert Hot Springs
Yerxa homesteaded the site until around 1918, leaving it to join the army during World War I.
Upon his return from the war, Yerxa tried to interest developers in the resort potential of his hot
springs.
It was not until 1932 that L.W. Coffee and Aubrey Wardman to ventured to develop the springs.
After considering the pros and cons of developing hot mineral water in the area, Coffee was
convinced of its potential by Desert Hot Springs’ spectacular view of the snow-capped
mountains.
Coffee procured the necessary equipment and supplies to drill a test well. He dug a well over 170
feet deep and struck hot mineral water. Coffee then dug a second well, which was also
successful.
Completion of the second well led Coffee to subdivide the surrounding property into acre lots,
and many were sold. The entire property, however, was soon tied up in litigation due to
complications with the trust. In 1938 the trust was dissolved. The property reverted back to the
original owners.
Aubrey Wardman of Whittier relieved Coffee’s predicament by giving him complete control of
his 160 acres to develop a community focused upon the area’s therapeutic mineral water.
Additional acreage was purchased by Wardman, and Coffee was able to develop the area into a
promising health resort.
The town of Desert Hot Springs witnessed most of its early growth in the 1940s as a result of
Coffee’s efforts. In addition to selling land for homes, Coffee opened the first public bath house
in Desert Hot Springs known as “Coffee’s Hot Mineral Baths”. Soon other bathhouses opened
and people began taking advantage of the therapeutic value of Desert Hot Springs’ hot mineral
waters. Consequently, Coffee became known as the “originator, founder and developer of Desert
Hot Springs”.
Cabot’s Old Indian Pueblo
Yerxa’s intense fascination with the Indian lifestyle led him to construct “Cabot’s Old Indian
Pueblo”. This 35-room Hopi-style pueblo was constructed of salvaged lumber and adobe bricks
mixed with cement. Although the framing of the building took approximately seven years to
complete, Yerxa continually worked on the pueblo for over twenty years. At the time of his death
in 1965, the pueblo was still unfinished.
After Yerxa’s death, Cole Eyraud, a Burbank business executive, purchased the property and
formed the non-profit educational organization known as Landmark Conservators. Cabot’s Old
Indian Pueblo served as a museum, art gallery and trading post for many years. It has recently
                                                IV-18

                                                                             TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                General Plan/Archaeological and Historic Resources Element
undergone renovations and other improvements, and is expected to re-open to the public in
Summer of 2000. It is located at 67-616 East Desert View Avenue.
Desert Hot Springs Heritage Properties/ Historic Sites
According to the Eastern Information Center’s 1994 cultural resources records search, there are
no National Register listed properties or California Historic Landmarks recorded within the
planning area. Furthermore, there are no properties listed on the California Inventory of Historic
Resources.
Desert Hot Springs does have one California Point of Historical Interest. This site is known as
Yerxa’s Discovery. A bronze plaque commemorating Cabot Yerxa’s 1913 “discovery of hot well
water” is located in front of Cabot’s Old Indian Pueblo on Desert View Drive. Also important
are Two Bunch Palms Artesian Well and Coffee’s Well.
Additionally, approximately 40 properties in the City and its Sphere of Influence are listed in the
Office of Historic Preservation’s 1994 Historic Properties Directory.
For the most part, these properties comprise structures that are over 40 years of age that have
been evaluated for National Register Status, but for one reason or another were determined
ineligible for listing in the Register.
CULTURAL RESOURCES POTENTIAL (CRP) MAP
Based upon field and literature surveys conducted to date, a resource sensitivity map has been
developed, which identifies various prehistoric and historic resource areas within the planning
area. Field survey techniques used in past years for recording/documenting site surveys were
more intuitive and less methodical than those practiced today.
Additional information can be made available on potentially sensitive archaeological resources
areas by contacting the City Planning staff. The base data used to prepare the Cultural Resources
Potential (CRP) Map are not published in order to protect resources from disturbance, damage or
removal.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
It is the obligation of the lead agency, the City of Desert Hot Springs, to assure that every
reasonable effort is made to locate, identify and evaluate archaeological, historical and cultural
sites within its jurisdiction. The City must determine what actions or development activities have
the potential to adversely affect known or suspected sites of significance. The manner in which
the City must review and address issues related to Archaeological and Historic Resources is set
forth in the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA, Appendix J, 1992 Edition). Projects
involving a federal agency, federal funding or some other federal assistance fall under and must
conform to Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (NHPA).
                                                IV-19

                                                                              TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                 General Plan/Archaeological and Historic Resources Element
As time passes and the community continues to develop, opportunities for documenting and
preserving archaeological and historic sites and artifacts will decrease. The City should
encourage the research, documentation and recordation to register appropriate sites and
structures within the community and vicinity. In this manner, positive action can be taken to
identify, preserve and pass on the important traditions and history of the community.
RESOURCES GOAL, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
GOAL
Preservation and maintenance of cultural heritage and resources, including historic and
prehistoric cultural artifacts and traditions.
Policy 1
The City shall exercise its responsibility to locate, identify and evaluate archaeological, historical
and cultural sites, and assure that appropriate action is taken to protect these resources.
Program 1 A
An archaeological and historical resources data base shall be established and maintained at City
Hall, and shall incorporate information from the Eastern Information Center (EIC), focused
cultural resource studies conducted in the study area, and other resources.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department.
Schedule: Continuous; five year Element update.
Policy 2
Development or land use proposals, which have the potential to disturb or destroy sensitive
cultural resources, shall be evaluated by a qualified professional and, if necessary, appropriate
mitigation measures shall be incorporated into project approvals.
Policy 3
Make every effort to ensure the protection of sensitive archaeological and historic resources from
vandalism and illegal collection.
Program 3 A
Maintain mapping information and similar location-oriented resources in a confidential manner
and assure that only those with appropriate professional and organizational ties
are provided access to these sensitive records.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department.
Schedule: Continuous.
Program 3 B
In the course of reviewing development proposals and cultural surveys that identify sensitive
resources, staff shall, where appropriate, encourage in-place preservation or the recovery and
preservation of materials for later study and display.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department.
Schedule: Continuous.
                                                 IV-20
                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                               General Plan/Archaeological and Historic Resources Element
Policy 4
The City shall support the listing of eligible properties, structures or sites as potential historic
landmarks and their inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places.
Program 4 A
In cooperation with local historical associations, the City shall periodically review the historical
and archaeological resources of the area for possible application for status as a historical
landmark or inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department.
Schedule: Periodically.
Program 4 B
The City shall consider establishment of a Cultural Commission, which could meet with staff
and elected officials in prioritizing and proposing action on the preservation and registration of
important archaeological and historical resources in the community and vicinity.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Cultural Commission.
Schedule: Continuous; with annual meetings.
                                               IV-21
                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                  General Plan/Water Resources Element
WATER RESOURCES ELEMENT
PURPOSE
The purpose of the Water Resources Element is to address issues of water quantity, quality and
availability for current and future needs. An essential aspect of this element is the coordination
and cooperation between the City and the Mission Springs Water District, and other water
agencies responsible for supplying water to the City and Sphere-of-Influence (SOI). Wastewater
management has also become an increasingly important part of water management that is critical
to the protection of ground water resources. The goals, policies and programs set forth in this
element direct staff and City officials in the management of this essential resource.
BACKGROUND
The Water Resources Element addresses one of the community’s most basic needs and has a
direct relationship to the Land Use Element, which has evolved to a major degree in response to
the availability of water resources. Water resource issues are also associated with the Flooding
and Hydrology Element and opportunities to protect groundwater and enhance groundwater
recharge, as well as the Public Utilities and Fire and Police Protection Elements. The Water
Resources Element is also related to the Community Design, Economic Development and
Emergency Preparedness Elements.
Issue areas set forth in subdivision (d) of California Government Code Section 65302 are
addressed in the Water Resources Element. Also, the implementation of the California
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), Section 21083.2(g), empowers the community to require
that adequate research and documentation be conducted when the potential for significant
impacts to water and other important resources exists.
Over the past few centuries, production of water in the Coachella Valley by Native Americans
has included the direct use and diversion of streams in the mountain canyons, the digging of
wells to intercept the aquifer in Indian Wells, and the exploiting of artesian wells that occur in
association with the Banning and Mission Creek Branches of the San Andreas Fault system in
the City and Sphere-of-Influence (SOI). Early mechanical water production in the Desert Hot
Springs area started with the drilling of wells for domestic purposes, with earliest results near the
Mission Creek Fault yielding geothermal water, which in turn helped give birth to the City.
It was not until decades later that the enormous extent of the groundwater resource in the
Coachella Valley was recognized. There has been inflow of groundwater throughout the
Coachella Valley, however, fault barriers, constrictions in basins profiles, and areas of low
permeability have limited and controlled the movement of groundwater. Analysis of these
structures by the US Geological Survey and the California Department of Water Resources has
determined that groundwater basins are separated into distinct sub basins and sub areas within
sub basins. The first 1,000 feet of the underlying sands and gravels and other water-bearing fill
                                                IV-22

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                  General Plan/Water Resources Element
eroded into the fault-controlled valley floor comprise a storage capacity in the Valley of more
than 39 million acre feet (one acre foot equals about 326,000 gallons).
Domestic Water Resource
In the City and its Sphere area, domestic water services are primarily provided by the Mission
Springs Water District (MSWD) utilizing wells to extract groundwater from the Mission Creek
sub basin. A limited area of the City’s southern Sphere is located within the service boundaries
of the Coachella Valley Water District. The sub basin groundwater source is currently being
recharged by natural sources, i.e. precipitation and runoff from the San Bernardino and Little San
Bernardino Mountains. The MSWD, in cooperation with the Desert Water Agency, is actively
developing facilities to provide for additional groundwater recharge into the Mission Creek sub
basin through imported water carried by the Metropolitan Water District aqueduct, which passes
through the west end of the City and its SOI. Portions of the City and its Sphere-of-Influence
also occur within the limits of the Garnet Hill sub basin, which is bounded by the Banning Fault
on the north and the Garnet Hill Fault on the south.
Mission Creek Sub basin
The Mission Creek Sub basin is bounded on the north and south by the Mission Creek and
Banning Faults, respectively, to the west by the San Bernardino Mountains and on the east by the
Indio Hills (Edom Hill). The basin is underlain by water-bearing Ocotillo Conglomerate and
Cabezon Fanglomerate deposits of the Mission Creek upland. While direct recharge from rainfall
onto the valley floor is considered insignificant, both surface and subsurface discharge into the
sub basin from major drainages, including Mission Creek, and Little and Big Morongo Creeks,
does provide a meaningful natural recharge to the sub basin. The Mission Creek Sub basin is also
naturally recharged by surface and subsurface flows into the Desert Hot Springs Sub basin and,
in turn, into the Mission Creek Sub basin. Estimates of natural surface and subsurface recharge
have ranged from 6,000 to 9,100 acre feet per year, with the latest analysis yielding an estimate
of 6,870 acre feet per year. Groundwater flows well within the sub basin in a generally
southeasterly direction, breaking out at or near the surface along the Banning Fault in the vicinity
of 20th Avenue and at Willow Hole just east of Mountain View Road.
Based on state and federal analyses, the Mission Creek Sub basin has a storage capacity of
approximately 2.6 million-acre feet. Current estimates of recoverable water within the sub basin
totals approximately 1 million acre-feet. As a reference, the Mission Springs Water District
produces (pumps) an average of 2.43 billion gallons, or about 7,454 acre-feet per year.
Geothermal Resources
Geothermal waters (hot mineral water) are the hallmark of the City and have been an important
community asset that has stimulated spa hotel and other development in the City and the vicinity.
Geothermal waters are associated with the San Andreas Fault Zone and specifically the Mission
Creek Fault, along which the major geothermal resources of the Coachella Valley are located.
                                                IV-23

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                   General Plan/Water Resources Element
Waters in this zone range in temperature from 23 to 93Ε C (76 to 200Ε F) with two mechanisms
thought to be at work: the accessibility to depth of the water table and the relatively shallow
geothermal sources. In the Coachella Valley, the San Andreas Fault Zone, including the Mission
Creek Fault, are creating an extended and widening valley of great depth. In the vicinity of the
Salton Sea this process has allowed the generation of even higher geothermal water temperatures
allowing these resources to be exploited for large-scale electric power production.
EXHIBIT IV-1: GEOTHERMAL TEMPERATURE CONTOUR MAP
                                               IV-24

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                  General Plan/Water Resources Element
Desert Hot Springs Sub basin
The Desert Hot Springs Sub basin, and more specifically the Miracle Hill Sub area within this
basin, is the primary source of geothermal waters in the City and Sphere. As mentioned, this sub
area generates water temperatures of up to 200ΕF with a somewhat differing water chemistry
from waters in the Mission Creek Sub basin, being lower in both calcium (Ca2+) and bicarbonate
(CO32-), and higher in sodium (Na1+) and sulfate (SO42-). While the entire Desert Hot Springs
Sub basin is estimated to have a storage capacity of about 2.3 million acre feet, the Miracle Hill
Sub area serving the City and Sphere has a storage capacity of about 400,000 acre feet with an
estimated 40,000 acre feet in storage within the first 60 feet of the water table. The latest
estimates available (for 1977) placed pumpage or extractions from this sub basin at between 500
and 600 acre-feet. These waters are used for spas and hot mineral baths rather than as a source of
potable water.
Natural sources of recharge to the Miracle Hill Sub area of the Desert Hot Springs Sub basin are
from Little Morongo and Long Canyons, with additional but minor contributions from smaller
drainages. The total annual inflow into this sub basin is estimated at approximately 3,080 acre-
feet.
Garnet Hill Sub basin
That portion of the City and Sphere occurring south of the Banning Fault is located within the
Garnet Hill Sub basin. This sub basin is defined and bounded by the Banning Fault to the north,
the Garnet Hill Fault to the south, Edom Hill to the east and the San Bernardino Mountains to the
west. The principal source of recharge for this sub basin appears to be from the Whitewater
River through the permeable deposits, which underlie Whitewater Hill.
The Garnet Hill Sub basin is estimated to have a storage capacity of about 1 million acre feet,
with an estimated 100,000 acre feet in storage within the first 60 feet of the water table. Neither
the Mission Springs Water District nor the Coachella Valley Water District currently produces
water from this sub basin.
Overdraft in the
Mission Creek Sub basin
Although the Mission Creek sub basin experienced a general rise in water levels between 1938
and 1952, studies indicate that water levels have steadily declined by approximately 0.5 to 1.5
feet per year since 1952. The sub basin is currently in an overdraft condition of approximately 2
lineal feet per year.
Consumptive Demand of City
As the City continues to develop it could raise citywide total domestic water demand to
approximately 57 million gallons per day upon General Plan buildout. It is estimated that
approximately 40% of domestic water consumed is reintroduced into the groundwater table and
is not lost. This includes a percentage of irrigation water applied to residential and golf course
landscaping. All of these uses are factored into the Mission Springs Water District’s per capita
                                               IV-25

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                   General Plan/Water Resources Element
consumption estimate of 297 gallons per day. Impacts that are project-specific may be more or
less on a per capita basis, depending on the type of development, the density in residential
developments, and the level and type of landscaping and water-dependent amenities within each
project. As demand generated by residential and golf course development continues to increase,
the real or potential overdraft will become progressively greater, with significant long-term
cumulative impacts on the groundwater supply.
Groundwater Replenishment Program
To further assure an on-going supply of domestic water to service the expanding residential,
recreational and resort development occurring in the City and Sphere, the Mission Springs Water
District, Desert Water Agency (DWA) and the Coachella Valley Water District (CVWD)
contracted for State Project Water to meet the anticipated demand. The construction of the
Coachella Aqueduct to convey State Project Water has not yet been undertaken. Until a separate
system can be developed, the CVWD and DWA have entered into an agreement with the
Metropolitan Water District (MWD) to exchange entitlements to allow the Coachella Valley to
be provided with Colorado River water through its Colorado River Aqueduct, which passes
through the northwest portion of the Coachella Valley in the vicinity of the Whitewater River.
Since 1973, Colorado River water has been directed to spreading ponds in the Whitewater River,
which are recharging the Whitewater River Garnet Hill sub basin. From 1973 through 1997
approximately 1.4 million acre-feet of Colorado River water has been diverted to recharge the
Whitewater sub basin. Now these Districts are implementing plans to use this same resource to
recharge the Mission Creek Sub basin through a diversion of aqueduct supplies, which will flow
into recharge basins planned for construction in the upper Mission Creek Wash. Construction of
the recharge basins is expected to be completed by winter 2001. A water replenishment fee will
be assessed after the program is in place to help defray infrastructure and operation costs.
Supplemental water for the Coachella Valley, including the Mission Creek Sub basin, is assured
through the year 2035. Various agreements and pacts have been entered into, which provide for
additional water supplies, including the Colorado River Compact of 1922, the Boulder Canyon
Act of 1928, the Seven Party Agreement of 1931, and the 1964 Supreme Court Decree in
Arizona vs. California. While there is an overall decrease in water quality from Colorado River
sources, which provides water higher in total dissolved solids, the quality difference is not
regarded as significant. Please see the discussion on water quality, below.
Water Quality
Water quality in the Coachella Valley is generally good to excellent. Exceptions are primarily
limited to perched and semi-perched water tables occurring in the southern portions of the
Whitewater River sub basin where on-going crop irrigation has increased total dissolved solids.
Another more recent impact on area groundwater has been contamination associated with long-
term discharge from on-lot septic systems. In areas with high rates of percolation, septic system
effluent may not spend adequate time in the soil strata to be cleaned by microbes and filtering
and can add nitrates to groundwater. Wastewater contains contaminants, such as nitrogen,
bacteria and organic chemicals that may degrade the quality of groundwater and even render it
unsuitable for human consumption. Of particular concern is nitrate (NO3), which can eventually
                                                IV-26
                                                                                  TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                          General Plan/Water Resources Element
reach the water table even after all other contaminants have broken down or been effectively
treated by passage through the soils column.
The City and surrounding area still have about 5,000 septic tank systems in operation, which are
a significant concern for potential groundwater contamination. While high nitrate levels have
been identified elsewhere in the Coachella Valley, Mission Springs Water District indicates that
water quality in its service area has not been adversely impacted by the use of on-lot septic
systems. To date, none of the common potential contaminants, including human fecal coliform,
nitrate, chlorine, or sulfate, have exceeded allowable maximum contaminant levels. The City has
become a member of the Groundwater Guardian Program, which seeks to address threats of
contamination and to preclude increased threats through a variety of management strategies.
Quality of Surface Waters
With the anticipated importation of Colorado River water via the MWD aqueduct, the water
quality in the Mission Creek Sub basin may be somewhat affected. The following table indicates
the relative quality of surface waters recharging the sub basin.
                                               Table IV-2
                         Mineral Analysis of Representative Surface Waters
       Source               Whitewater         Snow Creek            Colorado River        Mission Creek
                           River (North)
     Constituent            epm1/ppm2            epm/ppm                 epm/ppm              epm/ppm
 Ca                           1.75/35             0.50/10                 3.97/79               1.30/26
 Mg                           0.90/11               0.0/0                 2.31/79               0.71/9
 Na                           0.62/14             0.47/11                4.78/110               0.26/6
 K                           0.108/4.2            0.04/1.6                0.11/4.3             0.06/2.4
 C1                             0.14                 0/0                 6.01/213               0.17/6
 Total Dissolved
 Solids                      201 ppm              55 ppm                 727 ppm               118 ppm
 Source: DWR Bulletin No. 108: Coachella Valley Investigation, California Department of Water Resources, July
 1964.
 1
   epm = Chemical equivalents per million.
 2
   ppm = Parts per million by weight.
The above table indicates that natural recharge from the Mission Creek surface waters is low in
constituent minerals and total dissolved solids, providing the sub basin with a high quality source
of natural recharge. In comparison, imported water from the Colorado River is about six times
higher in total dissolved solids (TDS) than the Mission Creek source. The impacts of Colorado
River recharge waters on water quality in the Desert Hot Springs area may be promoted by the
prevailing horizontal groundwater flow parallel to the bedding of alluvium deposits. As a result,
movement of groundwater parallel to the bedding is somewhat encouraged, and vertical mixing
of recharge and deeper portions of the water table is somewhat retarded. This parallel bedding of
                                                    IV-27
                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                  General Plan/Water Resources Element
deposits not withstanding, there is good potential for vertical mixing within the sub basin, and
the quality of groundwater in the Desert Hot Springs area can be expected to remain relatively
high.
California Regional Water Quality Control Board
The California Regional Water Quality Control Board (WQCB) implements federal and state
laws established to assure planning, implementation, management and enforcement, including
penalties for noncompliance in the control of water quality. Major water quality control
legislation includes the Federal Clean Water Act and the National Environmental Policy Act
(NEPA). Applicable California statutes and administrative law include but are not limited to the
California Water Code, California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), California Code of
Regulations, and a variety of other codes such as Health and Safety Code, Fish and Game Code,
and Public Resources Code.
In the Coachella Valley, the primary issues addressed by the WQCB are agricultural drainage,
geothermal power impacts, the New River, Salton Sea, Mission Creek and other sources of
surface water. There are numerous other locations monitored by the WQCB, where inappropriate
disposal of hazardous and toxic materials have threatened to contaminate groundwater. These
range from leaking fuel storage tanks, illegal discharges of human or animal waste, dumping of
waste oils and other hazardous liquids.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
The NPDES implements the federal Clean Water Act and was adopted in 1990. It requires the
development, adoption and implementation of plans and programs for storm water management,
which must, among other things, “...effectively prohibit non-storm water discharge into the storm
drain” and “require controls to reduce the discharge of pollutants from storm water systems to
waters of the United States to the Maximum Extent Practical”. The legislation also makes the
implementation of pollutant control measures exempt from CEQA.
One of the primary strategies to comply with the provisions of NPDES is the use of on-site storm
water retention or detention basins within any new development one acre or larger. These
facilities may in some instances include artificial wetlands that use this biologically active zone
to break down potential pollutants before they can contaminate surface runoff or reach the water
table through percolation. These intercept structures will also be important in capturing sand and
sediment before it is discharged into drainage facilities.
Water Conservation
Water Conservation Efforts
Water conservation is essential as both a short-term and long-term resource management
strategy. With increasing demands on the water supply, continuing efforts to reduce per capita
consumption are a priority. One of the best opportunities for water conservation has been in the
area of landscape design and maintenance. Fortunately, City residents have shown an
appreciation for the native desert environment and the excellent opportunity it provides to reduce
                                               IV-28

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                  General Plan/Water Resources Element
the use of turf grasses and other types of heavily water-dependent landscaping, with potentially
significant water conservation and enhancement of wildlife habitat.
The water resource and its delivery cost money, whether the service is provided by a private
company or a public agency. There is a direct relationship between the cost of a resource and
how thoughtfully it is used. Inevitably, the District shall continue to raise rates to all its
customers. As future costs of the water resource and its delivery rise, individual conservation
efforts can also be expected to increase.
The City has adopted a water conserving landscape ordinance as required by state law, which
requires that new landscape plans be designed to incorporate more native and locally compatible
drought-tolerant planting materials and efficient irrigation systems. Water conservation should
be second nature to desert dwellers, yet the need to control and manage our use of this limited
resource must be constantly restated. The long-term viability of our community and the Valley
depend upon it.
To further reduce the impacts of development on groundwater supplies, the MSWD and DWA
have adopted a wide range of “Best Management Practices” and programs. These include free
water audits and conservation incentives, enforced use of conserving technologies in new
development, landscape water conservation, public information programs, and conservation
pricing.
Future opportunities may include wastewater reclamation strategies to utilize tertiary treated
wastewater for golf courses, landscape and other irrigation purposes. The Horton treatment plant
has an installed capacity of approximately 1 million gallons per day. While the District does not
currently provide tertiary treated water for this purpose, future development may make this type
of conservation effort cost-effective.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The wise use and conservation of water resources will be a continuing central theme of
community development planning in Southern California. Desert Hot Springs and other local
communities have developed programs to extend the use of efficient landscape and irrigation
design, and to encourage the use of water efficient appliances and fixtures in homes and
businesses. The City has an important role to play in the long-term protection of this finite and
ever more valuable resource.
Groundwater resource sub basins do not respect jurisdictional lines and the threat of pollution or
contamination of groundwater must be viewed on a regional as well as a local level. Effective
future storm water management will also help protect groundwater and preserve capacity in
storm water facilities. Protection of our major mountain watersheds will also assure preservation
of a viable long-term source of natural groundwater recharge to the City and the larger sub basin.
                                                IV-29

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                  General Plan/Water Resources Element
WATER RESOURCES
GOALS, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
GOAL 1
A dependable long-term supply of clean and healthful domestic water and hot mineral water to
meet the needs of all segments of the community.
GOAL 2
An informed public that respects the City’s finite water resource and maximizes protection and
conservation efforts for the benefit of the entire community.
Policy 1
To the greatest extent practical, require the use of low water consuming, drought tolerant
landscape plantings as a means of reducing water demand, and coordinate with DWA, MSWD
and CVWD to strengthen education/public relations programs to inform residents of the full
range of water saving techniques available.
Program 1 A
Continue implementation of the water conservation-oriented landscape ordinance in compliance
with State Assembly Bill 325 (AB 325), by requiring the use of natural and drought resistant
planting materials and efficient irrigation systems.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: Continuous.
Program 1 B
Coordinate and cooperate with DWA, MSWD and CVWD in the continued development of
educational materials and programs that encourage and facilitate water conservation throughout
the community.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; DWA, MSWD; CVWD and
DWA
Schedule: Continuous.
Policy 2
The City shall encourage, facilitate and/or require the use of water conserving appliances and
fixtures in all new development, as required by state law.
Program 2 A
The City shall provide information on the use of low-flush toilets, and low-flow showerheads
and faucets, and shall require the application of water conserving technologies in conformance
with Section 17921.3 of the Health and Safety Code, Title 20, California Administrative Code
Section 1601(b), and applicable sections of Title 24 of the State Code.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Public Works Department
Schedule: Continuous
                                                 IV-30

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                 General Plan/Water Resources Element
Policy 3
The City shall confer and coordinate with the DWA, MSWD and CVWD to enhance
groundwater recharge concurrent with prudent flood plain management.
Program 3 A
To the extent practical, encourage the efforts of County Flood Control and the Mission Springs
Water District to design flood control facilities that also enhance opportunities for groundwater
recharge in the Mission Creek, Desert Hot Springs and Garnet Hill sub basins.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; County Flood Control; DWA,
MSWD; CVWD
Schedule: Continuous.
Program 3 B
Establish regulations and guidelines for the development and maintenance of project-specific on-
site retention/detention basins, which implement the NPDES program, enhance groundwater
recharge and complement regional flood control facilities.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; City Engineer; MSWD; CVWD
Schedule: 2000-01.
Policy 4
Coordinate with the Desert Water Agency, Mission Springs Water District, Coachella Valley
Water District, the California Regional Water Quality Control Board and other appropriate
agencies to share information on potential groundwater contaminating sources.
Program 4 A
Develop and maintain a system to share records and technical information with DWA, MSWD,
CVWD, CRWQCB and other appropriate agencies regarding all sites, which have the potential
to contaminate groundwater resources serving the City.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; DWA, MSWD; CVWD;
CRWQCB
Schedule: Continuous.
Program 4 B
Evaluate all proposed land use and development plans for their potential to create groundwater
contamination hazards from point and non-point sources, and confer with other appropriate
agencies to assure adequate review.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Public Works Department
Schedule: Continuous.
Policy 5
The City shall encourage or require existing and new development to connect to the sewage
treatment system of the Mission Springs Water District.
                                               IV-31
                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                        General Plan/Air Quality Element
AIR QUALITY ELEMENT
PURPOSE
The purpose of the Air Quality Element is to coordinate the planning of land use, circulation,
housing and other City policies with their potential effects on air quality. It is the intent of this
element and air quality planning in the region and locally to meet ambient air standards set by
the Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the California Air Resources Board
(CARB).
BACKGROUND
One of the most essential issues associated with public health and safety is community air
quality. The Air Quality Element is directly related to the type and intensity of land uses
established in the Land Use Element, and the number, length and timing of traffic trips
established in the Circulation Element. It is also related to the Economic Development Element,
which addresses air quality and other valuable natural resources important to the local economy.
This Element is also related to the amount and rate of housing development established in the
Land Use and Housing Elements, and to the amount of open space planned for preservation in
the Open Space and Conservation Element.
State Assembly Bill 2595 was enacted by the Legislature in 1988, and became known as the
California Clean Air Act. The purpose of the act was to assure that the future health and welfare
of the people of the State of California and the State’s environment and economy are protected,
regardless of action or direction from the federal government. State Implementation Plans are
designed to meet ambient air quality standards by the deadlines specified in the Federal Clean
Air Act (CAA) and emission reduction targets of the California Clean Air Act (CCAA). These
Acts base the extent of required emission reductions and the length of time to attain standards on
the severity of a District’s pollution.
Responsibility for air quality management in the State is also the responsibility of the California
Air Resources Board (CARB), which has taken a committed approach to expeditious
implementation of the Act. The CARB has been entrusted with an overseer role, to advise and
evaluate local air pollution control agency and District efforts to comply with CCAA
requirements.
The Coachella Valley and the City of Desert Hot Springs are located within the Salton Sea Air
Basin (SSAB), which is regulated by the South Coast Air Quality Management District
(District). The District is responsible for regional planning affecting a variety of areas, including
air quality. The District has identified two areas of air quality degradation having to do with
ozone (03) and micron-sized particulate matter (PM10). Associated issues, including land
development and traffic generation, are also associated with the District’s coordinated air quality
management efforts.
                                                 IV-32

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                        General Plan/Air Quality Element
The regional Air Quality Management Plan, a multi-pronged, multi-tier effort to regulate
pollutant emissions from a wide range of sources, is also the responsibility of the District. The
Plan’s implementation affects city and the Coachella Valley Association of Governments
regulatory roles, and is also meant to result in lowering the production of ozone/photochemical
smog, which is transported into the Valley.
As a member of the Coachella Valley Association of Governments (CVAG), the City is also
involved in the regional management of air quality through the cooperative implementation of
the Coachella Valley PM10 Plan. This plan has been jointly developed by the District, CVAG and
its member cities and has been approved by the U.S. EPA. The CVAG cities are nationally
recognized as leaders in the management of PM10. The prevailing conditions that have spurred
the development and implementation of this plan are discussed below.
CVAG and the City have also participated in the development and implementation of the
Regional Mobility Element of the Regional Comprehensive Plan developed by the Southern
California Association of Governments (SCAG). Addressing federal and State law requiring a
regional transportation plan, the element focuses on issues of roadway congestion and air quality
management.
Climate and Air Quality
Desert Hot Springs and the entire Coachella Valley comprise a geographically and
meteorologically unique area wholly contained within the Salton Sea Air Basin. The region is
currently impacted by significant air pollution levels caused by the transport of pollutants from
coastal air basins to the west, primarily ozone, and by primarily locally generated PM10. The
Valley is isolated from coastal influences by surrounding mountains, which create a hot and dry
low-lying desert. As the desert heats up it draws cooler coastal air through the narrow San
Gorgonio Pass, generating strong and sustained winds that cross the most active fluvial (water
caused) and aeolian (wind) erosion zones in the Valley. These strong winds suspend and
transport large quantities of sand and dust, reducing visibility, damaging property and
constituting a significant health threat.
The region is also susceptible to air inversions, which trap a layer of stagnant air near the ground
where it can be further loaded with pollutants. These inversions create conditions of haziness,
which is caused by moisture, suspended dust, and a variety of chemical aerosols emitted by
trucks and automobiles, furnaces and other sources.
The City of Desert Hot Springs, in relation to other areas in Southern California, essentially has
good air quality. In the past few decades noticeable deterioration of air quality has occurred due
to increased development and population growth, traffic, construction activity and various site
disturbances. It is apparent that although air pollution is emitted from various sources in the
Coachella Valley, substantial degradation of air quality may be attributed primarily to sources
outside of the Valley.
                                                IV-33

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                      General Plan/Air Quality Element
POLLUTANTS
Air pollutants are generally classified in two categories, primary and secondary. Primary
pollutants are those, which are a direct consequence of energy production and utilization, while
secondary pollutants are those, which undergo chemical changes after emission. Primary
pollutants typically affect only local areas, and do not undergo chemical modification or further
dispersion. Secondary pollutants, on the other hand, do disperse and undergo chemical changes
under conditions of high ambient temperatures and high rates of solar insulation. Primary sources
and their pollutants are a direct consequence of the combustion of petroleum and other fuels
resulting in the production of oxides of carbon, sulphur, nitrogen, and a number of reactive
hydrocarbons and suspended particulates. Principal secondary pollutants are termed oxidants and
include ozone (O3), peroxynitrates, nitrogen dioxide (NO2), and chemical aerosols.
Sensitive Receptors
The potentially serious detrimental effects caused by even the most common pollutants is of
widespread concern. Ozone, particulates, carbon monoxide and other pollutants pose a very real
threat to health and property in the desert. The region’s high median age implies that major
portions of residents are particularly susceptible to respiratory distress from the two principal
pollutants of concern, ozone and PM10. Other sensitive receptors include hospitals and nursing
homes, schools and parks.
The following is a brief summary of the primary criteria pollutants that can be found in the
Desert Hot Springs area.
Ozone (O3)
Ozone is most commonly associated with smog, and is a pungent, colorless, highly reactive gas,
which is the main component of photochemical smog. This is a daily occurrence that commonly
takes place from the pollution emitted primarily by motor vehicles. The potential impact ozone
can have on human health is significant, as ozone molecules react with sensitive lung tissues,
irritating and inflaming the lungs, compromising the body’s ability to fight respiratory infections.
Ozone can also cause extensive damage to vegetation and has been associated with major
damage to forests to the west and elsewhere throughout the world.
The Coachella Valley has a history of exceeding federal ozone standards, although the number of
days and months exceeding the federal standard have dropped steadily over the past decade. The
Coachella Valley is currently (year 2000) classified as a “severe-17” ozone non-attainment area
under the federal Clean Air Act. The area must comply with federal ozone air quality standards
by November 15, 2007, which is 17 years from the date the Clean Air Act was enacted.
Although some ozone is produced locally in the Coachella Valley, ozone-monitoring data
indicate that federal ozone exceedances in the Coachella Valley are largely the result of pollutant
transport from the South Coast Air Basin, through the Banning Pass, into the Coachella Valley.
The majority of smog experienced in the Desert Hot Springs area results from the transport of
pollutants from Los Angeles, Riverside and San Bernardino Counties. Although it is difficult to
quantify the amount of ozone pollutants contributed from other regions, improved air quality in
                                                IV-34

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                       General Plan/Air Quality Element
the Coachella Valley is partly dependent upon reduced ozone emissions in communities in the
South Coast Air Basin.
Particulate Matter (PM10)
Small and suspended particles, both solid and liquid, such as dust, sand, metallic and mineral
particles, road-surfacing materials, pollen, smoke, fumes and aerosols are generally referred to as
particulate matter. These various particles are categorized by “settling” characteristics, and those,
which are the size of 10 microns or smaller, are referred to as PM10. PM10 particles can cause
serious health problems, as they can pass through the lung’s filtering system, lodge deep in the
lung’s tissues, and directly irritate these tissues. PM10 is considered one of the most prevalent
forms of pollution and health impacts in the Desert Hot Springs area, and therefore is discussed
further in relation to “Blowsand Effects”, below.
The Coachella Valley has a history of elevated PM10 levels. In 1993, the Coachella Valley was
reclassified from a “moderate” to “serious” non-attainment area for PM10 by the U.S. EPA. The
Coachella Valley Association of Governments (CVAG) and its member cities have worked
closely with one another to implement the measures set forth by the “State Implementation Plan
for PM10 in the Coachella Valley,” which outlines reasonably available measures for controlling
PM10. Recent air quality monitoring data indicate that, with few exceptions, the Coachella Valley
has attained the federal PM10 standard for three consecutive years, and is now eligible for
reconsideration by the U.S. EPA as having attained this standard. The EPA is expected to issue
its opinion on attainment status in the year 2000.
The health effects associated with PM10 are more widespread than previously thought, according
to recent research and analysis. Since the Coachella Valley’s designation as a “non-attainment
area” for meeting federal PM10 standards, large areas of California have been added to this
category of impact. And while federal and state regulations have heretofore focused on particles
of 10 microns or smaller, significant health concerns are now focusing further on the health
effects of particles of 2.5 microns.
Efforts to control and limit the generation of PM10 have been successful through the
implementation of the Coachella Valley PM10 Plan. To further facilitate the management
programs established in the plan, the South Coast Air Quality Management District and CVAG
have expanded monitoring of weather conditions and pollutant levels. Expansion of the program
is expected to help local jurisdictions implement control measures and to substantiate city claims
for reimbursement for major wind events.
OTHER POLLUTANTS
Nitric Oxide (NO) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2), commonly referred to as NOx, are the two most
significant oxides of nitrogen for air pollution. NOx is formed as a byproduct of combustion.
NOx levels may be imported from air basins to the west, or may increase locally with inversion
layers. Carbon Monoxide (CO) is a colorless, odorless, toxic gas, which is generally produced by
the incomplete combustion of carbon containing fuels. Carbon Monoxide passes through the
lungs directly into the blood stream, binding with hemoproteins and reducing the amount of
                                                 IV-35

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                       General Plan/Air Quality Element
oxygen reaching the vital organs such as the heart, brain and tissues. Levels of concern are
generally found along heavily traveled roadways during periods of limited air movement.
Of all of these pollutants, ozone and PM10 are the most prevalent in the Desert Hot Springs area.
By integrating CVAG and SCAQMD efforts in the development of air quality management
plans, the City assures a more efficient regulation, monitoring and response appropriate to local
meteorological conditions.
Blowsand Effects
                                                  In the Desert Hot Springs area, PM10 comes
                                                  mostly from locally generated fugitive dust.
                                                  Each year, winter rains cause erosion of
                                                  adjacent mountains, and water run-off produces
                                                  and sorts substantial deposits of gravel and sand
                                                  throughout the major drainage areas in the
                                                  Valley. During the spring months and at other
                                                  times of the year, persistent and strong winds
                                                  carry the sand methodically southeast through
                                                  the center of the Valley. This process effectively
                                                  combines water and wind erosion to generate a
                                                  wide range of sand and very fine dust.
Sometimes referred to as “blowsand”, this natural sand migration produces PM10 in two ways:
(1) by direct particle erosion and fragmentation (natural PM10), and (2) by secondary effects,
such as sand deposits on road surfaces that can be ground into PM10 by moving vehicles, and re-
suspended in the air by those vehicles (man-made PM10).
Dust, sand and other blowing particulate matter are deposited on fabrics, buildings and
automobiles and animal respiratory systems. Extensive wind-borne soil can obliterate
landscaping and dirty streets. Losses and damage occur to materials and finishes, as blowing
sand can pit windshields, destroy finishes and require additional cleaning and sweeping of
exposed areas. Dust on vegetation can suppress plant growth and interfere with respiration
through leaves.
PM10 is associated with adverse health effects, including reduced lung function. Children and
the elderly are considered especially susceptible, as are those suffering from asthma, bronchitis,
or cardio-pulmonary distress. PM10 has been shown to generally have an adverse impact on
mortality and morbidity.
Air Quality Monitoring Stations
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and more recently the South Coast Air
Quality Management District, have operated two regional air quality monitors in the Coachella
Valley, one at the Palm Springs Regional Airport and the other in the downtown area of the City
of Indio.
                                               IV-36

                                                                               TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                            General Plan/Air Quality Element
State and Federal Standards
State and federal ambient air quality standards are set at levels believed adequate to protect the
health of the most sensitive population groups, particularly the elderly, children and people with
respiratory diseases. State standards are more restrictive than federal.
The following table provides a breakdown of the pollutants monitored in the South Coast Air
Quality Management District and the applicable State and federal standards.
                                               Table IV-3
                                State and Federal Ambient Air Quality
                                               Standards
          Pollutant                     State Standards                      Federal Standards
                                     Time/Averaging Conc.                  Time/Average Conc.
 Ozone                                   1 Hour/.09 ppm                       1 Hour/0.12 ppm
 Carbon                                  1 Hour/20 ppm                        1 Hour/35.0 ppm
 Monoxide                             8 Hour Ave./9.0 ppm                   8 Hour Ave./9.0 ppm
 Nitrogen                               1 Hour/0.25 ppm                     Annually /0.053 ppm
 Dioxide
 Sulfur                                 1 Hour/0.25 ppm                      Annually/0.03 ppm
 Dioxide                               24 Hours/0.04 ppm                     24 Hours/0.14 ppm
 Particulate                           24 Hours/50ug/m3                      24 Hours/150ug/m3
 Matter                                  AGM/30ug/m3                           AAM/50ug/m3
 Notes: ppm= parts per million; AAG = Annual Geometric Mean; AAM = Annual Arithmetic Mean
 Source: “1997 Air Quality Management Plan,” South Coast Air Quality Management District.”
With the greater attention being dedicated to particulate matter, monitoring for PM10 has been
expanded both through temporary research and field data collection stations as well as the siting
of permanent wind speed and pollutant measuring equipment.
Developer’s Air Quality Management Manual
In response to requirements of SCAQMD to monitor air quality impacts associated with site
disturbance and grading activities, in 1992 the City initiated preparation of a manual to assist
developers in controlling air quality impacts. The Air Quality Management Plan to Control PM10
and Other Emissions has been prepared as a practical tool for developers, consultants, and
contractors to report on air quality impacts and mitigation measures associated with individual
developments.
The manual’s step-by-step procedures also include a menu of activities and programs designed to
reduce development impacts to the lowest practical level. It includes methods for calculating
potential dust generation and construction vehicle emissions through simple worksheets. A wide
variety of methods for controlling impacts are described, including a comprehensive list of
                                                   IV-37

                                                                        TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                     General Plan/Air Quality Element
vendors providing dust control and other pollution management services. The City has received
particular recognition from SCAQMD for this pro-active approach to air quality protection.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The South Coast Air Quality Management District, CVAG and the City of Desert Hot Springs
share responsibility to monitor pollutant levels and regulate air pollution sources. With the
installation of additional monitoring devices in the Whitewater River, the District has been
collecting data to establish a “naturally occurring” or “background” level for PM10 in the
Coachella Valley. This data will allow a more meaningful estimate of manmade PM10 emissions.
The issues addressed in the Air Quality Element are a part of those set forth in the California
Government Code, Section 65302(b), where within the requirements set forth for the Circulation
Element, the Government Code conditions that air quality trends and existing air quality levels
be analyzed. In addition, the California Clean Air Act (Assembly Bill 2595) necessitates the
development of air quality policies and programs, which will protect and preserve the
environment and general public from harmful air pollutants.
AIR QUALITY GOAL, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
GOAL
Good regional air quality preserved and enhanced for the protection of the health and welfare of
the community as a whole.
Policy 1
The City shall coordinate and cooperate with CVAG and SCAQMD in the on going monitoring
and management of major pollutants affecting the City and region, with particular focus on
PM10, and shall provide all required reporting to be included in SCAQMD’s annual report.
Program 1 A
Participate, through CVAG and SCAQMD, in the monitoring of all air pollutants of regional
concern on a continuous basis, and maintain records of trends in regional air quality.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; CVAG; SCAQMD
Schedule: Continuous.
Program 1 B
The City shall make available its Air Quality Management manual to encourage and facilitate
self-regulation to the greatest extent practical. Coordinate with developers and encourage the
phasing and staging of development to assure the lowest construction-related pollutant emission
levels practical. The City shall impose mitigation measures, including the use of water trucks and
temporary irrigation systems, as well as other measures, which will effectively limit fugitive dust
emissions resulting from construction or other site disturbance.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Public Works Department
Schedule: Continuous.
                                               IV-38

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                        General Plan/Air Quality Element
Policy 2
The General Plan Land Use Element shall be developed and maintained to locate air pollution
point sources, such as manufacturing facilities, at an appropriate distance from residential areas
and other sensitive receptors.
Policy 3
The City shall promote the development of pedestrian-oriented retail centers, as well as
community-wide multi-use trails and bike paths, dedicated bike lanes and other desirable
alternatives to motor vehicle traffic.
Policy 4
The City shall promote the appropriate and cost-effective development and coordination of mass
transit/shuttle service linking residential, shopping, resort and commercial centers of the City,
and participate with CVAG, Southern California Association of Governments and public and
private service providers to improve and optimize regional transportation services.
Policy 5
The City shall encourage the use of clean alternative energy sources for transportation, heating
and cooling whenever practical.
Program 5 A
The City shall continue and expand the use of CNG and electric powered vehicles, as well as
other alternative and/or renewable energy sources to the extent practical.
Responsible Agency: Administrative Services Department; Public Works Department
Schedule: Continuous.
Program 5 B
Wherever practical, the City shall use cost effective alternative energy sources for transportation.
Responsible Agency: Administration; Public Works Department
Schedule: Continuous.
Policy 6
All development proposals brought before the City will be reviewed for potential adverse effects
on air quality and will be required to mitigate any significant impacts.
Program 6 A
The City shall conduct an initial study and, as appropriate, require detailed air quality analyses
for all applications, which have the potential to adversely affect air quality.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: Continuous.
                                                IV-39
                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                        General Plan/Air Quality Element
Program 6 B
Projects with the potential to generate significant levels of air pollutants, such as manufacturing
facilities and site development operations, shall be required by the City to incorporate air
pollution mitigation in their design and operation, and to utilize the most advanced technological
methods feasible.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Planning Commission; City
Council
Schedule: Continuous.
Program 6 C
The City may monitor the effectiveness of transportation management programs of employers,
which may include coordinated carpooling, off-peak shift times, employee flextime and other
components. As future demand warrants, promote and support the development of a Park-and-
Ride program to decrease existing and future traffic levels within the community.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; SCAQMD
Schedule: Continuous.
                                               IV-40
                                                                        TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                    General Plan/Open Space and Conservation Element
OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION ELEMENT
PURPOSE
The purpose of the Open Space and Conservation Element is to address the need for the
preservation of open space lands and to ensure the conservation, diverse development and
utilization of energy and natural resources, including watersheds, wildlife habitat, mineral and
scenic resources. These finite resources can be preserved and reclaimed, but as growth
continues so too will the demand for energy and natural resources, as well as open space lands.
This Element quantifies current (1997) energy usage, mineral resource location and
identification, and open space lands. The Open Space and Conservation Element also
identifies issues associated with energy, minerals, and open space, and provides approaches
for conservation of these commodities.
It is the intent of this Element to define and establish open space and conservation areas,
mineral resource zones, and existing energy resources and consumption patterns, in an effort
to preserve and expand these important resources and determine how they may be most
effectively managed. Policies and programs will serve as the tools to insure the preservation
and management of these resources and discourage premature or inappropriate conversion of
mineral resource zones, and open space and conservation lands to urban uses, thereby assuring
their long-term viability and integration with regional open space resources.
BACKGROUND
The broad and comprehensive nature of the issues and subjects of this Element relate directly
and indirectly to many other Elements of this General Plan. The Land Use, Circulation, Scenic
Highways, Parks and Recreation, Biological, Cultural Resources, Water Resources, and
Seismic Safety Elements are directly related to the Open Space and Conservation issues
addressed in this Element. The Land Use, Air Quality, and Circulation Elements directly relate
to the Mineral Resource issues of this Element, and the Housing and Air Quality Elements
have direct consequences upon energy resources. This Element is oriented almost exclusively
towards natural resources, with particular focus on conservation and open space lands, and
mineral and energy resources. Its design is not only the assurance of continued availability of
land for the production, use and conservation of energy and natural resources, but also for the
enjoyment of scenic beauty and recreational uses.
Open space land is defined as any parcel or area of land or water that is essentially
unimproved and devoted to open space uses. These areas primarily include lands designated
for the preservation of natural resources (plant and preserves, animal communities), rivers,
washes and their banks, managed crop lands and mineral deposits, parks and recreational
facilities, and areas where the presence or existence of hazardous conditions have prohibited
development (Government Code Section 65560(b)).
The Open Space Lands Act (Government Code Section 65566) requires local governments to
prepare open space plans before adopting required open space related zoning ordinances. The
goal is to ensure that open space zoning remains consistent with the open space plan. The Act
marked the first legislative signal in the open space movement and has remained practically
unaltered since its original enactment in 1970. As defined within the Energy and Minerals
                                              IV-41
                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                       General Plan/Open Space and Conservation Element
Element, minerals are considered to be any naturally occurring chemical elements or
compounds, formed from inorganic processes and organic substances, including, but not
limited to iron, limestone, coal, peat, bituminous rock, sand and gravel, but excluding
geothermal resources, natural gas and petroleum. The importance of mineral deposits and their
utilization is dependent upon their relative abundance and importance in commerce and
industry. Deposits of rare or important industrial materials require careful consideration before
their availability is precluded by urban development.
In recent years, federal legislation has been passed to reduce intensity of human use and
increase environmental protection to a large portion of the California desert. In recent years,
Federal legislation has turned approximately eight million acres of the California desert into
national parks and wilderness areas, a large portion of which is located in Riverside and San
Bernardino Counties. Excavation of soil and mineral deposits within the area has been limited,
and special permitting processes are being developed to review the impacts of each potential
extraction of the mineral resources.
Energy resources are integral in residential, commercial and industrial land uses, and
especially in transportation. Regional high-energy costs, a highly competitive economic
environment, and substantial opportunities for conservation encourage the development and
use of alternative energy resources. The overall quality of air and health of communities and
ecosystems are dependent upon sensible choices of energy production, use and conservation.
Government Code Section 65302(d) requires that General Plans include elements addressing
issues of resource conservation, and sets forth the areas that may be addressed, including
reclamation, prevention of pollution or resource degradation, and protection of watersheds.
Open Space Categories
There are four types of open space categories described in this Element. Each type of open
space contains its own set of issues regarding conservation.
I. Open Space for the Use of Outdoor Recreational Use
An essential priority in the community design of the City is the investment in parks,
community spaces, and open space and conservation areas. With an anticipated increase in the
population of California, Riverside County, and the Desert Hot Springs region, it is necessary
to plan for the preservation of valuable open space land. Open space within the City can
provide relief from urban congestion, while creating opportunities for recreational activities,
settings for public activities, as well as a place to gather in a more natural environment.
Open space areas for the use of outdoor recreation include those areas with outstanding scenic,
historic and cultural value; areas particularly suited for park and recreation purposes, including
those accessible to washes; and areas, which serve as links between major recreation and open
space facilities. Examples of these lands include utility easements, steep terrain and
mountainous areas, river, stream and wash beds and their banks, trails, and scenic highway
corridors.
                                                 IV-42
                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                     General Plan/Open Space and Conservation Element
Joshua Tree National Park
Perhaps the largest and most well known park facility in the Desert Hot Springs area is the
Joshua Tree National Park, which contains 794,000± acres administered by the National Park
Service, and is located immediately north of the City. Access to Joshua Tree National Park can
be found at the Long Canyon trailhead and trail. Hikers and equestrian riders can traverse the
western portion of the park and reach the Black Rock Ranger Station in Yucca Valley. The
Long Canyon Trailhead is located 0.6 miles north of Hacienda Boulevard in Long Canyon and
provides parking for cars, horse trailers and handicapped parking.
Big Morongo Canyon Area of Critical Environmental Concern (ACEC)
The Big Morongo Canyon Area of Critical Environmental Concern (ACEC), generally located
approximately one mile north of the City of Desert Hot Springs, is a desert oasis with
perennial water flowing over three miles, supporting all types of riparian vegetation. Limited
lands in the southeast portion of the ACEC are located within the City’s sphere-of-influence.
The ACEC is managed by the U.S. Bureau of Land Management (BLM), and was expanded in
1998 from 3,705 acres to 29,000± acres. In the preserve, visitors can find lush vegetation and
water providing a rich habitat for various bird species, some of which are quite rare and
unusual. Desert mammals, reptiles, and amphibians can also be found in this unique
wilderness environment.
Riverside County Ecological Park and Devil’s Garden
Within the City limits, west of Highway 62 are the Riverside County Ecological Park and the
BLM’s Devil’s Garden area. The County’s 320-acre holding is a state-owned site managed for
the protection of rare plants and animals. This site is considered to provide important
opportunities for scientific research in desert ecology and habitat and species conservation
(also see the Biological Resources Element).
The BLM and Devil’s Garden Resource Area encompasses about three square miles within the
City and boasts a unique mix of Sonoran and Mojave desert-type plants. This biological
transition area supports important specimens of cacti, succulents and other plants, as well as
sensitive bird, mammal and reptile species. The scenic qualities of this area are also
outstanding.
Other Open Spaces
In addition to Joshua Tree National Park, the Big Morongo Preserve, and other surrounding
public lands, the City of Desert Hot Springs also provides developed park facilities, including
the Carl May Community Center facilities, Arroyo Park, Constitution Park, Corsini-Eastside
Park, Hot Springs Park, Mission Springs Park, People’s Park and Wardman Park. With scenic
beauty as one of Desert Hot Springs’ prime assets, it is important that residents have a park
and open space system that will continue to grow and improve through time for current and
future generations of residents.
The table below illustrates the acreage of open space in the City of Desert Hot Springs and its
surrounding areas.
                                               IV-43

                                                                                    TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                             General Plan/Open Space and Conservation Element
                                                  Table IV-4
                                      Designated Open Space Lands
                    City of Desert Hot Springs And General Plan Study Area*
                                    Approximate Acres Approx. Acres
                                                                                                   Approx. Acres
Lands Designated Open Space/Mountain Reserve
(Designated OS/MR and not designated as                                                              5,316.0 acres
parkland)
Arroyo Park                                                                                              3.97 acres
Constitution Park                                                                                          .25 acres
Corsini-Eastside Park                                                                                   21.02 acres
Hot Springs Park                                                                                           3.0 acres
Mission Springs Park                                                                                     12.0 acres
People’s Park                                                                                                5 acres
Wardman Park                                                                                               6.6 acres
Undeveloped Park Lands                                                                                175.36 acres
Total (Approximately)                                                                                5,538.7 acres
Open Space Lands
Riverside County Ecological Reserve                                                                     240.0 acres
Devil’s Garden Area                                                                                  1,840.0 acres
Designated Private Open Space                                                                        1,204.0 acres
Open Space/Floodways                                                                                 8,360.0 acres
Additional Open Space Lands near the City of Desert Hot Springs
Joshua Tree National Park                                                                         794,000.0 acres
Big Morongo Canyon Preserve (+ACEC**)                                                               29,000.0 acres
Coachella Valley Preserve                                                                           17,076.0 acres
Whitewater Preserve                                                                                  1,175.0 acres
Willow Hole/Edom Hill Preserve                                                                       1,863.0 acres
Total Coachella Valley Preserve                                                                     20,114.0 acres
 * Other park facilities providing open space experiences are discussed further in the Parks and Recreation Element.
**Area of Critical Environmental Concern
                                                      IV-44

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                     General Plan/Open Space and Conservation Element
Trails and Floodways
Floodway channels and utility easements, serving as potential trails, can serve as public access
links between open space areas, providing residents with alternate access. A significant
opportunity for this type of floodway easement development exists in the Morongo and
Mission Creek Flood Control Channels, as well as the Desert Hot Springs Channel and future
Long Canyon flood control improvements (please see the Flooding and Hydrology, Parks &
Recreation, and Circulation Elements for more detailed information).
II. Open Space for the Preservation of Natural Resources
Open space for the preservation of natural resources encompasses an assortment of areas,
which are required to maintain biological diversity, to protect significant features, and to
ensure that future generations will have access to natural environments. Conservation is
defined as the management of natural resources to prevent waste, destruction, or neglect.
Many finite and renewable resources are beginning to be depleted by population increases and
development.
Natural resources can be categorized into two groups: renewable and finite. Renewable
resources include fertile soils, forests, wildlife, water resources, washes, and scenic beauty.
These resources can be refurbished by natural ecological cycles or sound management
practices. Careful planning and management is necessary to ensure that these resources remain
renewable. Finite resources include fossil fuels, nonmetallic and metallic minerals. These
resources are those that when destroyed or consumptively used cannot be replaced. Finite
resources must be used wisely in order to ensure their future availability. Although
conservation may suggest the hoarding of natural resources for use at a later date, the aim of
good conservation practices is to ensure a continuous yield of useful plants, animals, and
materials by establishing a balanced cycle of harvest and renewal.
III. Open Space for the Managed Production of Resources
While the most prevalent use of land is for residential, commercial and other development,
there are also economically productive uses for which rely on open land that is not
overburdened with development.
Open space for the managed production of resources requires open areas which have not yet
been urbanized, such as agricultural lands, areas containing major mineral deposits, areas of
economic importance for the production of food, wind energy production areas, recreational
uses, and areas required for the recharge of ground water basins and water storage.
IV. Open Space for Public
Health and Safety
An important function of open space is its use as a buffer to separate people and buildings
from hazards, which could cause injury, damage, or death. Open space for public health and
safety includes areas, which require special management or regulation because of hazardous or
special conditions. These include earthquake fault zones, unstable soil areas, flood plains,
watersheds, areas presenting high fire risks, areas required for the protection of water quality
and water reservoirs, and areas required for the protection and enhancement of air quality
                                               IV-45
                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                     General Plan/Open Space and Conservation Element
(Please see the Seismic Safety, Hydrology, Emergency Preparedness, fire and Police
Protection, and Water Resources Element for more detailed information). Although these
lands remain open due to hazardous situations, they have potential for other uses. Land along
fault lines can be retained in its natural condition as a wildlife corridor, or used as developed
open space, and flood control facilities may be usable for natural open space and recreation.
MINERAL RESOURCES
Within the City of Desert Hot Springs and vicinity, there are relatively few mineral resources,
as the majority of the area is made up of alluvial fans, containing mostly sand and gravel.
More particularly, the soil composition of the area consists of active channel and recent
(<11,000 years) floodplain deposits, and active alluvial fan deposits. Soils and bedrock also
include older alluvial deposits, unique structures such as the Painted Hill Formation, and
granitic plutonic rocks of the San Bernardino Mountains.
The sand and gravel deposits within the area do represent an important economic resource,
used for road base and similar applications. Other mineral deposits occurring in the region
include copper, limestone, specialty sands, and tungsten. These deposits are limited to rocky
outcroppings occurring in the Little San Bernardino Mountains and have not been exploited.
Although none of the above mentioned minerals are listed as “strategic”, they are considered
to be in short domestic supply by the U.S. Bureau of Mines, as sand and gravel are in high
demand for road base and other building materials. Efforts should be made to monitor and
preserve these resources, with the threat of significant negative environmental and aesthetic
effects still prevalent. Exhibit IV-2 identifies the predominant soil types located within the
City.
                                               IV-46

                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                     General Plan/Open Space and Conservation Element
EXHIBIT IV-2 SOIL TYPES IN DESERT HOT SPRINGS
                               IV-47
                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                       General Plan/Open Space and Conservation Element
ENERGY RESOURCES
Riverside County has very limited fossil fuel resources, importing 90% of the fuel consumed
from adjacent counties, states and foreign countries. The remaining 10% is supplied by small
amounts of oil and natural gas produced from wells located in the Chino Hills and Prado Basin
areas, and from solar and wind energy systems. With low local conventional resource levels
and high consumption rates, conservation and the development and utilization of alternative
energy sources are imperative.
Renewable Energy
There are three major and potentially significant alternative energy resources within the Desert
Hot Springs area, which are solar, wind and solid waste. The region has one of the highest
insulation values in the United States and is the site of major solar energy installations. The
San Gorgonio Pass area is one of the world's most successful wind energy production sites,
with the potential to generate up to 3,000 megawatts of electricity. Finally, solid waste, now
largely deposited in landfills, is a potentially significant source of energy but is also associated
with significant environmental constraints.
Energy Services and Consumption
The City of Desert Hot Springs is a somewhat elevated desert community, with temperatures
that are usually 5 to 7 F cooler than those on the valley floor. Temperatures occasionally
exceed 120 F in the summer months, and sometimes drop below freezing during the desert
winter nights. With somewhat milder year-round temperatures, compared to other desert
communities, Desert Hot Springs residents still must factor substantial utility costs into their
cost of living.
Precise figures on per capita or per household consumption of electricity and natural gas in the
City of Desert Hot Springs are not available and vary significantly with use, however, the
South Coast Air Quality Management District
(SCAQMD) and utility companies have developed assumptions to define the general level of
consumption of energy on a use basis.
Gas Service
On average, the typical residential energy consumer uses approximately 6,665 cubic feet per
unit per month of natural gas. Gas service is available to commercial, industrial and residential
users in the City, with costs varying with seasons and amount of use. Compressed natural gas
is emerging as a cleaner-burning vehicular fuel and will be essential in fueling industrial
development (Please see the Public Utilities Element for a more detailed discussion).
Electrical Service
On average, the typical residential electric residence uses approximately 5,626 kilowatt-hours
per year of electricity. Electrical services are provided in the Desert Hot Springs area by
Southern California Edison (SCE). There are two substations that serve the City of Desert Hot
Springs: the Coffee substation, located on Camino Aventura, west of Palm Drive, and the
Devers substation, north of Dillon Road in the City’s SOI. Every year, residential users are
offered various rebates for the installation of energy efficient equipment. Several rebates
offered by SCE include: refunds for the replacement of a “through-the-wall” heat pump; for
the installation or replacement of a central electric air conditioner; for the replacement of a
central electric heat pump; and for the replacement or retrofitting of a heat pump water heater,
                                                 IV-48

                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                        General Plan/Open Space and Conservation Element
to name a few. In addition to providing electrical services to their customers, SCE has special
rates for low-income customers. (Please see the Public Utilities Element for a more detailed
discussion).
Alternative Energy
Desert Hot Springs has a high potential for wind and solar energy use, with year-round
sunshine and intense summer heat providing an excellent setting for the use of this energy
resource. Both residential and commercial uses in the City utilize solar heating systems to heat
swimming pools, and to provide hot water, lighting, air conditioning and heating. Although
the initial cost of installation is relatively high for solar systems, a 70% reduction in electricity
bills can be realized for certain applications, with an average payback of 1.5 years for
residential, and 2.5 for commercial. The most typical use of solar energy in the City is for
domestic water heating. Desert Hot Springs's climate calls for flexibility in design and
materials in order to allow for alternate energy systems and maximum energy conservation.
Windfarm development is already occurring in the City, its SOI and near the Gorgonio Pass.
The energy resources available to accomplish useful work are conservation, solar, geothermal,
wind, hydropower, oil, propane, gas and uranium. Conservation is a special energy resource
because it is the prudent use of all natural and man-made resources. Conservation is
considered to be reduced demand resulting from lifestyle and technological changes, waste-to-
energy conversion, recycling, cogeneration, and waste reduction from efficient building and
equipment design standards, transportation habits and land use design. All of these
conservation methodologies should be encouraged in the City of Desert Hot Springs.
LAND ACQUISITION
One way to ensure the development or preservation of natural resources is through the
designation of open space. Open space can allow the land to be used for the good of the entire
community while remaining largely undeveloped. To help conserve open space in California,
many conservation programs and legislative enactments have been put into effect. These
programs include the Conservation Easement Act, Open Space Easement Act of 1974, less-
than-fee real property interests, and the Scenic Easement Deed Act.
The Conservation Easement Act (Civil Code Sections 815-816) enables a local government or
a nonprofit organization to acquire continual easements for the conservation of agricultural
and open space lands, and historic preservation. An agreement is made between the landowner
and accepting agency as to the types of uses that can be permitted, which are then incorporated
into the easement. The granting of a conservation easement may qualify as a charitable
contribution for tax purposes or as an “enforceable restriction” for purposes of preferential
assessment.
The Open Space Easement Act of 1974 (Government Code Sections 51070-51097) gives local
governments the authority to accept easements granted to them or to nonprofit organizations
for the purpose of conserving open space and agricultural lands.
State law facilitates preserving open space through a less-than-fee real property interest. This
concept grants the land holder the right to prevent certain land uses. Easements qualify as less-
than-fee interests, and are often used because they are less expensive than the purchase of full
                                                  IV-49

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                     General Plan/Open Space and Conservation Element
fee rights, can be more effective than zoning, do not displace, and often yield tax advantages
to property owners. Local agencies may obtain these easements by purchase, exaction, or gift.
The Scenic Easement Deed Act (Government Code Sections 6950-6954) authorizes a local
government to purchase fee or scenic easements, but there is no special mechanism for
obtaining them. Land uses are regulated by the Act enabling local governments to adopt an
ordinance for the purpose of establishing open space covenants with property owners.
A City may acquire real property rights in other various ways. The City of Desert Hot Springs
may wish to consider additional acquisition methods such as acquisition of fee simple absolute
interests, joint acquisition, and land swapping, which are discussed in the General Plan EIR.
Public Land Trusts
A public land conservation trust is another type of vehicle devoted to protecting open space,
agricultural lands, wildlife habitats, and natural resource lands. Land trusts achieve their
objectives primarily through acquiring and managing interests in land.
Land conservation trusts preserve open space and resource lands in a variety of ways. Some
use their funds to acquire fee simple interest in real estate and then manage or lease back their
holdings. Others purchase conservation easements, which protect sensitive land from
development while allowing owners to sell their remaining property interests to whomever
they please.
One such entity, the Coachella Valley Mountains Conservancy, was established by the
California Legislature in 1990 to acquire and hold in trust open space in the mountainous
lands surrounding the Coachella Valley. Working in coordination and cooperation with local,
state, and federal agencies, the Conservancy has assisted in the protection of over 13,000 acres
in the Coachella Valley mountain areas between 1991 and 1997. Together these entities have
also developed a conservation strategy to protect the mountains for present and future use. The
Mountains Conservancy is assisted by the Friends of the Desert Mountains, a nonprofit
membership organization dedicated to preservation efforts ranging from fundraising to habitat
restoration.
Since they are less fettered by red tape, private land trusts are usually able to respond more
quickly than governmental entities to sudden and fleeting purchasing opportunities. They also
use their real estate experience to help public agencies with the mechanics of acquisition. Both
private and public land trusts help to preserve environmentally sensitive open space and
conservation lands, pursue state and federal financing with grants and loans, and other
assistance mechanisms for the preservation of open space.
Other Recreational Assets
Within the City and its sphere-of-influence, other recreational assets occur which include both
public and private lands. Golf courses include: Desert Dunes Golf Course is a unique and
challenging 174-acre, 18-hole championship Robert Trent Jones Golf Course, Mission Lakes
Golf Course, also an 18-hole championship course, providing challenging mountain holes, and
Sands Mobile Country Club, a 9-hole executive golf course. In the Mission Creek area, the
San Gorgonio Wilderness Area comprises of 37,980 acres of BLM-managed land located
                                               IV-50
                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                     General Plan/Open Space and Conservation Element
northwest of the City, and provides protection of important biological resources. This
wilderness is part of the eastern slope of the San Bernardino Mountains with topography
rapidly changing from low, rolling foothills and canyons to steep, rugged mountains.
Elevations range from 2,300 to 5,500 feet. Because of this elevation gradient, the wilderness
reflects a unique transition between desert, coastal and mountain environments.
Funding Mechanisms
Viable funding mechanisms will be essential to finance the acquisition of open space and may
include state general obligation bonds, tax increment financing, and grants. In addition to the
funding mechanisms mentioned, the Legislature has helped organizations create a broad range
of categorical grant and loan programs that can help to finance open space and make its
acquisition more economically feasible for smaller communities, including:
•        Land and Water Conservation Fund/Department of Parks and Recreation
•        Habitat Conservation Program/Department of Parks and Recreation
•        Simms Trail Bill/Department of Parks and Recreation.
•        Public Access Program/Department of Fish and Game
•        Wildlife Conservation Board Program/Department of Fish and Game.
•        Urban Forestry Program/California Department of Forestry
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The City of Desert Hot Springs is located in a natural setting where snow-capped mountains
and dramatic scenery, blue skies and clean air provide a high quality of life for its residents
and visitors. In order to continue this residential resort lifestyle during future years of
increased development, open space will need to be maintained and preserved for future
generations.
The thoughtful implementation of the City General Plan, Development Code and other
regulatory mechanisms will play an essential role in preserving existing open space and
conservation areas. They will also assure that continued development does not adversely
impact these areas and may provide opportunities and mechanisms for long-term conservation
of lands not currently under the City 's control.
The City can also play an important role in encouraging the creation of nonprofit conservation
groups and assist in securing open space lands for long-term preservation. Assistance may also
be provided in helping to secure state and federal grants for purchase of conservation
easements and/or fee simple ownership interest. The ongoing efforts of the City and private
interests can add to the conservation and preservation of one of the communities’ most
valuable assets, its natural resources and open space lands.
The nonrenewable character of mineral deposits requires their careful evaluation and
preservation to prevent unnecessary waste and/or exploitation. The California Surface Mining
and Reclamation Act (SMARA) of 1975 was passed to identify and protect mineral resources
in areas of high land used conflict and to insure the reclamation of mined lands. Additionally,
Government Code Section 65302(d) states that for the conservation, development and
utilization of natural resources, the location, quantity and quality of rock, sand and gravel
resources shall be identified. The state has already identified the majority of mineral resources
                                               IV-51

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                     General Plan/Open Space and Conservation Element
within the Desert Hot Springs area. Public Resources Code Section 2762 indicates that mineral
resource management policies shall be developed to establish the importance of the minerals
to the market region. Desert Hot Springs' compliance with these mandates will assure that
adequate supplies of such resources will be available to meet the future needs of the City,
County and region.
Steadily increasing economic and environmental costs associated with energy production and
use are forcing communities and countries to develop new energy policies and programs. The
various constraints that have emerged can also be viewed as opportunities for economic
development and environmental enhancement. Lowering demand will help to control costs.
Encouraging development and use of alternative and renewable energy can expand economic
opportunity. The community has an important and meaningful role in the encouragement of
the wise use of energy resources.
The following goals, policies and programs provide the basis for the long-term viability of this
important component of the community.
OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION GOALS, POLICIES AND
 PROGRAMS
GOAL 1
Conservation, preservation and management of open space areas and protection of
environmental resources and threatened animal species, protection against environmental
hazards, and provision of enhanced recreational opportunities, and scenic qualities of the City.
GOAL 2
Preservation of the City ’s desert atmosphere, including maintenance of natural and scenic
resources.
Policy 1
Identify and map designated and generally assigned lands suitable for preservation as passive
and active open space areas, including parks, trails, and open space resources.
Program 1 A
Confer and coordinate with other responsible agencies to map and periodically update
information on the various open space lands and facilities within the City and immediate
vicinity.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; City Engineer; Community
Services Department; Bureau of Land Management; State Department of Fish and Game;
Riverside County Flood Control
Schedule: Implement initial mapping in 2001-02 Fiscal year; Continuous; every two years.
Policy 2
Where appropriate, incorporate identified hazard zones (earthquake fault lines, floodways and
floodplains, steep and unsuitable slopes, etc.) into the land use map, designating these areas as
public or private open space.
                                              IV-52

                                                                        TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                    General Plan/Open Space and Conservation Element
Program 2 A
Identify and assess areas of the community appropriate for preservation as public or private,
passive and active open space. On-going consideration shall be given to future inclusion into
the City Open Space and Conservation system.
Responsible Agency: Planning Commission; City Council; Community Development
Department
Schedule: Continuous; minimum every five years.
Policy 3
With the cooperation and approval of the local utilities and service providers and County
Flood Control Districts, the City shall maximize use of flood control and utility easement
areas to develop a multi-use trail system to and through parks and open space areas.
Program 3 A
Confer and coordinate with the County Flood Control District and utility purveyors to, as
practical, integrate a multiple use trail system that links City parks and open space and
conservation areas.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; County Flood Control; and
public utility purveyors
Schedule: 2001-02, Continuous.
Policy 4
Prepare and implement design and development guidelines and regulations that assure
provision of appropriate buffers between urban lands and open space/conservation areas.
Program 4 A
Establish land use and development guidelines and regulations in the General Plan and Zoning
Ordinance which ensure the integration of appropriate buffers between urban land uses and
open space and conservation areas.
Responsible Agency: City Council; Community Development Department
Schedule: 2000-01, Continuous.
Policy 5
Adopt amendments to the Zoning Ordinance, which encourage the provision of open space
areas through flexible development standards.
Program 5 A
The City shall support and, as appropriate, work with the Coachella Valley Mountains
Conservancy to preserve environmentally sensitive open space and conservation lands and to
provide a mechanism for gifts and bequests of land to the trust.
Responsible Agency: Planning Commission; City Council; Coachella Valley Mountains
Conservancy; CVAG; Community Development Department
Schedule: 2001-02; Continuous.
                                              IV-53
                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                     General Plan/Open Space and Conservation Element
Program 5 B
The City shall cooperate and participate with the Coachella Valley Mountains Conservancy in
pursuing private funding as well as state and federal grants, loans and other assistance for
acquisition, preservation and management of open space and conservation lands.
Responsible Agency: Coachella Valley Mountains Conservancy; City Community
Development Department; CVAG
Schedule: 2001-02, Continuous.
Policy 6
The City shall assure a Development Code, which encourages the provision of open space
areas through flexible development standards.
Program 6 A
Ordinances and other appropriate regulations shall be amended to assure the provision of
flexible development policies, standards, and guidelines, that encourage the provision of
quality open space amenities within new residential subdivisions and planned developments.
Responsible Agency: Planning Commission; City Council; Community Development
Department
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Policy 7
The City shall adopt a comprehensive grading ordinance that will protect and conserve open
space and natural resources to the greatest extent practical (also see Geotechnical Element).
Program 7 A
The City shall develop and adopt a comprehensive grading ordinance that protects hillsides
and other open space and natural resource conservation areas sensitive in terms of topography
and visibility, wildlife resources, water or mineral resources and air quality.
Responsible Agency: City Council; City Planning Commission; Community Development
Department
Schedule: 2001-02; Continuous
                                               IV-54
                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                     General Plan/Energy and Mineral Resources Element
ENERGY AND MINERAL RESOURCES
ELEMENT
PURPOSE
The purpose of this element is to address the need for thoughtful use and management of energy
and mineral resources, diverse development and conservation. Minerals and most energy
resources are finite and limited. The household demand for energy resources in Desert Hot
Springs and the Coachella Valley is relatively high and escalating energy prices have placed
serious burdens on residents and businesses alike. This element sets forth goals, policies and
programs that respond to the community’s dependency on these limited resources. Resource
production, transmission and use issues are also set forth in the element, as are the major
opportunities faced by the city and regional governments for more local control of these
resources.
Current (1997) energy usage, mineral resource location and identification are quantified in this
element. Mineral resource zones and existing energy resources and consumption patterns are
defined and established in an effort to preserve and expand these important resources and
determine how they can be most effectively managed. Policies and programs serve as tools to
insure the preservation and management of these resources and discourage premature or
inappropriate conversion of mineral and/or energy resources zones to incompatible uses.
BACKGROUND
The Energy and Mineral Resources Element is directly related to several other elements,
including Land Use, Open Space and Conservation, Circulation, Air Quality, Housing,
Economic Development, as well as other elements. A wide range of state and federal legislation
and regulation are applicable to energy and mineral resource issues, including California
Government Code Section 65560(b), which directs cities and counties to provide for the
preservation of energy and mineral resource areas, as well as other resources. As discussed
below, these requirements have direct application to the City and its Sphere-of-Influence, where
important mineral and energy resources have already been identified and developed.
Government Code Section 65302(d) requires that General Plans include elements that address
issues of resource conservation, and sets forth the areas that may be addressed, including
reclamation, prevention of resource degradation and preservation for long-term use.
The regulation of mineral resources is also extensively addressed in the Public Resources Code,
including Sections 2762, 2763 and 2764. Government Code Section 65303 allows the local
jurisdiction to add other resource conservation/management subjects that, in its opinion, relate
to the physical development of the City.
The State Solar Rights Act and Solar Shade Control Act, meant to enhance opportunities for the
use of solar energy, and Title 24 building standards, provided to reduce unnecessary energy use
in new or substantially remodeled construction, are some of the state regulations affecting
                                              III-55

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                      General Plan/Energy and Mineral Resources Element
mineral and energy resources. These and the above referenced code sections may be
incorporated into the General Plan.
Minerals are considered to be any naturally occurring chemical elements or compounds formed
from inorganic processes and organic substances, including iron, sand and gravel, limestone,
coal and peat, but not including natural gas or petroleum. The importance of mineral deposits
and their utilization is dependent upon their relative abundance and importance in commerce
and industry. Deposits of rare or important industrial materials require careful consideration
before their availability is precluded by urban development.
Energy resources are integral in residential, commercial and industrial land uses, and especially
in transportation. Relatively high regional energy costs, a highly competitive economic
environment, and substantial opportunities for conservation encourage the development and use
of alternative energy resources. The overall quality of our air and the health of our ecosystems
are dependent upon sensitive choices of energy production, use and conservation.
Located in an area with high mean annual temperatures, Desert Hot Springs and the Coachella
Valley have a substantial need for air conditioning and related electrical energy demand. To a
lesser extent, the Valley also consumes large quantities of natural gas for space heat and hot
water for homes and businesses, to provide industrial process heat, and to prepare food.
Energy Resource Consumption
Consumption of electricity and natural gas per capita or per household in the Coachella Valley
are estimates and vary significantly with use. However, the South Coast Air Quality
Management District (SCAQMD), in cooperation with utilities, has developed a set of
assumptions to define the general level of energy consumption on a use basis. Residential
energy users, the City's largest consumer segment, on average utilize approximately 79,000
cubic feet of natural gas, and 6,000-kilowatt hours (KWH) per household per year.
With the minor exception of electrical energy being generated from nuclear and renewable
resources, non-renewable fossil fuels are depended upon for the generation of electricity and the
heating of homes. Also important, the operation of vehicles is still essentially dependent upon
non-renewable resources. In addition to reducing the long-term availability of these important
resources, the burning of fossil fuels is directly associated with the production of air pollutants,
hazardous waste materials and global warming.
ELECTRIC POWER SERVICES
The availability of cost-competitive electrical power is essential to the community in attracting
new residents, business and industry. The cost of electricity can have a substantial impact on
business, and its affordability through reasonable rates, load management and energy
conservation incentives is essential to the continued growth of the Desert Hot Springs business
and industrial sectors. The impact of the high cost of electrical energy is further compounded
by air conditioning needs during summer months. In Desert Hot Springs, electric power
services are provided by the Southern California Edison Company (SCE). Electricity is
transmitted to the City primarily through high voltage lines and step-down transformers at
substations located in the City’s SOI. Currently, there is no power generation within the City,
                                                IV-56

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                      General Plan/Energy and Mineral Resources Element
with the exception of a single 160-acre wind farm and stand-by generators located at City Hall
and the Carl May Community Center.
Southern California Edison
SCE is the primary electric service provider in the City
and Sphere planning areas. High voltage transmission
lines deliver power to the Devers substation in the City’s
sphere-of-influence, north of Dillon Road, and the
Coffee Substation, located on Camino Aventura, west of
Palm Drive, where power is stepped down and
distributed through lower voltage lines. Individual
homes and businesses then receive power through a
final transformer, which brings voltages down to useful
levels.
Residential users are offered a variety of rebates for the installation of energy efficient
equipment. Several rebates offered by SCE include: refunds for the replacement of “through-
the-wall” heat pumps; the installation or replacement of a central electric air conditioner; the
replacement of central electric heat pumps; and the replacement of heat pump water heaters, to
name a few. Another program called Automatic Power Shift allows substantial savings from
June through September, in exchange for allowing SCE to remotely cycle-off selected air
conditioning units during peak period of heavy use and potential power outages.
NATURAL GAS SERVICE
Natural gas is found in association with petroleum crude oil deposits and is transported
throughout the country through high-pressure transmission lines. It is generally considered a
clean and efficient fuel, but nonetheless emits a wide range of air pollutants. On average, the
typical household uses approximately 6,600 cubic feet of natural gas per dwelling unit per
month. Gas service is available to commercial, industrial and residential users in the City, with
costs varying with seasons and amount of use. Natural gas has also been adopted as the fuel of
choice by the Sunline Transit Authority, which now operates its entire fleet on compressed
natural gas (CNG). The City has also added CNG-powered vehicles to its fleet. College of the
Desert has even added an educational certificate program in the repair and maintenance of CNG
vehicles, providing the first such college-level certification in California.
The General Plan study area is located within the service district of the Southern California Gas
Company (The Gas Company). The Gas Company has by far the most sophisticated and
detailed technical assistance and incentive program of all energy service providers serving the
City. Service planners and technical expertise from the Gas Company’s various service
divisions are available to assist in addressing a wide range of use issues, including land use
master planning, service extension and use-specific technical consulting/problem-solving. A
brief summary of the various services available from the Gas Company are provided below.
                                               IV-57

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                      General Plan/Energy and Mineral Resources Element
Gas Company Energy Management Programs
A wide range of energy management, conservation and equipment retrofit programs have been
developed by The Gas Company for its customer base. These programs include core
nonresidential customer equipment rebates up to 20% of the cost of qualifying equipment. To
maximize energy efficiency and cost-effective equipment purchases and operations, assistance
in facilities planning and analysis is also provided. The Gas Company’s Air Quality Assistance
Program provides detailed information on current and anticipated air quality requirements and
helps users through the regulatory compliance maze, including the permitting process. Business
partnerships are also facilitated, with an Export Hotline and market research. The Gas Company
also helps in the development of new technologies and process solutions primarily for industrial
customers.
LOCAL RENEWABLE ENERGY RESOURCES
Desert Hot Springs and the Coachella Valley have
substantial and important renewable energy
resources, which include abundant sunshine and
high temperatures, and the San Gorgonio Wind
Resource Area in the vicinity of the San Gorgonio
Pass and extending into the City and its Sphere-
of-Influence. A proven energy resource area is the
west end of the City; approximately 160 acres of
windfarm development is located in the City and
extensive windfarm development occurs in the
west sphere area.
In the early 1980s wind energy development started in the San Gorgonio Pass area. It was
originally regulated by the U.S. Bureau of Land Management and the County of Riverside.
During the mid-1990s the City of Desert Hot Springs and the City of Palm Springs both
annexed windfarms into their incorporated areas. The San Gorgonio Wind Resource Study and
subsequent analysis delineate those portions of the wind resource area that offer an
economically viable (developable) wind resource.
The cost of wind-generated electricity is now equal to or lower than electricity generated by
coal or natural gas. It is generally conceded that the true costs of energy from fossil or nuclear
fuels are not yet fully factored into their market price. The performance of commercial-scale
turbine development in the city and western sphere area would appear to indicate the viability
of additional City and SOI lands for future commercial-scale wind turbine development.
                                                IV-58

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                      General Plan/Energy and Mineral Resources Element
Solar Energy
The costs of producing and installing solar photovoltaic systems, which involve the direct
conversion of sunshine to electricity, have been dramatically reduced in recent years but are
still primarily used for special applications, including powering remote locations. Solar thermal
systems have meanwhile been in use all over the world for many years and are widely applied
in the Coachella Valley to provide domestic hot water and to heat swimming pools. Passive
solar designs are also being used to provide natural lighting and space heating. Desert Hot
Springs is well situated to take advantage of the continued emergence and refinement of solar
technologies, with intense solar insulation for both solar thermal and photovoltaic systems.
These technologies are also expected to become integral to the emergence of a hydrogen fuel
cycle, which could result in virtually pollution-free electric power and combustion fuel.
Geothermal Energy
Geothermal resources are also in plentiful supply in Desert Hot Springs. The City of Desert Hot
Springs primarily developed to take advantage of the naturally occurring hot mineral water,
which exists, in this localized area. The geothermal hot springs are structurally controlled by
faults and occur in three known water-bearing strata or aquifers. The lower-most aquifer is
generally the most prolific and yields the hottest water. Water temperatures in the aquifers
range from 77 F to 200 F, with water depth ranging from 16 feet to 340 feet. Geothermal
resources are largely focused along the Mission Creek fault.
Geothermal energy in Desert Hot Springs is used primarily for commercial spas and therapeutic
pools, and may have limited potential for space heating and domestic hot water.
MINERAL RESOURCES
The nonrenewable character of mineral deposits requires their careful and efficient
development to prevent unnecessary waste or exploitation. The excavation of mineral resources
can also have significant environmental impacts that may only be marginally mitigated by
surface mining reclamation plans. Evidence of mining, particularly surface mining in desert
areas, can remain for centuries if not properly reclaimed through extensive importing of fill,
grading, and replanting.
In the Coachella Valley, the deep fault-controlled valley has filled in with eroded materials
from the surrounding hills and mountains to a depth of thousands of feet within the planning
area. As a consequence, the mineral resources of the desert floor are largely limited to sands
and gravels. Important deposits of these materials occur within the region and are actively being
developed, although none are located within the City or its SOI. Other mineral deposits
occurring in the region include copper, limestone, specialty sands, and tungsten. These deposits
are limited to rocky outcroppings occurring in the Little San Bernardino Mountains and have
not been exploited.
                                                IV-59
                                                                              TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                         General Plan/Energy and Mineral Resources Element
Locally Important Mineral Resources
In 1988, the State of California Department of Conservation, Division of Mines and Geology
released a report identifying aggregate materials in the Palm Springs Production-Consumption
Region, which includes the City and it’s sphere-of-influence. The primary goal of the study was
to identify regionally significant mineral deposits in an effort to conserve and develop them, in
order to meet anticipated aggregate production needs of the region.
Three mineral resource categories are applicable to the City and its sphere-of-influence:
MRZ-1: Areas where adequate information indicates that no significant mineral deposits are
        present, or where it is judged that little likelihood exists for their presence.
MRZ-2: Areas where adequate information indicates that significant mineral deposits are
        present, or where it is judged that a high likelihood for their presence exists.
MRZ-3: Areas containing mineral deposits, the significance of which cannot be evaluated
        from available data.
As shown on state mineral resources maps, an area of MRZ-1 is identified in the hills west of
Whitewater Canyon. MRZ-2 zones occur at Little Morongo Canyon just north of the City and
its SOI, and along the Whitewater River floodplain approximately 1 mile west of the SOI,
which coincides with the operation of two active aggregate quarries. A full range of aggregate
products is supplied by these plants. The remaining area of the Sphere-of-Influence is in the
MRZ-3 zone.
The conclusions of the state study indicate that existing aggregate resources will only meet 43
percent of the aggregate demand in the Palm Springs Production-Consumption Region over the
next 50 years. This may necessitate the establishment of new resources for mining or utilization
of alternative resources.
While sand and gravel for aggregate and decorative stone are the only mineral commodities
currently being produced in the Desert Hot Springs area, small deposits of limestone, gold and
copper have been explored in the past. Two small deposits of copper minerals were staked out
in West Blind Canyon in 1954. One is the Cactus Hill mine, a 20-foot horizontal mineshaft; the
other, a mile southwest, is called the Indian Copper mine, a 50-foot vertical shaft. Both mines
are inactive.
Local residents report that a vein-quartz gold mine called the Hager-Kale mine was worked
prior to 1911. The mine has not been located according to the State of California Division of
Mines and Geology (1960), but an approximate location is shown to be one mile east of the
mouth of Long Canyon.
                                                  IV-60

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                     General Plan/Energy and Mineral Resources Element
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Steadily increasing economic and environmental costs associated with energy production and
use are forcing communities and countries to develop new energy policies and programs. The
various constraints that have emerged can also be viewed as opportunities for economic
development and environmental enhancement. Lowering or shifting demand will help to control
costs and require power generators to operate more efficiently and price their product more
competitively. Encouraging the development and use of alternative and renewable energy can
also expand economic opportunity.
The community has an important and meaningful role in encouraging the wise use of energy
resources. The City also has an important long-term role in helping assure the availability of
important sand and gravel resources located in the Sphere. Future resource needs must be kept
in mind when land use or development planning has the potential to adversely affect these
important mineral and energy resources.
ENERGY AND MINERAL RESOURCES GOAL, POLICIES AND
PROGRAMS
GOAL
Conservation and thoughtful management of energy sources and mineral deposits, assuring the
long-term viability of limited and non-renewable resources.
Policy 1
Promote energy conservation in all areas of community development, including transportation,
development planning, public and private sector office construction and operation, as well as in
the full range of residential, commercial and industrial projects.
Program 1 A
Participate in the energy management and conservation efforts of Sunline Transit Authority and
encourage the expanded use of compressed natural gas, buses with bike racks, and other system
improvements, which enhance overall energy conservation.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Sunline Transit; CVAG
Schedule: Continuous.
Program 1 B
Plan for and facilitate the development of a Citywide and regional bike path system to provide
visitors and residents with non-vehicular alternatives for travel to work, convenience shopping,
and recreating.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; CVAG; RCTC
Schedule: Continuous.
Policy 2
The General Plan and other community plans shall assure an efficient circulation system and
land use pattern in the City, which minimizes travel.
                                               IV-61
                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                      General Plan/Energy and Mineral Resources Element
Program 2 A
Community land use and transportation planning and design shall assure the provision of
convenient neighborhood shopping, medical and other professional services appropriately
located to minimize travel and facilitate the use of alternative means of transportation.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Planning Commission; City
Council
Schedule: 2001-02, Continuous.
Policy 3
Major mixed-use developments, which provide significant employment centers, shall be
required to provide convenient and safe access to the public transit system.
Policy 4
Pro-actively support the affordable and reliable production and delivery of electrical power to
the community.
Program 4 A
Investigate and pursue the various options available to influence or directly manage the
purchasing and/or distribution of electrical power to the various segments of the community,
including regular consultation with SCE, and the possible participation in a public power
authority.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Public Works Department; City
Council
Schedule: 2001-02
Policy 5
Support public and private efforts to develop and operate alternative systems of thermal and
electrical production, which take advantage of local renewable resources.
Program 5 A
Assign land use and zoning designations to appropriate lands in the City’s wind resource area
to allow and facilitate their development as windfarms to the extent practical, consistent with
the City’s standards.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; CVAG; RCTC
Schedule: Upon annexation.
Program 5 B
Support and facilitate the integration of co-generation and other energy management systems
into larger industrial and commercial operations in the City to enhance operational efficiencies
and provide additional opportunities for local power production.
Responsible Agency: Public Works Department; SCE; So. Cal Gas
Schedule: Continuous.
Policy 5 C
To the extent practical, monitor and regulate development in the vicinity of significant mineral
resources occurring within the City, its Sphere-of-Influence and the vicinity.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Public Works
Schedule: Continuous.
                                               IV-62

                                                                                   TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                                                      General Plan
        CITY OF DESERT HOT SPRINGS
   COMPREHENSIVE GENERAL PLAN
                                             CHAPTER V
                                ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARDS
This chapter of the General Plan addresses those man-made and natural environmental hazards, which
occur in the City of Desert Hot Springs and surrounding areas. General Plan elements discussed under this
chapter include Geotechnical, Flooding and Hydrology, Noise, and Hazardous and Toxic Materials. The
assessment of and planning for these hazards or constraints are the primary purpose of this chapter of the
General Plan.
                                                        V
                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                    General Plan/Geotechnical Element
GEOTECHNICAL ELEMENT
PURPOSE
The purpose of the Geotechnical Element is to provide information, as well as goals,
policies and programs to protect the general health, safety and welfare of the City from
seismic and other geotechnical hazards, and to educate the community and its residents
about seismic and related geologic hazards. The Element is also meant to satisfy the
requirements of state law, including the Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act
(amended). The Element and its supporting documentation are also intended to provide a
regularly updated information database on geotechnical hazards affecting the region,
which will serve as the basis for on-going land use policies and decisions.
BACKGROUND
A wide range of other General Plan elements that are directly or indirectly related to the
Geotechnical Element, including Land Use, Emergency Preparedness, Circulation,
Housing, Public Utilities, Economic Development, and Public Buildings and Facilities.
The Emergency Preparedness Element of the General Plan is one most directly related to
the seismic safety issues embodied in the element. Many of the procedures, plans,
programs and policies in that element are logical extensions of the Geotechnical Element.
In this regard, the Flooding and Hydrology and Fire and Police Protection Elements are
also closely related to seismic and geotechnical safety.
The City of Desert Hot Springs and the General Plan study area are located at the
northwestern extreme of the Salton Trough, which is the landward extension of the East
Pacific Rise spreading ridge and transform fault system. This spreading ridge is creating
new crust and is responsible for separating Baja California from mainland Mexico and
creating the Gulf of California and the Imperial and Coachella Valleys. This spreading
action is also responsible for moving the Pacific Plate to the northwest relative to the
North American Plate at the rate of about 50 mm per year. Movement along these two
tectonic plates is responsible for the earthquakes that occur in Southern California, with
about 70 percent of this movement being accommodated by the San Andreas Fault Zone.
The General Plan study area straddles two physiographic provinces; the valley floors in
the north are part of the Colorado Desert province, and the San Bernardino and Little San
Bernardino Mountains being in the Transverse Range physiographic province. The valley
floor is a tectonic (fault controlled) depression that began forming about 5 million years
ago and in the study area has been filled with nearly 5,000 feet of sediment (some of
marine origin) washed down from surrounding mountains. In the vicinity of the
US/Mexico border this spreading and sediment infilling is up to 40,000 feet deep.
                                                V-1
                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                       General Plan/Geotechnical Element
Applicable Legislation
The California General Plan Guidelines and a wide range of other requirements for the
development of an element addressing seismic safety issues are found in both the
California Government Code and Public Resources Code. Government Code Section
65302(g) requires that the General Plan address the need to protect the community from
unreasonable risks associated with the effects of seismically induced surface rupture,
ground shaking, ground failure, seiching, dam failure, subsidence and other known
geologic hazards. In accordance with Government Code Section 65303, the City General
Plan may also address other subjects related to the physical development of the
community, as provided through Flooding and Hydrology, Emergency Preparedness and
other Elements of this Plan.
The Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act is considered the most important piece
of legislation related to this Element and is found in Public Resources Code Sections
2621 et. seq. The location of these study zones must be disclosed to the general public
through the use of maps and other appropriate materials (Title 14, California
Administrative Code Section 3603 (b)).
Finally, Government Code section 8876 establishes a program by which the City and all
other jurisdictions located within seismic zone 4, as set forth in Chapter 2-23 of Part 2 of
Title 24 of the Administrative Code, shall identify all potentially hazardous or
substandard buildings and shall establish a program for the mitigation of these buildings’
inadequacies.
Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act
The Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act (previously known as the Alquist-Priolo
Special Studies Zone Act adopted in 1972), was developed with the primary purpose of
mitigating the hazards associated with fault rupture by prohibiting the location of
structures for human occupancy across the trace of an active fault. Earthquake fault
zones, which are sufficiently active and well defined, have been designated on maps
prepared by the State Division of Mines and Geology. Study area boundaries range from
200 to 500 feet on either side of an active fault, depending on whether it is a minor or
major fault. The Act defines active faults as those that have evidenced movement during
the past 11,000 years (Holocene epoch).
The City is also required by the Act to withhold the issuance of development permits
within an active fault zone until geologic investigations are conducted that demonstrate
that sites are not threatened by surface displacement from future faulting. The Coachella
Valley Segment of the San Andreas Fault Zone (also known as the Mission Creek Fault)
passes through the southwestern quadrant of the urban core of the City. It extends
through the SOI from the Desert Crest Mobile home Park in the southeast, and through
the Mission Lakes Country Club development in the north-central portion of the planning
area (see Exhibit V-1: Faults in the Desert Hot Springs General Plan Area). The Banning
Fault is located in the City’s southern SOI and passes very near the extreme southwest
corner of the city limits. These faults and others with the potential to cause damage in the
City are discussed further below.
                                                V-2

                                                                        TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                    General Plan/Geotechnical Element
Geotechnical Conditions in the Desert Hot Springs Region
Located along one of the most active tectonic boundaries on the globe, the Coachella
Valley and Southern California region is susceptible to a wide range of hazards
associated with geotechnical conditions. Recent analysis indicates that far too few
earthquakes have occurred in Southern California in the last 200 years to account for the
rate of movement between the Pacific and North American plates. The data suggest that
the region will be subject to either numerous, moderate earthquakes (such as the
Northridge quake) or a few larger (Magnitude 7.2 or larger) earthquakes. Therefore, the
City and the region must factor in these geologic threats in the development of
appropriate policies and programs.
Geologic Units, Basement Rocks, Alluvium and Sand
In addition to the tectonic forces acting on the Desert Hot Springs area, geologic hazards
and geotechnical constraints are also affected by the characteristics of the rocks and
sediments that underlie the area. The majority of the planning area consists of active
channel deposits, Holocene (within the last 11,000 years) flood plain deposits and active
alluvial fan deposits, which extend from the San Bernardino foothills south to Interstate-
10 and east to the canyons and foothills of the Little San Bernardino Mountains. Older
geologic units in the Planning Area include Holocene surficial sediments deposited on the
valley floor, Holocene and Late Pleistocene alluvial fan deposits and Pleistocene
deposits.
The prevailing alluvial sediments are underlain by a thick section of semi-consolidated
and consolidated sedimentary rock of terrestrial and marine origin. The semi-
consolidated units are exposed primarily in the western portion of the Planning Area,
forming the flanks of Whitewater Hill and Painted Hills. Basement rock in the area north
of the San Andreas Fault Zone is expected to be the same as that making up the San
Bernardino and Little San Bernardino Mountains. Basement rock south of the zone is
expected to be common with that of the Santa Rosa and San Jacinto Mountains.
Sediments that cover the valley floor can be classified as either stream-deposited
(alluvium), or wind-deposited (aeolian). The windblown or aeolian deposits typically
consist of reworked alluvium, which have been picked up by strong winds and
redistributed as silty, fine and medium-grained sands that now form sand dunes and sand
fields. A thick accumulation of these windblown sands has formed a broad, elongated and
southeast trending ridge in the southeast part of the planning area, along the vegetation
scarp formed by the Banning Fault. This elevated dune system extends southeast into
Willow Hole, and rises as much as 130 feet above the surrounding desert floor.
The valley floor deposits are underlain by consolidated and semi-consolidated
sedimentary rock, which are in turn underlain by bedrock similar to that exposed in the
Santa Rosa and San Jacinto Mountains. The only exposed semi-consolidated sedimentary
unit is the Ocotillo Conglomerate, which can be seen on Edom Hill and Flat-top
Mountain, where it has been uplifted as a result of movement along the Banning Branch
and Garnet Hill Faults. In the Edom Hill area, the Ocotillo Conglomerate is
approximately 2,400 feet thick.
                                                V-3
                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                      General Plan/Geotechnical Element
Portions of the San Bernardino and Little San Bernardino Mountains located within the
Planning Area are comprised primarily of 6 to 12 million year old deposits of the Painted
Hills formation and the Imperial formation, which is of marine origin. Bedrock consists
of distorted schists and gneisses intruded by granitoid rock, which has become fractured
and jointed, weakening these rocks and contributing to potential seismic hazards. A more
detailed discussion of the engineering characteristics of these various geologic units can
be found in the General Plan Program EIR and the geotechnical report found in the EIR
appendices.
Measurements of the Seismic Hazards in Desert Hot Springs
Earthquakes are classified by their magnitude and by their intensity. The intensity of
seismic ground shaking is a function of several factors, including the magnitude of the
quake, distance from the epicenter, and the local geologic and topographic conditions.
Analysis of the San Andreas Fault (Banning and Mission Creek Faults) earthquake
potential indicates that in a major seismic event the City generally lies within intensity
zones IX through XI, as defined in the Modified Mercalli Intensity Scale (see below).
This intensity range can result in partial or complete collapse of typical masonry
buildings, heavy or total destruction of frame buildings and their foundations, serious to
complete destruction of underground pipelines, bending of rail lines, land and rock slides,
and damage or destruction of bridges and overpasses.
The largest or maximum credible earthquake a fault is capable of generating is used for
community planning purposes. Maximum seismic design parameter values, including
peak ground or bedrock acceleration, duration of strong ground shaking, and period of
ground motion (frequency), are derived from maximum credible earthquakes to establish
safety margins. These potential effects associated with local faults are discussed below.
Richter Scale
The breakage of bedrock and overlying sediments along tectonic plate boundaries is
generally termed faulting and ground rupture, are associated with ground acceleration or
motion and are the most significant potential geotechnical hazards affecting the General
Plan study area. Earthquakes are typically defined by their magnitude as measured on the
Richter Scale. Each whole number step in magnitude on the scale represents a ten-fold
increase in the amplitude of the waves on a seismogram and about a 31-fold increase in
energy released. As an example, a 7.5 Richter magnitude earthquake is 31 times more
powerful than a 6.5 magnitude (Richter) quake.
Seismic Intensity and the Modified Mercalli Intensity Scale
The Modified Mercalli Intensity Scale (MMIS) is a more useful measure of the damage
potential of earthquakes, and is based upon people’s reactions to a quake, and observed
damage to structures and other physical effects. There are twelve levels of intensity in
this scale, ranging from I (tremor not felt) to XII (damage is nearly total). The effects of a
quake on masonry and other buildings are an important part of characterizing the
intensity using this scale.
                                                 V-4

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                     General Plan/Geotechnical Element
Major Active Faults and Their Potential Effects in the Desert Hot Springs Area
Earthquakes can cause substantial property damage, the loss of public services and
facilities and loss of life. Strong shaking from an earthquake can result in landslides,
ground lurching, structural damage or destruction, and liquefaction. Strong shaking can
also set in motion other hazards, including fires, disruption of essential facilities and
systems (water, sewer, gas, electric, and transportation, communications, irrigation and
drainage systems), releases of hazardous materials, and flood inundation as a result of
dam or water tank failure.
During an earthquake ground rupture and ground shaking are the most significant seismic
hazards that will impact the Desert Hot Springs planning area. Critical parameters include
whether foundations and/or structures straddle the fault, distance between the fault and
various portions in the City, the maximum credible earthquake each fault is capable of
generating, the intensity of ground shaking expressed as a fraction of the acceleration of
gravity (g), and the Modified Mercalli (MM) seismic intensity values that have been
calculated for the City. In general, peak ground accelerations and seismic intensity values
decrease with increasing distance from the causative fault. However, local site conditions,
such as the top of ridges, may amplify the seismic waves generated by an earthquake,
resulting in higher accelerations than those discussed below.
With the significant risk of the community being exposed to extreme seismic forces, an
effective seismic hazard reduction program, should include the identification and
mapping of geologic and seismic hazards, the enforcement of building and fire codes, and
the expedient retrofitting and rehabilitation of weak structures. Programs should also be
developed to help City residents to provide for themselves and their families in the
aftermath of an earthquake.
San Andreas Fault Zone
The San Andreas Fault Zone is the principal boundary between the Pacific and North
American plates and locally has been divided into several segments. The San Bernardino
Mountains segment is a structurally complex zone northwest of the City and is
accommodated by several sub parallel fault strands, the most important of these being the
Coachella Valley Segment (Mission Creek), San Gorgonio and Banning Faults. It is
suggested that fault ruptures along the San Gorgonio branch can cause simultaneous
rupture along the Banning Fault. Movement along this segment is estimated at
approximately 24 ±5 mm/yr., with an average earthquake recurrence interval of 146
years. More recently, since the year 1192 there have been six ruptures on this segment
averaging once every 106 years. The most recent surface-rupturing earthquake on this
segment is thought to have occurred in 1812, 183 years ago. It is estimated that this
segment has a 28 percent probability of rupturing in the time period between 1994 and
2024.
The Coachella Valley Segment (Mission Creek Fault)
The southernmost portion of the San Andreas Fault Zone capable of impacting the City is
the Coachella Valley segment (Mission Creek Fault), which bisects the eastern and most
heavily populated portion of the City. This fault is currently considered the main trace of
the San Andreas Fault in the Coachella Valley. No earthquakes have been recorded on
                                                V-5

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                     General Plan/Geotechnical Element
this segment in historic times, and on-going analysis suggests that the last surface rupture
on this segment occurred around 1680 A.D. Studies at Indio indicate that prior to 1680,
earthquakes on this fault occurred on an average interval of 220 years. There is evidence
of simultaneous rupture along the San Bernardino and Coachella segments around 1680
and 1450. The Coachella segment has experienced creep (slow slippage) at the rate of
about 4 mm/yr. but has a long-term slip rate of about 25 ±5 mm/yr. This segment is
estimated to have a 22 percent probability of rupturing in the period between 1994 and
2024. A Magnitude 8.0 earthquake on this segment is estimated to be capable of
generating peak ground accelerations of between 0.5 and 0.75g in Desert Hot Springs.
Banning Fault
The Banning Fault is considered the southern-most strand of the San Andreas Fault Zone,
and consists of three segments with activity appearing to have shifted eastward over time.
This fault is believed to be the source of the 1986 North Palm Springs earthquake of
magnitude 5.9, which caused secondary ground fractures and landslides and had its
epicenter in the western Planning Area. A Magnitude 7.5 earthquake on the Banning
Fault is currently (1977) considered capable of generating peak horizontal ground
accelerations of up to 0.9g in the City. Even higher accelerations can be expected on
ridgelines and immediately adjacent to the fault in the southern portion of the City SOI.
Blind Canyon Fault
The Blind Canyon Fault was mapped as a generally north-trending fault extending north
through Blind Canyon and into the Little San Bernardino Mountains. The fault also
extends south across the Cornerstone property (Section 29) and trends southeast from the
intersection of Miracle Hill Road and Pierson Boulevard. This fault may connect further
south with the Mission Creek Fault. Whether the Blind Canyon Fault is active has not
been conclusively established, however evidence supports considering this fault
potentially active and the fault may also move in sympathy with movement on the San
Andreas Fault. It is recommended that development proposed along this fault be required
to conduct fault hazard studies to locate the fault and to determine appropriate
geotechnical mitigations.
                                               V-6

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                      General Plan/Geotechnical Element
Pinto Mountain - Morongo Fault
The Pinto Mountain-Morongo Fault is one of several east-west-trending, high-angle
strike-slip faults with left-lateral movement, which means it is similar to and may be
directly associated with the San Andreas Fault Zone. Traceable for 47 miles from its
linkage with the main trace of the San Andreas, the fault extends eastward beyond
Twentynine Palms near and along the base of the Sawtooth Mountains, which are
evidence of the uplift component in this fault’s movement. This fault is active and has
recently experienced sympathetic movement and ground ruptures associated with the
1992 Landers earthquake (magnitude 7.6). The Pinto Mountain-Morongo Fault is
considered capable of generating a maximum credible earthquake of 7.3 to 7.4. Such an
event would generate peak horizontal ground acceleration of up to 0.6g in the northern
reaches of the City Planning Area.
Secondary Active Fault Zones
In addition to the major active fault branches associated with the San Andreas Fault
Zone, there are numerous other active faults in the region that have the potential of
impacting the City as a result of a major seismic event along these faults. Each of these
secondary faults/zones is briefly discussed below.
Blue Cut Fault
The Blue Cut Fault is a east-west trending fault located along the north flank of the Eagle
Mountains, near the southeast corner of the Mojave Desert. This fault appears to be
accommodating some of the north-south compression that results from the “big bend” in
the San Andreas Fault north of Los Angeles. It is considered one of the major active
surface faults in Southern California but with very long recurrence intervals. An
earthquake along this fault is estimated to be capable of generating peak horizontal
ground accelerations of between 0.1 and 0.3g in the City.
Johnson Valley Fault
The Johnson Valley Fault, one of several northwest-trending faults in the Mojave Desert
not far north of Desert Hot Springs, which collectively appear to be accommodating
between 9% and 23% of the motion between the North American Plate and the Pacific
Plate. These faults are referred to as the Eastern California or Mojave Shear Zone. The
June, 1992 Magnitude 7.6 Landers Earthquake occurred on the Johnson Valley Fault and
was strongly felt in the Desert Hot Springs area. Trenching indicates that this fault had
last ruptured about 9,000 years ago. An earthquake of Magnitude 7.5 on this or nearby
faults is estimated to be capable of generating peak horizontal ground accelerations of
about 0.2 to 0.3g in Desert Hot Springs.
                                                V-7

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                       General Plan/Geotechnical Element
EXHIBIT V-1: FAULTS IN THE DESERT HOT SPRINGS GENERAL PLAN
AREA
San Jacinto Fault Zone
The San Jacinto Fault Zone consists of a series of closely spaced faults that form the
western margin of the San Jacinto Mountains. The fault zone extends from its junction
with the San Andreas Fault in San Bernardino and runs southeasterly to Brawley and on
to the US/Mexico border as the Imperial Fault. This active fault zone has generated at
least ten moderate (Magnitude 6-7) earthquakes in the last 100 years. Two segments of
this fault located closest to the City have a high (37 to 43 percent) probability of
rupturing in the period from 1994 to 2024. A maximum credible earthquake of
Magnitude 7.0 on any of the three closest segments of this fault is estimated to generate
peak horizontal accelerations in the area of about 0.06 to 0.16g.
Other Seismically Induced Geologic Hazards
While direct effects such as ground rupture and ground acceleration are typically
associated with earthquakes, there are other seismically induced hazards that can injure
people and damage structures. These hazards include liquefaction, dynamic settlement,
and ground fracturing or fissuring, lateral spreads, slumps, landslides, and earth or rock
falls. Each of these is briefly discussed below.
                                                 V-8
                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                       General Plan/Geotechnical Element
Liquefaction
When loose, unconsolidated, saturated, sandy soils are subjected to ground vibrations
during a seismic event they may liquefy; this phenomenon is called liquefaction. This
occurs in areas where the ground water table is within 50 feet of the ground surface and
that are subject to Modified Mercalli Intensity values of VII or greater. Significant
ground shaking can suddenly increase water pressure in the pores between soil particles
and cause soils to lose cohesion and to “liquefy”. Effects include a loss of bearing
strength, ground oscillations, lateral spread and slumping. This hazard is considered low
in the Desert Hot Springs area, principally because of the approximate depth of 150 to
200 feet to ground water. The exception includes lands located immediately adjacent to
and on the north side of the Banning and Coachella Valley (Mission Creek) Faults, which
dike ground water and allow it to rise within 50 feet of the surface.
Seismically Induced Settlement
Under some circumstances, strong ground shaking can cause densification or compaction
of soils resulting in local or regional settlement of the ground surface. This can result in
local differential settlement and damage to foundations and structures, as well as damage
to water and sewer lines. This potential is affected by the intensity and duration of ground
shaking and the relative density of the subsurface soils. Windblown sands and other
recently deposited sediments are typically loose and, therefore, potentially subject to
seismically induced settlement. In the Planning Area, wind and especially stream-
deposited sediment are the predominant soil types (see Exhibit V-2: Seismically Induced
Rock Falls and Land Slide Susceptibility Map), and development in these locations
should include site-specific subsurface geotechnical investigations that address this
potential seismic hazard. Proper excavation, compaction and foundation design can
accommodate some of the seismic settlement potential.
Seismically Induced Slope Instability
Seismically induced landslides and rock falls can be expected to occur on both the
northern and western portions of the General Plan study area. It is estimated that ground
acceleration of at least 0.10g in steep terrain is necessary to induce earthquake-related
rock falls. With several faults capable of generating peak ground accelerations over 0.10g
in the study area, there is a high potential for seismically-induced rock falls and
landslides to occur in Desert Hot Springs and its Sphere-of-Influence. The 1986 Banning
Fault earthquake induced numerous landslides on the sides of steep-walled canyons,
while debris slides and rock falls occurred in fractured basement rocks of the San
Bernardino and Little San Bernardino Mountains. Fractures and landslides are likely to
occur on elevated mountainous terrain in these two ranges, especially where the bedrock
is intensely fractured or jointed. Sections of Interstate-10, Highway 62 and Palm Drive
could be blocked by fallen rock debris or from landslides immediately following an
earthquake, which would hinder rescue and evacuation operations. Rock falls could also
impact developments adjacent to mountain slopes, especially those along the toe of the
Little San Bernardino Mountains. Throughout the City, manufactured slopes of
significant height will also be susceptible to failure and should be engineered to resist
seismically induced failure.
                                                  V-9

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                      General Plan/Geotechnical Element
Seismically Induced Inundation
Failure of water tanks, reservoirs, retention basins, recharge basins and other water
storage structures can be caused by seismic events, especially in areas susceptible to
ground failure. There are several above ground water storage tanks in the City that could
be subject to damage in an earthquake. Damage to these tanks could significantly hinder
efforts to suppress fires and could greatly limit supply and availability of potable water
after a major earthquake.
With regard to storm water retention basins, there are currently no meaningful
opportunities for seismically induced inundation down grade. Future private and public
facilities may include storm water detention and groundwater recharge basins.
Groundwater recharge basins should be designed and engineered to address this seismic
potential. However, the infrequency of storm water retention, the limited likelihood of
storm water storage, and the occurrence of a major earthquake substantially reduces, but
does not eliminate, this potential hazard. Design engineering of future major
detention/retention facilities will need to focus on the seismic hazards of the area when
planning for and constructing these facilities.
EXHIBIT V-2: SEISMICALLY INDUCED ROCK FALLS AND LAND SLIDE
SUSCEPTIBILITY MAP
                                                V - 10
                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                        General Plan/Geotechnical Element
Colorado River Aqueduct
The Colorado River Aqueduct skirts the Planning Area to the north and crosses through
the western portion of the City. The aqueduct crosses the Coachella Valley (Mission
Creek) Fault about one mile north of the city limits, within the flood plain of the Big
Morongo Wash. A surface-rupturing earthquake on either the Coachella Valley or San
Bernardino Mountains segments of the San Andreas could damage the aqueduct and
release large volumes of water. Repairs to the aqueduct could take up to two weeks.
Collapsible and Expansive Soils
Soils are an important component of the geotechnical conditions in the General Plan
study area. Two considerations are the potential of soils to collapse or to expand and to
cause damage to structures in either instance. Soil collapse typically occurs in recently
(Holocene) deposited sediments laid down by wind or water, which typically contain
minute pores and voids. When saturated, collapsible soils undergo a rearrangement of
their grains and a loss of cohesion or cementation, resulting in a substantial and rapid
settlement even under relatively low loads. The alluvial and aeolian sediments in the
planning area are prone to collapse, and this potential should be evaluated on a site-
specific basis as part of soils and other geotechnical studies for development. Mitigation
can be accomplished through a variety of design and construction methods. Post-
construction management of drainage, irrigation and other water sources should be
designed to prevent saturation of foundation soils.
Expansive soils are those, which include a significant amount of clay and are subject to
swelling. Expansive soils can change in volume and can exert significant pressure on
loads (such as buildings) that are placed on them. In the General Plan study area,
expansive soils are not generally considered a hazard because of the relatively minor
amount of clay present in the soils. Where expansive soils may occur is in the Qf3 and
Qf4 soils, which generally occur north of the Mission Creek Fault and in the vicinity of
Whitewater Hill (see the Program EIR).
Wind Erosion and Blowsand
The City and its Sphere-of-Influence are located in an area with a susceptibility to wind
erosion ranging from “Extremely Severe” to “None”. The most severe conditions occur
in the southern SOI at 20th Avenue primarily east of Palm Drive and to the immediate
west. The geomorphology of the Coachella Valley, its extreme aridity and the funneled
marine air masses to the west through the San Gorgonio Pass conspire to create strong
and persistent winds in the valley. These strong winds have been blowing and
redistributing sand deposits in the area for thousands of years. Lands disturbed by
flooding, grading or agricultural activities are, therefore, subject to significant erosive
forces that suspend fine dust and transport sand over great distances.
In addition to damage to vehicles, structures and other improvements, blowing sand
collects on streets, driveways and in other areas where it must be removed at considerable
expense. Exhibit V-3 shows the wind erosion hazard areas occurring within the General
Plan study area. Wind erosion and blowing sand also contribute to a significant health
threat associated with the suspension of fine particulate matter of ten microns and smaller
(PM10). These conditions have required the development and implementation of a
multifaceted mitigation plan to help protect human health (also see Air Quality Element).
                                                 V - 11

                                                  TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                              General Plan/Geotechnical Element
EXHIBIT V-3: WIND HAZARD ZONES IN THE DESERT HOT SPRINGS AREA
                                V - 12
                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                        General Plan/Geotechnical Element
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
With substantially challenges posed by local seismic and geotechnical conditions, the
City will need to rely on several mechanisms to address hazards identified in this
Element. These include the regulations and guidelines set forth in the Alquist-Priolo
Earthquake Fault Zoning Act, the State CEQA Statutes and Guidelines, PM10
Implementation Plan, Zoning Ordinance, the Uniform Building Code, and the
Subdivision Ordinance. The development review process of the City Community
Development Department must assure that development proposals are thoroughly
evaluated with regard to geotechnical and seismic safety that all necessary special studies
are conducted and reviewed, and that comprehensive mitigation measures are developed
and implemented.
The City should also work with State, Regional, and County agencies to establish and
maintain an up- to- date information database on geotechnical and seismic conditions in
the region, legislation affecting the City's regulatory responsibilities, and changing
technical assessments that refine or recharacterize the geotechnical hazards affecting the
region.
GEOTECHNICAL ELEMENT
GOAL, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
GOAL
Maximized protection from and minimize vulnerability to the general health safety and
welfare of the community from the effects of geotechnical hazards that may impact lives,
property and economic well being of the community.
Policy 1
The City shall establish and maintain maps illustrating the location of seismic and other
geotechnical hazard zones occurring within the City boundaries and Sphere-of-Influence.
Program 1 A
The City shall periodically confer with the California Division of Mines and Geology to
develop and maintain updated Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning maps and other
information on seismic and other geotechnical hazards affecting the community.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; State Division of Mines
and Geology
Schedule: Continuous.
Program 1 B
The City shall consult and cooperate with surrounding communities and applicable state
and federal agencies, in an on-going program to improve and update the database and
other information on regional geologic/seismic conditions.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Applicable state and
federal agencies
Schedule: 2001-02, Continuous.
                                                 V - 13
                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                       General Plan/Geotechnical Element
Policy 2
In accordance with State law, development proposals within designated Alquist-Priolo
Earthquake Fault Zones and along the Blind Canyon Fault shall be accompanied by
appropriate geotechnical analysis.
Program 2 A
The City shall prepare an informational handout, which specifies the format and contents
of geotechnical and fault investigations, which must be carried out within Alquist-Priolo
Earthquake Fault Zones.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department, City Engineer; County
Geologist
Schedule: Immediately.
Program 2 B
The City shall establish a cooperative arrangement with the County Geologist, the State
Geologist, or a contract geological engineer to review and determine the adequacy of
geotechnical and fault hazard studies prepared within the City.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department, City Engineer; County
Geologist
Schedule: Immediately.
Policy 3
The Blind Canyon Fault shall be considered equivalent to and shall be regulated as a
Fault Hazard Management Zone.
Program 3 A
The City shall establish criteria for and shall require the preparation of fault hazard
analyses across the Blind Canyon Fault and shall restrict development in a manner
consistent with the Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zone and the General Plan
Geotechnical Report.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department, City Engineer; County
Geologist
Schedule: Immediately
Policy 4
The City shall identify and initiate a program to encourage the rehabilitation of
unreinforced masonry buildings and other major structures, which pose a threat or hazard,
due to inadequate seismic design, engineering or construction.
Program 4 A
The City shall identify inadequately designed/constructed structures and prepare and/or
distribute handouts and provide information on possible sources of funding to facilitate
the rehabilitation of unreinforced masonry buildings and other major structures, which
are inadequately constructed to withstand major seismic impacts.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department, City Engineer
Schedule: 2001-02.
                                                 V - 14
                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                       General Plan/Geotechnical Element
Policy 5
The City shall cooperate and coordinate with public and quasi-public agencies to assure
the continued functionality of major utility services in the event of a major earthquake.
Program 5 A
City staff shall contact and establish working relationships and strategies with the Public
Utilities Commission, Southern California Edison, Southern California Gas, Mission
Springs and Coachella Valley Water Districts and other appropriate agencies to
strengthen or relocate facilities, and take other appropriate measures to safeguard water,
electricity, natural gas and other transmission and distribution systems.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Public Works Department;
Public Utilities
Schedule: 2001-Continuous
Program 5 B
The City shall take a pro-active position to encourage and cooperate with CalTrans to
promote the expeditious stabilizing of susceptible slopes and strengthening of bridges,
elevated roadways and other structures along state highways, which may be subject to
failure during major seismic events, thereby isolating portions of the community from
emergency aid and assistance.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Public Works Department;
CalTrans
Schedule: Immediate, Continuous.
Program 5 C
The City shall coordinate with the Desert Hospital and other local emergency
preparedness agencies to enhance the survivability of and access to these essential
facilities in the event of a major earthquake.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Emergency Preparedness
Coordinator; Desert Hospital
Schedule: 2001; Continuous.
Policy 6
The City shall play an active role in the development and/or distribution of earthquake
preparedness information and materials to City residents and local businesses.
Program 6 A
Information shall be collected from a wide variety of sources, including public agencies
and utility companies, providing instruction on earthquake preparedness. Said materials
shall be made available to residents and businesses throughout the City.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; State, County and City
Offices of Emergency Preparedness; Public Utilities
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
                                                 V - 15
                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                       General Plan/Geotechnical Element
Program 6 B
The City shall confer and cooperate with local utility companies, Mission Springs and
Coachella Valley Water Districts, Palm Springs Unified School District, police and fire
departments, and others to coordinate education of the general public regarding
appropriate action before, during and after earthquakes and other disasters.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; City Engineer; City
Emergency Preparedness Coordinator; PSUSD; MSWD & CVWD; Public Utilities
Schedule: 2001-02, Continuous.
Policy 7
In areas of high seismicity, the City shall encourage the location of septic tank leach
fields, seepage pits, drainage facilities and heavily irrigated areas away from foundations
and other structural supports to minimize the creation of a localized collapse of soils and
associated hazards.
Program 7 A
Where soil conditions warrant, development applications shall include plans indicating
the location of leach fields, seepage pits, drainage facilities and water-dependent
landscaping to be reviewed by City staff to identify potential for ground saturation; City
may require their location away from foundation and other structural supports.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department, City Engineer
Schedule: Immediate; On application basis.
Policy 8
Development in areas identified as being subject to a rock fall or landslide hazard shall be
avoided.
Program 8 A
The City shall make available copies of the General Plan Landslide/Landslide
Susceptibility map and discourage development within areas so designated, or require
detailed geotechnical analysis and require mitigation measures that reduce associated
hazards to insignificant levels.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; City Engineer/Consulting
Geologist
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
                                                 V - 16
                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                            General Plan/Flooding and Hydrology Element
FLOODING & HYDROLOGY ELEMENT
PURPOSE
The purpose of the Flooding and Hydrology Element is to set forth the goals, policies and
programs that are intended to address potential drainage and flooding hazards occurring within
the community. The primary intent of this element is to protect the general health, safety and
welfare of the community from potential flood and associated hazards. It references and
coordinates with other elements of the General Plan which also address threats to the lives and
property of the community’s residents. The potential for and extent of major future flooding is
also assessed. It is the intention of the community to facilitate, plan and implement the phased
development of flood control facilities, both project-specific and Citywide. Provisions for open
space and multiple uses, wildlife, and pedestrian and equestrian corridors within major
drainages are also planned.
BACKGROUND
Desert Hot Springs is profoundly affected by occasionally severe flooding, which has isolated
and cut off much of the City from surrounding communities. In this context, the Flooding &
Hydrology has a direct relationship to the Emergency Preparedness Element, which addresses
the City’s most significant environmental threats. Also related, though to a lesser extent, is the
Geotechnical Element, which addresses associated liquefaction, erosion threats and water
storage facilities. The Hazardous and Toxic Wastes Element is also related by the potential of
storm water runoff to transport hazardous and toxic materials stored on the surface and
underground. Other related elements include the Land Use Element, which affects essential
relationships of use to location-specific threats, and the Circulation Element, which defines the
availability of, and need for secure access and evacuation routes in the event of a major
flooding.
State statutes, policies and regulations require that the General Plan of counties and cities
identify and offer mitigation measures for existing and potential flooding hazards in the area.
Specifically, Chapter 73 of the Statutes of California, 1939 mandates the joint planning of area-
wide drainage plans affecting local jurisdictions. Pursuant to California Government Code
Section 8589.5 and 65302(g), the jurisdiction is required to provide mapping of areas subject to
inundation in the event of dam failures. Government Code Section 8401(c) requires that local
governments plan, adopt, and enforce land use regulations for flood plain management. Known
as the Cobey-Alquist Flood Plain Management Act, this legislation also sets forth requirements
for receiving state financial assistance for flood control.
Desert Conditions and Flood Hazards
The City of Desert Hot Springs and the Coachella Valley enjoy a subtropical desert climate.
Mean annual rainfall is very low from the desert floor into the foothills, ranging from 4 to 6
inches per year and averaging about 5 to 6 inches along the Little San Bernardino foothills. In
some years no measurable rainfall has been reported within the planning area. Summer daytime
temperatures can occasionally exceed 125ΕF and winter temperatures seldom fall below
                                                V - 17

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                           General Plan/Flooding and Hydrology Element
freezing. The surrounding mountain slopes generally receive rainfall that increases with
elevation. The mountains and upper elevations of the planning area are also generally cooler,
with an approximate 5ΕF drop with every 1,000-foot increase in elevation.
The major drainages of Mission Creek, Big and Little Morongo Creeks, Blind Creek, Long
Creek and its tributaries, other mountain canyons and their alluvial fans, and runoff associated
with the foothills of the San Bernardino and Little San Bernardino Mountains comprise areas of
potential flooding in the planning area. Most of the rainfall occurs during the cooler months of
November through March, but occasional high-intensity thunderstorms and tropical storms
occur in late summer and early fall. Although the ground may be generally dry at the beginning
of a storm, sufficient amounts and intensities of rainfall can saturate the surface, substantially
reducing percolation and increasing runoff. Development also increases runoff by creating large
areas of impervious surfaces. Increased runoff upstream can be a significant contributor to
downstream damage.
Major historic storm events are used to gauge the potential for future flooding. Benchmark
storms used by the Army Corps of Engineers to calculate the most intense credible storm
include the storm of September 24, 1939. Centered over Indio and consisting of a thunderstorm
preceding a major storm off the west coast of Mexico, this intense storm generated 6.45 inches
of rain in a period of 6 hours. As further example of the storm runoff potential in the area, the
tropical storm Kathleen of September 9-11, 1976 generated very heavy general rainfall over a
three county area, with Desert Hot Springs receiving three inches. The surrounding hills and
mountains received as much as 14 inches, with rainfalls generally increasing with elevation.
Local and Regional Flood Control
The generation and management of storm water runoff are typically divided into two separate
categories, local and regional drainage, which are ultimately interrelated. Local drainage is
either defined by the limited size of the drainage area or to the generation of runoff in
association with urban development. Regional drainage consists of large-scale runoff and
facilities capturing and conveying runoff from over a larger geographic area. Regional drainage
ultimately picks up and conveys local drainage through the careful integration of these two
systems.
Regional Flood Control and the Riverside County Flood Control District
The Riverside County Flood Control District is responsible for the management of regional
drainage within and in the vicinity of Desert Hot Springs, including rivers, major streams and
their tributaries, and areas of significant sheet flooding. The District is empowered with broad
management functions, including flood control planning and construction of drainage
improvements for regional flood control facilities, as well as watershed and watercourse
protection related to those facilities. To carry out its mandate, the District (Riverside County)
also has powers of taxation, bonded indebtedness, land and water rights acquisition, and
cooperative partnerships with local, state and federal agencies. The Riverside County Board of
Supervisors acts as the official decision-making body of the District.
Local Drainage Management
The County has the primary responsibility, in close cooperation and coordination with the City,
for managing regional drainage in and around the community, and has also played a key role in
                                                V - 18

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                           General Plan/Flooding and Hydrology Element
the management of local drainage. The still current 1982 Master Drainage Plan for the City of
Desert Hot Springs was prepared by the Riverside County Flood Control District. While costs
originally assigned to these facilities are outdated, the design volumes in cubic feet per second
and the recommended types of facilities remain valid.
The effectiveness with which the City and District manage drainage issues will have a direct
effect on the scale, complexity and cost of future flood control facilities. The cost-effectiveness
of prevention and on-site management should be actively integrated into community land use
planning and regulation, recognizing significant physical and financial constraints in many
areas of City.
The preservation of lands constrained by topography or drainage, including steep slopes, areas
rich in vegetation and cover, and alluvial plains and drainage channels greatly reduces runoff
and preserves the capacity of downstream facilities. The planned integration of on-site storm
water detention facilities, where possible and appropriate, also significantly reduces the needed
size of downstream facilities, while frequently creating opportunities for enhanced open space
and/or recreation areas.
FEMA and the Federal
Flood Insurance Rate Maps
Many of the areas of the United States subject to flooding from 100-year storms have been
mapped by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The resulting documents are the
FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs), which serve as the basis for determining the need
for and availability of federal flood insurance. Exhibit V-4 is a compilation of the data
presented in three corresponding FIRM Community Panels (maps). The FEMA maps for the
City of Desert Hot Springs planning area designate lands within the 100-year flood plain (Zone
A). These areas include washes, channels and areas subject to sheet flow flooding.
Flooding and inundation is also expected and is designated by FEMA in the Sphere area
immediately north of Interstate-10, with varying depths and velocities ranging from three feet
deep and flows of up to eight feet per second. There are also extensive areas designated Zone X
on the FEMA maps, these being areas located between the 100 and the 500-year flood or areas
subject to 100-year flooding but at depths less than one foot. These occur with most of the
urban core of the community and outside the major drainages (Please see Exhibit V-4). Each of
the applicable flood zones is briefly described below.
A     Areas of 100-year flood; base flood elevations have not been determined.
AO: Special Flood Hazard Areas inundated by types of 100-year shallow flooding where
      depths are between 1.0 and 3.0 feet; depths are shown, or areas of 100-year alluvial fan
      flooding, depths and velocities shown, but no flood hazard factors are determined.
X:    Areas between limits of the 100 year flood and 500 year flood; or certain areas subject to
      100 year flooding with average depths less than one (1) foot or where the contributing
      drainage area is less than one square mile; or areas protected by levees from the 100-year
      flood.
C:    Areas lying outside the boundaries of the 100-year and 500-year flood plains and
      generally considered safe from flooding.
                                                V - 19
                                                                                   TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                   General Plan/Flooding and Hydrology Element
Major and Minor Flood Control Facilities
Capital projects such as dikes, levees, channels, and debris and detention/retention basins have
been constructed to manage project-specific, community and regional drainage systems in the
community. Designing, financing and constructing these facilities are significant challenges and
important opportunities. Methods of flood control and their costs are weighed against the
economic impacts likely to result from major flooding. In some areas, flood control
improvements are frequently necessitated by development itself, which creates its own runoff
management problems.
The Mission Creek, Big and Little Morongo Creeks, Blind Creek, and Long Creek are the main
drainages in the City planning area. These drainages are substantial in area and are discharged
onto relatively steep alluvial fans and generate high velocities. These flows in major storms of
several thousand cubic feet of water per second have tremendous force and scouring potential.
Substantial improvements, including concrete channel armoring, diversion dikes and levees,
and bridges, requires prioritizing these improvements for long-term construction.
                                                   Table V-1:
                                        Major and Minor Drainages
                                    Desert Hot Springs Planning Area
 Creek/Channel                       Construction Status        Cost (Mil1)       Funding
 Mission Creek                             Partial                 Unknown        FEMA2/District/ADP3
 Big/Little Morongo Creeks                 None                     $ 9.0+        FEMA/District/ADP
 Blind Creek (8th Street)                  Partial                  $ 2.16        FEMA/District/City
 Long Creek                                None                    Unknown        FEMA/District/ADP
 Foxdale Drain (Line B)                    None                      $ 4.7        District/City/Development
 Line A (Two Bunch Palms                   Partial                   $ 4.8        District/City/Development
 Drain)
 Line C                                    None                      $ 1.5        District/City/Development
 Line D                                    None                     $ 0.64        District/City/Development
 Desert Hot Springs Drain                  Partial                 Unknown        District/City/Development
 Source: Master Drainage Plan for the Desert Hot Springs Area. Riverside County Flood Control and Water
 Conservation District. February, 1982 and District Chief Engineer David Zappe, March, 1997.
 1 All cost estimates, excepting Morongo Washes, are in 1982 dollars.
 2 Federal Emergency Management Agency funds availability depends on funding policies.
 3 Area Drainage Plan: benefit area development fee.
                                                      V - 20
                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                           General Plan/Flooding and Hydrology Element
Regional Drainages and Facilities
Mission Creek Drainage
The Mission Creek Wash and partially constructed channel drains 36 square miles of the San
Bernardino Mountains and has the potential to generate major storm flows within the planning
area. Braided drainage is predominant for about two miles east of Highway 62, where flows are
consolidated and somewhat controlled by an earthen channel at approximately Mission Lake
Boulevard (extended). The potential for these flows to break out of established channels and to
focus unpredictably on the wide alluvial fan has driven FEMA to designate a large 100-year
flood plain in association with the Mission Creek drainage.
Big and Little Morongo Drainages
The Big and Little Morongo Creeks drain the western portions of the Little San Bernardino
Mountains. The mouth of Big Morongo Creek is located one mile east of Highway 62, and
flows in braided streams and sheetflows across and down the alluvial fan. The creek twice
crosses Indian Avenue and clips the southwest corner of Mission Lakes Country Club. Big
Morongo has its confluence with Little Morongo Creek one-half mile south of Mission Lakes
Boulevard and just west of Little Morongo Road.
The mouth of Little Morongo Creek is located two miles east of Big Morongo, with two smaller
and intervening drainages. Little Morongo Creek discharges are confined by a concrete-lined
channel located immediately north of Little Morongo Road (extended), which discharges these
flows into channelized fairways of Mission Lakes Country Club. Little Morongo flows cross
Mission Lakes Boulevard and continue south to join Big Morongo Creek. These combined
flows have a projected 100-year peak volume of more than 17,000 cfs. As with Mission Creek,
the largely unconfined nature of the flows from Big and Little Morongo Creeks has been the
basis for FEMA to designate a large 100-year flood plain in association with these drainages.
The District, in close cooperation with the City and project developers, has designed facilities to
control and convey storm flows from Big and Little Morongo Creeks. Currently (2000), the
District is refining its plans with FEMA, who must accept the method and design of flood
control before lands can be removed from the current flood plain designations. An Area
Drainage Plan has already been drafted, which will provide a mechanism for the District to
recoup some of the costs (approximately $ 9 million in 1997) of these facilities.
Blind Creek/8th Street Levee
The Blind Creek Channel and 8th Street levee are part of a system, which conveys Blind Creek
and local drainage southwest to join the combined Morongo Creek Channel just north of
Pierson Boulevard. These facilities are partially improved and include the earthen levee, down-
stream protection from which is partially recognized on FEMA flood maps. In addition to the
main channel, these facilities will also include five feeder lines draining developed areas in the
northern-most portion of the City.
Local Drainages and Facilities
Local drainages can pose a significant flood hazard to existing and future development in the
City. To address these threats from local drainages, in 1982 the Riverside County Flood Control
District prepared a master drainage plan for the urban core of the City. These facilities were
broken down into 30 separate cost components, which totaled $ 15,230,000 in 1982. The major
components of the local drainage plan are listed in the above table. The District’s Chief
                                               V - 21

                                                                              TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                              General Plan/Flooding and Hydrology Element
Engineer has indicated that projected volumes and needed facilities set forth in the 1982 plan
are still valid.
Line A/Two Bunch Palms Drain
Line A is planned for construction in or adjacent to the Two Bunch Palms Trail right-of-way.
The Master Drainage Plan references the reader to the District for more information on channel
design. Two major feeder lines and associated collectors are planned to capture drainage as far
north as Third Street. Line A is then planned as an open channel approximately 1,600 feet east
of Palm Drive from which point it proceeds southeast to the natural drainage course of the
Desert Hot Springs Creek. The Line A/Two Bunch Channel improvements are extensive and
make the project the most expensive component of the local drainage plan.
Line B/Foxdale Drain
This drainage system is planned to primarily drain lands east of Foxdale, with portions
extending to Mountain View Road. That portion of the drainage area has also been addressed in
the Cornerstone Specific Plan, which is designed to provide debris basins and other
improvements, which may reduce the cost of the downstream facilities. This system could also
be one of the most costly to construct to address local drainage.
Land Use Planning as a Flood Control Strategy
Thoughtful and appropriate land use planning and development is one of the most effective and
direct methods of controlling flooding and limiting threats to lives and property. Consistent
with other primary goals of the community, land use planning can call for the preservation of
natural vegetation in the foothills and mountains, which function as natural water sheds for
local drainage and ground water recharge, and can affect the volume of storm water and debris
that reach downstream facilities.
The exposure of people and improvements to storm hazards and damage can also be limited
through careful land planning. Restrictions on the type and location of structures in the vicinity
of major drainages within the community can greatly reduce potential losses. Within the limits
of improved and unimproved 100-year floodplains, development should be severely limited and
regulated. In some instances it will be appropriate to prohibit construction of structures for
human habitation.
Within flood zones subject to sheet flooding, development approvals should be conditioned to
assure protection of improvements from flood damage. Protection measures may include raising
the finished floor level above the flood depth projected for the surrounding area and providing
protection against scouring. Until such time as flood protection is provided, which removes
areas from severe threats of flooding, development in these areas should be carefully regulated.
Flood Control and Wildlife Habitat and Recreation Enhancement
The controlling of storm water flows should also be viewed as an opportunity for multiple uses,
including recreation and wildlife enhancement. Washes, detention basins and channels should
be designed with this multi-use function in mind. In addition to the opportunity to integrate
hiking and other trails into these facilities, these areas are commonly frequented by numerous
birds and small and large mammals and can offer meaningful areas for passive enjoyment. They
can be important as a source of forage and cover, and as relief from the more urban
                                                  V - 22
                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                          General Plan/Flooding and Hydrology Element
environments of the area, and offer opportunities for the continued integration of the natural
desert habitat into the built environment.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The Flooding and Hydrology Element is implemented through the direct expression of policies
and programs of the Element and through the implementation of other General Plan Elements,
including the Water Resources, Open Space and Conservation, Land Use, and Biological
Resources Elements. However, the principle and direct implementation of this element will be
through the enforcement and implementation of the City Master Drainage Plan.
The Master Plan and its improvements help control and confine the area-wide drainage pattern
to more discrete and focused routes where it can be better managed. It may also point to
facilities that complement land use patterns, provide cost-effective flood control alternatives,
and maximize opportunities for multiple uses, including enhanced groundwater recharge.
The Master Drainage Plans will also set critical parameters for future development along areas
subject to area-wide flooding. The Element will also be implemented through the development
guidelines and regulations of the Desert Hot Springs Zoning Ordinance, Grading Ordinance and
Subdivision Ordinance.
EXHIBIT V-4 FLOOD ZONES
                                               V - 23
                                                                             TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                             General Plan/Flooding and Hydrology Element
FLOODING AND HYDROLOGY GOALS POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
GOAL
Comprehensive flood control system that assures the protection of lives, property and essential
facilities within the community and assures all-weather access to regional roadways.
Policy 1
Assure that updated and effective Master Drainage Plans are implemented in a timely fashion
for the near and long-term protection of the community and its residents.
Program 1 A
Continue to pro-actively participate with the Riverside County Flood Control District in the
development and updating of Desert Hot Springs Master Drainage Plan, providing land use and
other relevant data and information.
Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department; Public Works Department;
District
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Policy 2
Provide for the implementation of drainage controls and improvements that enhance local
conditions and are consistent with and complement the Master Drainage Plan.
Program 2 A
Local regulations and guidelines shall be established and/or updated to direct the management
of runoff and provide for local drainage facilities that tie into and maximize the effective use of
regional drainage facilities.
Responsible Agencies: Public Works Department; Community Development Department,
District
Schedule: Continuous.
Program 2 B
Adopt or update local drainage policies and development standards that reduce the rate of
runoff from developed lands, consistent with capacities of public facilities and local and
regional management plans, while providing opportunities for open space enhancement and
multi-use.
Responsible Agencies: Public Works Department; Community Development Department,
District
Schedule: Update every 5 years.
Program 2 C
Coordinate and cooperate with the Riverside County Flood Control District, FEMA and other
potential management and funding sources to maximize the financial resources brought to bear
on flood control project construction.
Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department; Public Works Department;
District; FEMA; Developers
Schedule: Continuous.
                                               V - 24
                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                            General Plan/Flooding and Hydrology Element
Policy 3
City shall cooperate in securing FEMA map amendments recognizing the appropriate
redesignation of the 100-year flood plains within the City boundaries and SOI.
Program 3 A
Working with the Riverside County Flood Control District, the City shall coordinate and
cooperate in the filing of appropriate FEMA application materials to incrementally secure
amendments to the Flood Insurance Rate Maps for the City, consistent with existing and
proposed improvements.
Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department; Public Works Department;
District; FEMA
Schedule: Continuous.
Policy 4
The mandates set forth in the Emergency Preparedness Element shall, to the extent applicable,
be implemented through the Flooding and Hydrology Element and Master Drainage Plan.
Program 4 A
Confer and consult with the District, as well as CalTrans, to assure adequate all-weather
crossings/facilities at appropriate locations along Palm Drive, Pierson Boulevard, Mission
Lakes Boulevard, and especially those serving as emergency evacuation/access routes for the
various neighborhoods of the planning area.
Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department; Public Works Department;
District; CalTrans
Schedule: Immediate, Continuous.
Policy 5
Major drainage facilities, including debris basins and flood control washes and channels, shall
be designed to balance their enhancement as wildlife habitat and community open space
amenities, consistent with the functional requirements of these facilities.
Program 5 A
Work closely with the District to assure that design opportunities for enhanced open space and
recreation amenities, including habitat enhancement and hiking and equestrian trails, are fully
explored and incorporated when designing and constructing channels, debris and detention
basins, and other major drainage facilities, to the greatest extent practical.
Responsible Agencies: Community Development Department; Public Works Department;
District.
Schedule: Immediate, Continuous.
Policy 6
In addition to other methods, the City shall also establish as appropriate, Area Drainage Plans
or Benefit Assessment Districts for purposes of funding needed drainage improvements
benefiting defined tributary areas of the community.
Policy 7
All development proposed on lands of one (1) acre or larger shall be required to retain 100
percent of the 100-year storm runoff that is generated by development, on-site.
                                                V - 25
                                                                      TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                        General Plan/Noise Element
NOISE ELEMENT
PURPOSE
The intent of the Noise Element is to help coordinate the community's various land uses with
the existing and future noise environment, and to ensure that any negative effects of noise are
minimized or avoided completely. As development continues, the City shall carefully review
proposals to ensure that land uses incompatible with the noise environment are avoided. It is the
intention of this element to identify current noise problems within the City and its Sphere-of-
Influence and to determine future noise impacts resulting from continued growth. Through the
implementation of the policies and programs of this element, any current and future adverse
noise impacts can be greatly reduced or avoided entirely, and the general health, safety and
welfare of the community can be protected from significant noise impacts.
BACKGROUND
There is a direct relationship between the Noise Element and the Land Use and Circulation
Elements. The location of sensitive land uses including housing, schools and medical facilities,
are also affected by issues addressed in the Noise Element. The element also has a direct
relationship to the Economic Development Element, with the City’s peaceful and quiet
atmosphere a major community asset. Low noise levels are a basic element of the residential
and spa resort environment of the community. Generally, the City enjoys a quiet noise
environment, with existing community noise being dominated by local traffic and commercial
operations and heating/ventilation equipment. In general, however, the residential
neighborhoods of the community are quiet, with average noise levels typical of quiet rural
areas.
A wide range of issues are addressed in the Noise Element, including those set forth in
subsection (f) of California Government Code Section 65302, which requires that the Noise
Element identify and analyze noise problems in the community. The implementation of the
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), Section 21083.1, mandates adherence to the
State Guidelines and empowers communities to determine whether or not a proposed project
may have a “significant effect on the environment”. These significant impacts may range from
excessive traffic noise in a residential neighborhood, to industrial manufacturing noise
impacting a hospital or convalescent home.
A Model Community Noise Control Ordinance has been prepared by the California Department
of Health Services, which was developed in accordance with Section 46062 of the Health and
Safety Code to assist local agencies in the development of model ordinances to control and
abate noise. State guidelines require that a community noise control ordinance be adopted,
which sets forth control policies and programs that "minimize the exposure of community
residents to excessive noise."
The potential psychological and physiological impacts of noise have been of concern for many
years, and have increased significantly in recent years. Excessive noise levels are not only a
potential annoyance but can constitute a significant health threat resulting in temporary or
                                              V-26

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                           General Plan/Noise Element
permanent hearing loss and mental distress. The noise environment can also have a profound
influence on the quality of life enjoyed by residents and visitors.
Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL)
Noise is defined as unwanted or undesired sound. Airborne sound is the result of a very rapid
change in air pressure from the surrounding “normal” atmospheric pressure. The combination
of noise from all sources near and far is the Ambient Noise Level. For purposes of this
discussion, the ambient noise level at a given location is termed “environmental noise”.
Understanding environmental noise requires some familiarity with the physical description of
noise. The important physical characteristics of sound include its frequency range,
intensity/loudness and temporal/time-varying aspect. The decibel (dB), A-weighted level
(dBA), and Community Noise Equivalency Level (CNEL) are all units of measurement used to
describe and numerically weight noise.
The unit of measurement describing the amplitude or strength of sound is the decibel. The
Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) is the weighted average of the intensity of a
sound, with corrections for time of day, and averaged over 24 hours. The time of day
corrections require the addition of five decibels to sound levels in the evening from 7 p.m. to 10
p.m., and the addition of 10 decibels to sound levels at night between 10 p.m. and 7 a.m. These
additions are made during these time periods because during the evening and night hours, with
the decrease in overall amount and loudness of noise generated when compared to daytime
hours, there is an increased sensitivity to sounds. For this reason sounds seem louder and are
weighted accordingly. Essentially, during these evening and night hours the maximum tolerable
noise levels should be 5 to 10 dBA lower and the CNEL number is weighted to assure this bias.
Ranges and Effects of Noise
The most common sounds vary between 40 dB (very quiet) and 100 dB (very loud). Normal
conversation at three feet is roughly 60 dB, while loud engine noises equate to 110 dB, which
can cause serious discomfort. Due to the logarithmic nature of the sound measuring (decibel)
scale, doubling the sound energy of a noise source only increases the decibel rating by 3 dB.
However, due to the internal mechanism of the human ear and how it receives and processes
noise, a sound must be nearly 10 dB higher than another sound to be judged twice as loud.
Physical health, psychological well-being, social cohesion, property values and economic
productivity can all be affected by excessive amounts of noise.
The effects of noise on people can be grouped into three general categories: subjective effects,
such as annoyance and nuisance; interference with activities such as conversation and sleep;
and physiological effects, for example, a startle or hearing loss. Adverse reactions to noise
generally increase with an increase in the difference between background or ambient noise and
the noise generated from a particularly intrusive source such as a barking dog, traffic, aircraft or
industrial operations. In most situations, noise control measures must reduce noise by 5 to 10
dBA in order to effectively lower the perceived sound. Therefore, loud, short duration noises
from barking dogs and low-flying aircraft generally have little impact upon the CNEL levels of
an area, due to the averaging techniques utilized to define CNEL.
                                               V-27

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                           General Plan/Noise Element
Existing Community Noise Environment
In the City of Desert Hot Springs, the primary source of noise, as in most Coachella Valley
communities, is a consequence of motor vehicle traffic. The U.S. Interstate-10/Southern Pacific
Railroad corridor has a substantial impact on the southern portion of the City Sphere-of-
Influence. Other sources of community noise include mechanical equipment serving
commercial land uses, resorts and other larger operations.
Motor Vehicle Noise
The principal noise source measured within the community is vehicular traffic, including
automobiles, trucks, buses, and motorcycles. The level of noise generated by vehicular traffic
generally varies according to the volume of traffic, the percentage of trucks, and average traffic
speed. The tables below show the impacts of traffic and other sources at several locations in the
community on local noise environments. The table also presents projected impacts expected
from General Plan buildout.
Interstate-10 and Southern Pacific Railroad Lines
In addition to traffic along Highway 62 and the other major arterial roadways impacting the
City, the sphere areas of the community are also impacted by rail and vehicular traffic
associated with the Southern Pacific Railroad line and U.S. Interstate-10, respectively. While
the passage of trains is an intrusive noise event, it occurs only periodically and is limited in
duration. The influence of traffic noise of Interstate-10 is more significant and increases at night
with persistent truck volumes combined with occasional atmospheric temperature inversions,
which tend to reduce the acoustic attenuation typical of distance over open terrain. On a CNEL
basis, the calculated combined impacts associated with 1996 Interstate-10 and Southern Pacific
RR traffic place the 65 dB and 70 dB contours at 277 feet and 117 feet north of Interstate-10,
respectively.
Aircraft Noise
Aircraft noise impacting the community emanates from commercial and general aviation
operations at the Palm Springs International Airport, located south of the planning area. The
recently updated Airport Master Plan and Part 150 Noise Compatibility Study evaluated airport
operations, monitored portions of the noise environment, and projected future noise impacts
from planned expansions and increased operations. Flight tracks or patterns that aircraft are
assumed to follow in the noise study indicate limited over flights in Desert Hot Springs.
The tracking of flight operations associated with the airport indicate that both arrivals and
departures, whether during prevailing northwest or southeast winds, bring over-flights to the
edge of the City’s Sphere-of-Influence along Interstate-10. The analysis conducted for the
Airport Master Plan update indicates that existing and future noise levels associated with airport
operations will have no significant impact on the City or its Sphere.
Mechanical and Industrial Noise
In addition to noise generated by vehicular traffic, there are other noise generators within the
City, which could create significant noise-related conflicts. Industrial operations related to such
activities as rock crushing, construction and automotive repair can create substantial noise
problems. Loading and materials transfer areas, outdoor materials warehousing operations and
other acoustically unscreened operations will also raise issues of impact and compatibility.
Wind turbine operations can also be expected to be potentially significant noise generators.
                                                V-28

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                           General Plan/Noise Element
The operation of mechanical equipment is another important source of potentially significant
noise and includes chillers, refrigerator units and heating/air conditioning equipment associated
with commercial centers. Noise from roof-mounted equipment is especially effective at
penetrating into adjoining neighborhoods and impacting sensitive receptors. The constant hum
associated with fans and compressors can substantially impact the enjoyment of the outdoors
and adversely affect the quality of life. Substantial progress has been made in noise analysis and
mitigation through careful equipment design and ever improving baffling and noise cancellation
technologies.
Noise and Land Use Compatibility
In California and the City specifically, a CNEL of 65 dBA is used as a standard for maximum
outdoor noise levels in residential areas. Typically, the noise impacts cited are “unmitigated” or
have unobstructed transmission paths representing the worst case noise impact. As discussed
below, a variety of design and technical options are available to substantially reduce noise
impacts. The compatibility of different land uses is directly related to the user’s sensitivity to
noise and the potential for impacts to be mitigated.
Particularly sensitive land uses include residences, schools, libraries, churches, hospitals and
nursing homes, and resort areas. In addition, parks, golf courses and other outdoor activity areas
can be sensitive to noise disturbances. Less sensitive land uses include commercial and
industrial uses, conventional hotels and motels, playgrounds and neighborhood ballparks, and
other outdoor spectator sport arenas. Least sensitive to noise are heavy commercial and
industrial uses, transportation, communication and utility land uses. Table V-2 illustrates the
ranges of allowable exterior noise levels for various land uses.
                                                V-29

                                                                        TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                          General Plan/Noise Element
Noise Measurements and Modeling: Existing and Projected Future Noise Levels
In order to understand and evaluate the impacts of land use patterns, traffic and individual
developments on the noise environment, a variety of data has been collected, sites have been
monitored and existing and future impacts have been modeled. Existing conditions have been
specifically monitored and assessed at various areas of special focus or concern, including in
the vicinity of schools, residential neighborhoods, and commercial areas and along major
arterial roadways. The tables below show existing and projected General Plan buildout
conditions at specific locations and along major roadway segments.
Most transportation noise is highly predictable if specific data concerning operating
characteristics are available. Computer models and simulations are used to calculate the noise
environment along transportation routes based upon the vehicles operating characteristics and
                                               V-30
                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                              General Plan/Noise Element
the number of vehicles utilizing that particular transportation route. These predictions, provided
by existing quantitative models, have been verified by sound measurements at strategic and
sensitive receptor locations in the City. The Noise Monitoring section identifies the noise
monitor site locations.
Future noise impacts to the community are expected to be primarily generated by increasing
traffic volumes. From the Circulation Element, we can extract the future volumes projected on
major roadways. In order to make the projected traffic noise data more accurate, the average
posted speed limits and a percentage mix of light and heavy truck traffic along the roadways are
included in the modeling data. This information was supplied through City and CVAG traffic
counts, counts prepared for intersection improvement analyses, and for General Plan traffic
modeling. Computer modeling was used to estimate noise impacts due to the increased traffic
volumes.
It is important to note that special attention to project-specific site design may substantially
reduce noise impacts below those projected, and therefore these estimates are considered to be
conservative and unmitigated. A wide range of design criteria affecting roadway engineering
and traffic noise abatement include differences in final grade between the roadbed and the top
of walls, spacing of intersections, parkway widths and other considerations. Table V-5 lists the
1994 and projected General Plan buildout noise contours along major City roadways.
                                                 V-31
                                                                  TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                    General Plan/Noise Element
                                           Table V-3
                 Existing Exterior Noise Exposure Adjacent to City Roadways
                                   Desert Hot Springs 1994
Roadway                                A.D.T.1       CNEL2      Distance to Contours (FT) 3
                                     (Veh/Day)
                                                                  70      65 dBA      60 dBA
Mission Lakes Boulevard
East of Indian Avenue                       2,200     60.5       R/W          R/W        112
West of West Drive                          2,400     58.6       R/W          R/W         73
Pierson Boulevard
West of State Route 62                        200     50.1       R/W          R/W        R/W
East of State Route 62                      1,100     57.5       R/W          R/W         56
West of Indian Avenue                       2,100     60.3       R/W          R/W        107
East of Indian Avenue                       4,100     63.2       R/W             66      209
West of Little Morongo Road                 4,300     65.1       R/W           102       315
East of Little Morongo Road                 5,500     66.2       R/W           130       405
West of West Drive                          6,000     64.8       R/W             96      294
West of Cactus Drive                        6,400     63.2       R/W             68      204
West of Palm Drive                          7,000     63.6       R/W             74      224
East of Palm Drive                          5,200     62.3       R/W             57      167
Hacienda Avenue
West of Palm Drive                      3,400         61.5       R/W             50      139
East of Palm Drive                      6,000         63.9       R/W             79      240
East of Ocotillo Road                   6,700         63.0       R/W             63      199
East of Mesquite Avenue                 6,700         63.0       R/W             63      199
West of Miracle Hill Road               5,800         62.4       R/W             55      174
West of Mountain View Road              6,500         62.9       R/W             62      195
East of Mountain View Road              4,900         61.7       R/W          R/W        148
West of City Limits                     1,900         54.9       R/W          R/W        R/W
Two Bunch Palms Trail
West of Palm Drive                      6,700         63.4       R/W             71      214
East of Palm Drive                      6,100         59.9       R/W          R/W         98
                                            V-32
                                                                  TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                    General Plan/Noise Element
                                           Table V-3
                 Existing Exterior Noise Exposure Adjacent to City Roadways
                                   Desert Hot Springs 1994
Roadway                                A.D.T.1       CNEL2      Distance to Contours (FT) 3
                                     (Veh/Day)
                                                                  70      65 dBA      60 dBA
State Route 62
North of Pierson Boulevard             19,000         71.7        144           446      1407
South of Pierson Boulevard             15,000         70.6        113           347      1092
Indian Avenue
North of Mission Lakes Blvd.            6,000         64.8       R/W          96          302
North of Pierson Boulevard              7,000         65.5       R/W         112          354
South of Pierson Boulevard              8,300         66.2       R/W         132          416
Little Morongo Road
North of Pierson Boulevard              2,100         60.3       R/W        R/W           107
South of Pierson Boulevard              1,900         59.8       R/W        R/W            96
South of Two Bunch Palms Trail          3,000         61.8       R/W        R/W           151
West Drive
North of Pierson Boulevard              3,700         57.8       R/W        R/W            60
South of Pierson Boulevard              3,400         57.4       R/W        R/W            55
Palm Drive
North of Eighth Street                  6,300         64.1       R/W          82          253
North of Pierson Boulevard             10,500         66.3       R/W         133          415
South of Pierson Boulevard             14,600         66.8         52        149          465
North of Hacienda Avenue               18,800         67.9         64        191          599
South of Hacienda Avenue               18,800         69.8         96        294          927
South of Two Bunch Palms Trail         20,600         70.2        104        322         1017
North of City Limits                   23,400         70.6        115        362         1146
Miracle Hill Road
North of Hacienda Avenue                1,000         52.1       R/W        R/W          R/W
South of Hacienda Avenue                 400          48.1       R/W        R/W          R/W
                                             V-33
                                                                                     TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                                       General Plan/Noise Element
                                                      Table V-3
                      Existing Exterior Noise Exposure Adjacent to City Roadways
                                            Desert Hot Springs 1994
 Roadway                                         A.D.T.1           CNEL2         Distance to Contours (FT) 3
                                               (Veh/Day)
                                                                                     70       65 dBA       60 dBA
 Mountain View Road
 North of Hacienda Avenue                         1,400              53.5          R/W          R/W          R/W
 South of Hacienda Avenue                         4,400              58.5          R/W          R/W            71
          1.
 Notes:       A.D.T. Means current average daily two-way traffic volume.
          2
            . CNEL values are given at 100 feet from roadway centerlines (see Appendix E for assumptions).
          3.
              All distances are measured from centerline. R/W means the contour falls within the right-of-way.
 Source: Endo Engineering, 1994.
General Plan Monitoring Sites
Noise measurements were taken at six selected locations, primarily to address principal land use
compatibility questions associated with the updating of the General Plan. Sites included major
transportation corridors, land use transition areas, sensitive receptors and residential
neighborhoods. Monitoring was conducted during the day and nighttime hours in 1994. Each of
the sites monitored is briefly described below.
1.) Single Family Residence/NW Corner of Hacienda Ave and Ocotillo Road
2.) Corsini Elementary School/Hacienda Avenue
3.) Motel/Palm Drive South of Hacienda Avenue
4.) Desert Springs Middle School/Two Bunch Palms Trail
5.) Sky’s Haven Mobile home Park/Palm Drive
6.) Single Family Residence/Mission Lakes Boulevard
                                                        V-34

                                                                  TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                   General Plan/Noise Element
                                        Table: V-4
                            Noise Monitoring at Selected Sites
                            Locations and CNEL Values (1994)
              Location                Distance to Centerline (FT)            CNEL
1). Single Family Residence                        61                         61.6
2). Corsini Elementary School                      85                         54.1
3). Motel                                          63                         66.4
4). Desert Springs Middle School                   54                         60.4
5). Sky’s Haven Mobile home Park                   38                         72.4
6). Single Family Residence                        69                         58.1
                                          V-35

                                       TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                        General Plan/Noise Element
EXHIBIT V-5 NOISE MONITORING SITES MAP
                                V-36
                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                              General Plan/Noise Element
                                   Table V-5
                         1994 and General Plan Buildout
                  Projected Noise Contours on Major Roadways
              (Distance To CNEL Contours in Feet From Centerline)
                                            1994 Traffic      General Plan
                                                                Buildout
Roadway Segment                         60      65      70  60       65       70
Mission Lakes Boulevard
East of Indian Avenue                   112    R/W    R/W   492     230      109
West of West Drive                       73    R/W    R/W   357     167       81
Pierson Boulevard
East of State Route 62                   56    R/W    R/W   695     324      154
West of Indian Avenue                   107    R/W    R/W  1019     474      223
East of Indian Avenue                   209     66    R/W  738      343      161
East of Little Morongo Road             405    130    R/W   586     273      129
East of Palm Drive                      167     57    R/W  435      203       97
Hacienda Avenue
West of Palm Drive                      139     50    R/W  379      178       86
East of Palm Drive                      240     79    R/W  263      123       59
West of Miracle Hill Road               174     55    R/W   450     209       99
West of Mountain View Road              195     62    R/W  423      197       93
East of Mountain View Road              148    R/W    R/W   471     219      103
West of City Limits                    R/W R/W        R/W  369      172       81
Two Bunch Palms Trail
West of Palm Drive                      214     71    R/W  267      125       60
East of Palm Drive                       98    R/W    R/W   233     109       53
State Route 62
North of Pierson Boulevard             1407    446     144 881      410      192
Indian Avenue
North of Mission Lakes Boulevard        302     96    R/W  382      179       87
                                      V-37
                                                                        TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                          General Plan/Noise Element
                                          Table V-5
                            1994 and General Plan Buildout
                    Projected Noise Contours on Major Roadways
              (Distance To CNEL Contours in Feet From Centerline)
                                                   1994 Traffic           General Plan
                                                                             Buildout
Roadway Segment                                60       65      70       60      65       70
North of Pierson Boulevard                     354     112    R/W       419     196       95
Little Morongo Road
North of Pierson Boulevard                     107    R/W     R/W       515     240      114
South of Two Bunch Palms Trail                 151    R/W     R/W       750     350      166
West Drive
North of Pierson Boulevard                     60     R/W     R/W        60    R/W      R/W
South of Pierson Boulevard                      55    R/W     R/W       197      93       46
Palm Drive
North of Pierson Boulevard                     415     133    R/W       429     200       96
North of Hacienda Avenue                       599     191      64      520     243      118
South of Two Bunch Palms Trail                1017     322     104      874     407      192
Miracle Hill Road
South of Hacienda Avenue                      R/W R/W         R/W       141      67       35
Mountain View Road
North of Hacienda Avenue                      R/W R/W         R/W       293     137       66
South of Hacienda Avenue                        71    R/W     R/W       233     109       53
Source: “Desert Hot Springs General Plan Update Noise Background Study,” Endo Engineering,
         March 2000.
                                             V-38

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                             General Plan/Noise Element
Managing the Noise Environment
There are a variety of strategies available for managing the City’s noise environment and
preserving those qualities of peace and quiet that are essential and highly valued community
assets. Land use planning, transportation planning, project design mitigation, simple and
sophisticated technical fixes, and acoustical barriers are applied to community noise
compatibility issues and should be approached in this order.
In areas subject to significant or potentially significant noise impacts, site planning and design
standards are geared to provide direct and integrated noise impact mitigation. Applied
mitigation measures include the use of buffer zones consisting of earthen berms, walls and
landscaping between sensitive land uses and roadways and other noise sources. In addition, site
planning and building orientation can provide shielding of outdoor living spaces, and orient
operable windows away from roadways. Effective acoustical materials can also be incorporated
into building windows and walls, which adequately reduce outdoor noise.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Generally, the City of Desert Hot Springs enjoys a quiet noise environment consistent with its
character as a spa resort and residential community. The City is, however, most notably
impacted by major roadway noise sources. Future efforts in this regard should focus on the
preservation of the peaceful and quiet atmosphere that residents and visitors to the community
now enjoy.
Existing and future noise abatement and mitigation will have varying levels of effectiveness,
depending upon the noise type and its source, site conditions, geography and land uses. Noise
issues have been carefully considered in the development of the Land Use Element and land use
distributions. Zoning designations provide another level of land use control, which assures
appropriate uses near significant noise sources, and development standards and guidelines that
will reduce impacts and enhance compatibility. The Circulation Element has also been
designed, where possible, to protect the City’s residential areas from excessive traffic noise and
to assure compatible noise levels.
NOISE ELEMENT GOAL, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
GOAL
A noise environment providing peace and quiet that complements and is consistent with the
City’s spa resort and residential character and the various mix of land uses comprising the
community.
Policy 1
The potential of land use patterns, associated traffic and its distribution, and individual
development shall be assessed for their potential to generate adverse and incompatible noise
impacts, and significant impacts identified shall be appropriately mitigated.
                                                 V-39

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                           General Plan/Noise Element
Program 1 A
Draft and adopt a City Noise Ordinance to include noise exposure thresholds triggering project-
specific noise impact studies. Provide development standards and project design guidelines,
which include a variety of mitigation measures, which can be applied to meet City standards.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Planning Commission; City
Council
Schedule:2001
Program 1 B
Provide an outline of minimal requirements for noise studies for future development projects.
Studies shall analyze project impacts and the effectiveness of proposed mitigation measures.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: 2001 Continuous.
Policy 2
Protect noise sensitive land uses, including residences, resorts and community open space,
schools, libraries, churches, hospitals and convalescent homes from high noise levels from both
existing and future noise sources.
Program 2 A
Establish and periodically update an inventory of existing significant noise sources and
incompatibility areas, and develop procedures to reduce the noise effects on these areas, where
economically and aesthetically feasible.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: 2006; Every five years.
Program 2 B
On a project-specific basis, require the installation of soundwalls, earthen berms, wall and
window noise insulation and other mitigation measures in areas exceeding the City’s noise limit
standards.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: Continuous.
Program 2 C
Verify projected noise levels through noise monitoring at locations adjacent to residential and
other noise sensitive areas where traffic volumes have increased by more than 30%.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: Event of appropriate traffic volume increases.
Program 2 D
Develop a parkway master plan for undeveloped portions of Palm Drive, Mission Lakes
Boulevard, Pierson Boulevard, Two Bunch Palms Trail and other major roadways likely to
have adjoining sensitive land uses. Master plans shall reflect and utilize differences in
elevation, increased parkway width, mounding and/or berming, acoustically effective walls and
cohesive landscape planning to address noise compatibility, and other goals and policies.
Facilitate the establishment of an equitably based assessment district or other appropriate
financing mechanism for project design, development and maintenance.
                                                V-40

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                            General Plan/Noise Element
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department, Public Works Department;
Planning Commission; City Council
Schedule: 2001-02
Policy 3
Project designs shall be required to include measures, which assure that interior noise levels for
residential development do not to exceed 45 CNEL, as required by Title 25 (California Noise
Insulation Standards).
Program 3 A
In areas subject to potentially significant noise impacts, the City shall require new development
to monitor and document compliance with all applicable noise level limits.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: Project-specific
Policy 4
Land uses that are compatible with higher noise levels shall be located adjacent to the City’s
major arterial roads and highways, Interstate-10 corridor, or designated industrial lands in order
to maximize noise related land use compatibility.
Program 4 A
Periodically review land use patterns and the community noise environment, and amend the
Land Use map as appropriate to assure reasonable land use/noise compatibility.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Planning Commission; City
Council
Schedule: Review every five years.
Policy 5
Develop and maintain a circulation plan that is consistent with the spa resort and residential
character of the City, avoids impacts to existing and planned sensitive receptors/uses, and
which provides fixed routes for existing and future truck traffic.
Program 5 A
Encourage a Citywide circulation pattern, which places primary traffic loads on major arterials
and preserves local neighborhood noise environments by controlling traffic speeds, limiting
roadways to local traffic and minimum speeds to the greatest extent practical.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Public Works Department;
Schedule: Update every five years.
Program 5 B
Designate primary truck routes and clearly mark these routes through the City. Other than
vehicles providing local service, construction traffic, and delivery truck through-traffic shall be
limited to Palm Drive, Dillon Road, Two Bunch Palms Trail, Pierson Boulevard, Highway 62
and Interstate-10.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Public Works Department;
CalTrans
Schedule: Update every five years.
                                                V-41

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                           General Plan/Noise Element
Policy 6
The City shall assure that noise impacts from existing and future windfarm development shall
be kept at a level compatible with residential and other sensitive land uses.
Program 6 A
The City shall require that applications for windfarm development (WECS: Wind Energy
Conservation Systems) include technical data on noise generation and projected noise contours.
Following installation, noise monitoring shall be performed in conformance with requirements
of the City, with adverse impacts to be fully mitigated.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; county Environmental Health
Schedule: Immediately/ Continuous.
                                               V-42
                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                     General Plan/Hazardous and Toxic Materials Element
HAZARDOUS AND TOXIC MATERIALS
ELEMENT
PURPOSE
The Hazardous and Toxic Materials Element identifies existing hazardous and toxic material
locations in the community, and describes the regulatory environment established to safely
manage these materials. The aim of this element is to uphold the City’s concern and planning
for the protection of all Desert Hot Springs residents and visitors from adverse health and other
impacts due to the presence of hazardous and toxic materials. Goals, policies and programs are
set forth in this element that will help assure an effective response to the use, storage, or
transport of hazardous and toxic materials in the City of Desert Hot Springs, and help ensure
the general health, safety and welfare of the community from possible impacts associated with
these materials.
BACKGROUND
The Air Quality and Water Resources Elements are directly related to the Hazardous and Toxic
Materials Element, as policies implemented for hazardous and toxic waste management will
have an effect on preservation of clean air and protection against water resource contamination.
It is also related to the Land Use Element and land uses, with the potential of hazardous or toxic
materials and their storage or disposal undermining land use compatibility. The Emergency
Preparedness Element has a direct relationship to the emergency management of these materials
and their potential adverse impacts on the community as a result of spillage or upset. Resources
addressed by the Biological Resources Element may also be affected by the improper
management of these materials, especially herbicides and pesticides. The Fire and Police
Protection Element also has a relationship to this element.
It is mandated by California Government Code Section 65302(g) that the General Plan of a
community address safety issues, including but not limited to hazardous materials. Modern
industrial society has generated a wealth of materials and technologies that have improved our
quality of life but have also introduced new and potentially hazardous materials, which must be
carefully managed. This element discusses various issues associated with these hazardous and
toxic materials and provides background information on how these materials are to be managed
and disposed of. Most hazardous materials problems in the area are associated with leaking fuel
storage tanks, emissions from industrial and commercial solvents and coatings, pesticide and
herbicide use, and chemical and nuclear wastes generated by medical facilities. Control and
regulation of hazardous and toxic materials rests largely with county, state and federal agencies.
In the City of Desert Hot Springs, there are only a few identified hazardous/toxic material
generators associated with commercial, and quasi-industrial and medical operations, which
have the potential to be associated with accidental spills, purposeful illegal dumping, air
emission, and other uncontrolled discharges into the environment. The improper use and
management of these materials by service stations, petroleum product and equipment suppliers,
pesticide vendors and users, automotive dealers, medical practitioners, hospitals and clinics
pose a significant potential threat to the community and its environment.
                                               V-43

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                     General Plan/Hazardous and Toxic Materials Element
A wide variety of products, chemical and purified chemical compounds, and elements that are
considered hazardous or toxic are used in households, commercial businesses and industrial
operations and processes. They range through home and pool related chlorine products,
chemical fertilizers, herbicides and pesticides, stored fuels and waste oil, chemical solvents and
lubricants, and a variety of medical materials. All are considered “small quantity generators”
and some of those identified in the City include the Mission Springs Water District, Mission
Lakes Country Club, and Caliente Springs Hotel.
Community Hazardous Wastes Risks
Currently, there are several potentially hazardous waste sites that are generally restricted to the
above-mentioned and regulated “small quantity generators”. In addition to these mentioned
above, there are other sites that have been or should be monitored. These include other waste-
generating medical clinics and facilities, gasoline service stations, equipment and fuel storage
yards, and waste haulers.
Known or identified underground fuel storage occurring at locations in the City, where leakage
would pose the most significant hazard, include the City Corporate Yard, Edwards Enterprises,
Landells Aviation and Roesch Lines. The U.S. EPA requires all service stations to retrofit or
replace underground storage tanks with double-walled construction. Several sites in the City
have already complied with this rule. In the City Sphere-of-Influence various industrial
activities, including machining, wind turbine servicing, and materials research, also have the
potential for uncontrolled discharge of hazardous materials.
Hazardous Waste and Sewage Disposal
One area of recent concern in the Coachella Valley and the Desert Hot Springs area has been
the impact of long-term septic tank use on groundwater resources. Contamination problems
have not been particularly evident, although impacts on the lower portion of alluvial cones with
extensive upslope residential development are areas of concern, and on Mission Springs Water
District well has already been somewhat impacted by nearby septic tank use. (also see the
Water Resources Element). The use of septic tanks in these generally porous soils and on
sloping gradients can result in concentrated flows of effluent to the lower portions of these
areas and can result in contamination of the water table. Septic tanks are still widely in use in
Desert Hot Springs and their use will continue to pose varying threats to ground water.
Hazardous Waste Management Plans
The City of Desert Hot Springs has the opportunity to coordinate with appropriate county, state
and federal agencies in the identification of hazardous material sites, and the active regulation
of their timely cleanup. Management strategies may include establishing and maintaining
information on these sites, periodic monitoring facilities and operations that produce, utilize or
store hazardous materials in the City. Involvement in multi-agency monitoring of illegal
dumping in the City, conferring in the regulation of underground storage tanks and septic
systems, and regulating the transport of hazardous materials through the community is also
appropriate.
                                               V-44

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                    General Plan/Hazardous and Toxic Materials Element
AB 2948 (Chapter 1504, Statutes of 1986), commonly known as the Tanner Bill, authorizes
counties to prepare Hazardous Waste Management Plans (HWMP) in response to the need for
safe management of hazardous materials and waste products. The Riverside County HWMP
was adopted by the Board of Supervisors and approved by the California Department of Health
Services in 1990. The County HWMP identifies the types and amounts of wastes generated in
the County and establishes programs for managing these wastes.
In order to comply with Health and Safety Code Section 25135, the Riverside County HWMP
assures that adequate treatment and disposal capacity is available to manage the hazardous
wastes generated within the jurisdiction, and addresses issues related to manufacture and use.
This plan was developed jointly by the County, Desert Hot Springs and other cities within the
County, the State, the public and industry to address the disposal, handling, processing, storage
and treatment of local hazardous materials and waste products.
Preparation of the HWMP included extensive public participation. Its policies call for the
coordination of County efforts with state and federal agencies in the identification and
establishment of programs for managing these wastes. As an integral part of the County
HWMP, the City of Desert Hot Springs hazardous waste management policies for the General
Plan are essentially extensions of the County Plan and are hereby incorporated by reference.
Currently (2000), there are several sources of information concerning hazardous waste sites in
the City of Desert Hot Springs area.
The California Regional Water Quality Control Board (CRWQCB), as well as the Coachella
Valley Water District, maintains information concerning contaminated wells and groundwater.
The state and federal Environmental Protection Agencies (EPA), and the State Department of
Health also supply information concerning specific hazardous waste sites and their locations.
Private database screening and documentation services are also available, which will search,
extract, and summarize reports on contaminated sites recorded in various state and federal
databases.
Hazardous Materials Response
Hazardous and toxic materials are determined critical by the County Department of Health, and
the County and the City can require property owners to test, temporarily close and/or remove all
hazardous liquids, solids or sludge located on the site. Leaking underground storage tanks must
be removed by contractors having Hazardous Waste Certification and a General Engineering
license. Between cessation of storage and actual closure, monitoring is generally required by
the site’s operating permit. When soils contamination is detected, the clean up procedure to be
followed, the degree or level of cleanliness required by the regulator, and the method of
treatment (if permitted) will be directed by the County Health Hazardous Materials Division
and/or the Regional Water Quality Control Board.
The City of Desert Hot Springs has the opportunity to coordinate with appropriate county, state
and federal agencies in the identification of hazardous material sites, and the active regulation
of their timely cleanup. The Riverside County Fire Station #37, located within the city limits,
has the capacity of authority as a First Response Team; the agency responsible for the
Hazardous Response Plan is the County of Riverside Health Hazardous Materials Division
and/or the Regional Water Quality Control Board.
                                               V-45

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                     General Plan/Hazardous and Toxic Materials Element
 FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The City of Desert Hot Springs has the responsibility to coordinate with the appropriate
agencies in the identification of hazardous material sites, and the active regulation of their
timely cleanup. This element can most efficiently be implemented through regular consultation
with the RWQCB and the County Health Department and by updating information on
hazardous material sites, monitoring facilities that utilize or produce hazardous materials within
the City. The City should also remain current regarding the monitoring and regulating of
underground storage tanks and septic systems, and regulating the transport of hazardous
materials through the community.
A carefully coordinated program of oversight and management between responsible agencies
will be essential. Regular consultation and coordination between the City Emergency
Preparedness Director and responsible county and state agencies is also appropriate. Processes
for determining appropriate levels of local, County and State personnel and facilities will also
be critical. The goal, policies and programs of this element help to direct the planning and
development of appropriate strategies to address hazardous and toxic materials in the
community.
HAZARDOUS AND TOXIC MATERIALS GOAL, POLICIES AND
 PROGRAMS
GOAL
The assured safety of City of Desert Hot Springs residents and visitors through the regulation of
the manufacture, transport, use and disposal of toxic and hazardous materials.
Policy 1
Compile and maintain an inventory of all hazardous waste sites, and regulate, to the extent
empowered, the delivery, use and storage of hazardous materials within the City limits and
General Plan study area.
Program 1 A
Confer with the appropriate WQCB responsible agencies to determine the need for, and the
appropriateness of, developing a permitting process for the establishment of facilities, which
manufacture, store, use or dispose of hazardous and toxic materials within the community or
adjacent areas.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; County and State Health
Departments; CRWQCB
Schedule: Continuous.
Program 1 B
Proactively monitor and comment on the use, clean-up and re-use of existing hazardous
materials sites within the General Plan study area.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: Immediate, Continuous
                                               V-46
                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                    General Plan/Hazardous and Toxic Materials Element
Policy 2
Pro-actively encourage and facilitate the safe and immediate cleanup of all existing and future
hazardous waste sites within the City of Desert Hot Springs and General Plan study area.
Program 2 A
Coordinate with the appropriate state and federal agencies to activate procedures for the
cleanup of existing and future hazardous and toxic waste sites within the Desert Hot Springs
limits and its SOI.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; State and federal EPA, County
Health Department; CRWQCB
Schedule: Continuous.
Policy 3
Require and facilitate the safe and responsible disposal of all hazardous and/or toxic wastes in
compliance with existing federal, state and county regulations.
Program 3 A
Whenever possible, encourage the development and/or use of innovative and safe chemical
compounds, technologies and facilities.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: Continuous.
Program 3 B
Update and/or disseminate information and instructive education program materials for
residents, including direction on the identification and proper management of household
hazardous waste.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; County Health Department;
Valley Disposal; MSWD
Schedule: 2001-02; Continuous.
Program 3 C
To the extent empowered, prohibit the disposal of automotive and household hazardous and
toxic materials in landfills.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; County Health Department;
Valley Disposal
Schedule: Continuous.
Program 3 D
Coordinate with Valley Disposal and other appropriate public and quasi-public agencies to
sponsor and develop drop-off locations in Desert Hot Springs for hazardous or toxic household
products for all Desert Hot Springs residents.
Responsible Agency: Administrative Services Department; Valley Disposal; other appropriate
agencies
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Policy 4
Coordinate with the Fire and Police Departments to develop a system for roadway management
and for alerting emergency and medical facilities to the impending transport of hazardous and
toxic materials.
                                               V-47
                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                     General Plan/Hazardous and Toxic Materials Element
Program 4 A
Coordinate with appropriate departments and agencies to establish transportation management
and contingency emergency procedures and training programs for police, fire, medical and
other organizations that would be involved in an airborne release or ground spill of hazardous
and toxic materials or waste.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; City Emergency Preparedness
Director; Riverside County Fire Department; Sheriff’s Department; CalTrans
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Policy 5
Confer, cooperate and coordinate with the Regional Water Quality Control Board and the
Mission Springs Water District to monitor and regulate the use and phased removal of on-site
subsurface sewage disposal systems.
Program 5 A
Through the subdivision and/or development review process, the City shall encourage and/or
require, to the greatest extent practical, the connection of new development to the sewage
collection system of the Mission Springs Water District.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Public Works Department;
MSWD; Regional Water Quality Control Board
Schedule: 2001-02;Continuous.
Program 5 B
Cooperate with the Mission Springs Water District to help assure that all on-site sewage
disposal systems, upon completion of their use, are properly removed from service in
accordance with the requirements of the California Regional Water Quality Control Board and
other regulating agencies.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Public Works Department;
MSWD; Regional Water Quality Control Board
Schedule: Continuous.
Policy 6
Identify the location and monitor the use of all underground fuel storage tanks located within
the City limits with the potential to release hazardous or toxic materials into the environment.
Program 6 A
Coordinate with appropriate agencies in the enforcement of state and federal regulations for the
testing, monitoring and remediation of underground fuel storage tanks for leakage.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; County Health Department; State
EPA
Schedule: Continuous.
Policy 7
Actively oppose any plan or attempt to establish hazardous and toxic waste dumps/landfills or
hazardous industrial processes with the potential to adversely affect the community or the
City’s SOI.
Program 7 A
Coordinate with CVAG and its member cities to actively organize against and oppose any
county, state, federal or private effort to build and/or operate hazardous or toxic waste
                                                V-48

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                      General Plan/Hazardous and Toxic Materials Element
dumps/landfills or to operate hazardous industrial processes, which cannot be mitigated and
have the potential to adversely affect the City or its SOI.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Public Works Department;
Planning Commission; City Council
Schedule: Continuous.
                                                V-49
                                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                                                          General Plan
             CITY OF DESERT HOT SPRINGS
       COMPREHENSIVE GENERAL PLAN
                                                   CHAPTER VI
                                  PUBLIC SERVICES AND FACILITIES
This chapter of the General Plan addresses the public services and facilities needed to support development in the
City of Desert Hot Springs. General Plan elements found in this chapter that discuss these services and facilities
include Water, Sewer and Utilities, Fire and Police Protection, Schools and Libraries, Health Services, Emergency
Preparedness, and Public Building and Facilities. The levels of service needed for residential, commercial and
industrial development is directly related to the intensity of development in the community. The economic life of
the City is tied to the level of services, the types and intensities of land use, and the levels of demand for services
and the revenue generating potential of urbanizing areas.
                                                           VI
                                                                        TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                         General Plan/Water, Sewer & Utilities Element
WATER, SEWER AND UTILITIES ELEMENT
PURPOSE
This element establishes City policy for and provides a coordinated system of domestic water,
sewage treatment and utility services. The provision of these services is essential for orderly
growth and development of the community. Infrastructure types and utility services discussed
here include potable and irrigation water, sanitary sewage, natural gas, electricity and
telephone. This element institutes policies for these services in order to adequately serve the
City at full build out, identify standards for infrastructure relative to population or land use
intensity, and identifies courses of action and programs which implement the Goals and
Policies.
BACKGROUND
The Water, Sewer and Utilities Element is directly related to the Land Use Element in that new
development must be planned with the extension and availability of essential infrastructure.
Other related elements include Water and Energy Resources, and Flooding and Hydrology.
California Government Code Section 65302(d) provides for the General Plan to address the
conservation, development, and utilization of natural resources, including water. Related to the
conservation and utilization of this natural resource is wastewater (sewage) treatment and
natural gas and electricity availability. This Element satisfies, in part, the requirement for a
Conservation Element, while also addressing other utilities as allowed by Section 65303.
California Government Code Section 65103(c) requires that the planning agency “annually
review the capital improvement program of the city and the local public works projects of other
local agencies for their consistency with the General Plan.”
This Element of the General Plan provides an effective and meaningful framework from which
to comply with state law.
Domestic Water
Domestic water services are provided in the City and its sphere area by the Mission Springs
Water District (MSWD) and Coachella Valley Water District (CVWD). MSWD supplies the
existing City of Desert Hot Springs and most of its sphere area, south to Dillon Road. CVWD’s
boundary lies in an area south of 20th Avenue, and a small area west of Mountain View. Both
the MSWD and CVWD utilize deep wells to extract groundwater from the Mission Creek and
Garnet sub basins. MSWD’s domestic water system serving the City includes 7 wells, 20 above
ground storage reservoirs ranging in capacity from .055 million to 2.5 million gallons, and an
extensive system of distribution lines ranging in size from 4 to 16 inches in diameter. Water
well depths range between 400 and 1,085 feet (also see the Water Resources Element).
The Mission Creek Sub basin serves as the groundwater repository for the Desert Hot Springs
area, encompassing approximately 33 square miles and lies between the Desert Hot Springs sub
basin on the north and the Garnet Hill sub basin on the south. The boundaries of the Mission
                                               VI - 1

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                           General Plan/Water, Sewer & Utilities Element
Creek sub basin are formed by the Mission Creek fault on the north, and the Banning fault on
the south. Hydro-geological investigations in 1979 indicated that the southeastern portion of the
Mission Creek sub basin was estimated to have approximately 724,000 acre-feet in storage (1
acre foot equals about 327,000 gallons). The groundwater in storage for the entire sub basin
was estimated at 1.45 million-acre feet. It has an overall storage capacity of 2.6 million. Some
groundwater recharge comes from natural sources, such as the infiltration of runoff from the
San Bernardino and Little San Bernardino Mountains. Currently no Colorado River or other
water from state projects is used to recharge the basins. However, because of prevailing
overdraft conditions in the Mission Creek sub basin, Desert Water Agency (DWA) and the
Coachella Valley Water District (CVWD) have contracted with the State of California to
recharge the basin through the Metropolitan Water District’s Colorado River Aqueduct, which
passes through the western end of the city limits. Construction of a turnout is currently
underway, and the recharge program will use approximately 180 acres that have been secured
for development of a spreading basin. Completion of the project is estimated to be mid-1999.
Approximately 5,000 acre-feet per year will be discharged into the spreading basin.
The Federal Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974, amended in 1986, provides regulation of
drinking water quality.
Due to the complexity of the groundwater basins serving the City, the varying rates of natural
recharge and the flow of groundwater into and out of the Mission Creek sub basin from flows
across the Mission Creek and Banning faults, respectively, it is unclear whether and to what
extent this sub basin is in an overdraft condition. Further research is being conducted by the
District.
Major natural sources of groundwater recharge include infiltration of runoff from the San
Bernardino Mountains through the drainage of Mission Creek and other mountain drainages.
The Little San Bernardino Mountains through the drainage networks of Big Morongo Canyon,
Little Morongo Canyon and Long Canyon, and smaller channels; inflow from the Desert Hot
Springs sub basin; and returns from sewage effluent and excess irrigation. According to DWR
(1964, pp. 106-107), in desert areas where average annual rainfall is less than 12 inches (Desert
Hot Springs averages 5 inches) deep percolation of precipitation is negligible.
Continued increases in demand generated by residential, commercial, and golf course
development will have significant long-term cumulative impacts on the groundwater supply.
While the planned provision of recharge water will reduce the rates of overdraft, development
in the City and Coachella Valley is expected to continue to reduce the amount of potable
groundwater in storage. The City has adopted an ordinance to require water conserving
landscape design including the use of native desert plants, drought resistant landscaping, and
efficient irrigation technology in private and public landscaping applications.
The District is involved in a variety of efforts to conserve finite ground water resources. In
addition to the provision of domestic water, MSWD provides landscape plan checking services
and publications on the design and installation of drought tolerant landscaping.
                                               VI - 2

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                          General Plan/Water, Sewer & Utilities Element
Waste Water Treatment
Mission Springs Water District provides wastewater treatment for the planning area at two
treatment plants. The Horton Wastewater Treatment Plant, located on Verbena Road, has a
capacity of one million gallons per day (gpd), and is currently handling about 90 percent of its
design flow. The district has completed plans for an expansion of the plant, which will increase
its capacity to 2 million gpd. Expansion is expected to being in October 2000 and should be
completed within two years.
The District’s Desert Crest Wastewater Treatment Plant is located on Sunrise Road. The plant
has a capacity of 180,000 gpd, and it is currently treating about one-third of its total capacity.
Although there are no plans for immediate expansion, long-term expansion of the plant is being
considered and will be implemented as demand warrants.
In March 2000, there were about 5,000 septic tank systems in operation within the District
boundaries, including the city limits and SOI. Areas within the City range from 1.6 to 2 septic
systems per acre, while at Mission Lakes Country Club these systems occur at a density of 2.4
per acre. The recommended density of these systems in the planning area is about 0.7 systems
per acre (also see the Water Resources Element).
A limited portion of the planning area is located within the service area of the Coachella Valley
Water District (CVWD). Lands generally located east of Little Morongo Road and south of
Dillon Road are included in CVWD’s Improvement District #58. Development in this area is
sparse and largely limited to scattered residences. At this time, there are no CVWD wastewater
facilities in the area.
CVWD has indicated that it will be capable of providing wastewater collection facilities in this
portion of the planning area as additional development occurs and the demand for facilities
increases. Wastewater will be conveyed and discharged into existing sewer mains in Thousand
Palms, where it will be gravity fed to the Improvement District #58 Water Reclamation Plant
(WRP-7) in Indio. This plant currently has a capacity of 2.5 mgd and treats about 2 mgd.
Expansion of the plant to 5 mgd is currently (year 2000) underway and is expected to be
completed within one year.
Electric Service
Electric power services are provided by the Southern California Edison Company (SCE).
SCE has 2 transmission substations within the Desert Hot Springs sphere-of-influence. Electric
power is primarily generated outside the Coachella Valley, however, SCE purchases wind-
generated power from local producers. SCE facilities include 12 kv transmission lines for local
distribution. Higher voltage lines for more distant transmission range up to 115 kv and 230 kv
lines. Substations step down voltage for local distribution and use. Desert Hot Springs is served
by the Devers Substation, north of Dillon Road in the southwestern portion of the City’s SOI,
and the Coffee Substation, located on Camino Aventura west of Palm Drive, just south of the
city limits.
                                               VI - 3

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                           General Plan/Water, Sewer & Utilities Element
On average, the typical residential electric consumer uses approximately 6,000-kilowatt hours
per year. The higher summer temperatures in the Coachella Valley substantially increase the
demand for electricity for air conditioning, and costs associated with this service are also
significant.
SCE also offers various rebates for installation of
energy efficient equipment, including refunds for the
replacement of “through the wall” heat pumps;
installation or replacement of a central electric heat
pump; installation or replacement of a central air-
conditioning unit; replacement of a central electric
heat pump, and others. Another program called
Automatic Power Shift allows substantial savings
from June through September; in exchange for
allowing SCE to remotely "cycle-off" selected air-
conditioning units during periods of heavy use and
potential power outages.                                      Horton Wastewater Treatment Plant
                                                              Substation/Interstate 10 and Indian
Electrical rates in the Coachella Valley continue to be among the highest in the nation. Regional
electric utilities monopolies have traditionally been sole purveyors in distinct geographical
areas and as such, have the ability to set prices without concern for competition. However, the
regulation of electrical power is dramatically being changed by state and federal governments.
Recent rulings by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission require all utilities, including
investor-owned companies like SCE, to open their transmission lines to competitors and to
share information about available transmission capacity. Customers may no longer be bound to
buy power from the local utility company. The City may have an opportunity to play a role in
reducing electricity rates for its citizens. Most transmission lines in the planning area currently
are overhead; efforts should be made to underground new facilities whenever possible.
Natural Gas
Natural gas service is provided in the City by Southern California Gas, which has regional and
local distribution lines in the City and its Sphere-of-Influence. It is used for space heating,
domestic and commercial hot water, cooking and air-conditioning applications. On average, the
typical energy-consuming household in our region uses approximately 6,600 cubic feet of
natural gas each month. Services are available to all prospective users and nearby major
transmission facilities assure availability for most anticipated needs, be they residential,
commercial or industrial. Cost of services varies seasonally and with amount of use.
Telephone Service
General Telephone and Electronics (GTE) provide local business and residential phone services
are to the area, which has lines and switching facilities in the City. GTE provides a variety of
basic and special services and features, including three types of residential service. Flat rate
service allows unlimited local calls at one price. Measured service lowers the monthly rate but
incremental charges for local calls. GTE’s Lifeline Service is also available within certain age
and income restrictions.
                                                VI - 4

                                                                        TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                         General Plan/Water, Sewer & Utilities Element
Cable Television
Cable television service is provided to the City by Desert Hot Springs Cablevision as secured
by a franchise agreement. Desert Hot Springs Cablevision provides approximately 71 channels
with current capacity for 78. Fiber optic lines, the future highway for such technologies as
video digital compression and data transmission services, were activated in the Fall of 1994.
This allows the cable TV company to offer additional services such as telephone
communications.
The current (2000) franchise agreement provides the City with up to three public access
channels for information, education and public service uses, with one channel currently in use.
Desert Hot Springs Cablevision also owns and operates broadcast production equipment,
which it uses to provide videotaping and broadcasting as a public service for community-
sponsored events and City Council meetings.
Solid Waste Disposal Services
The City contracts with Desert Valley Disposal, Inc. (DVD) for provision of solid waste
management and disposal services. A variety of residential and commercial services are
available, including basic once weekly residential pick up and commercial pick up available up
to 6 days per week.
DVD also offers other services to such large waste generators as restaurants, retailers, and
hotels and resorts.
DVD also provides a resource recovery/recycling service to the community. This includes
provision of crates or other containers for the separation of cans, glass and newsprint by
residents for once a week curbside pickup. Recycling has many benefits, including preservation
of landfill space for non-recyclable materials, and the preservation of energy and finite
feedstock materials. An estimated 1.5 to 2.5 tons of recyclable materials are collected each
month in the Desert Hot Springs area by Desert Valley Disposal.
This program is run in conformance with State of California Assembly Bill 939, which requires
that every city and county implement programs to recycle, reduce at the source and compost
25% of its solid waste by the year 1995, and 50% by the year 2000.
Solid waste collected in Desert Hot Springs is currently disposed of at the Edom Hill Landfill,
located east of Varner Road on Edom Hill Road. The landfill accepts waste from communities
in the Coachella Valley and is operated by Riverside County. In March 2000, the remaining
capacity of the landfill was estimated at 1,900,097 tons, and the projected closure date was the
year 2004.
With the impending closure of the Edom Hill Landfill, the City and other Coachella Valley
communities are evaluating a number of disposal site alternatives. Options being considered
include the development of a solid waste transfer facility in the vicinity of Interstate 10,
between the cities of Palm Springs and Desert Hot Springs. The facility would function as a 24-
hour holding site for solid waste collected in the Coachella Valley, which would then be hauled
by truck to a landfill. Landfills currently being considered include the approved, but not yet
                                               VI - 5
                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                          General Plan/Water, Sewer & Utilities Element
constructed Eagle Mountain Landfill east of the Coachella Valley, and the Badlands, El
Sobrante and Lamb Canyon Landfills in western Riverside County.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Water, sewer and public utilities are essential parts of community development of all types.
The orderly and contiguous extension of services and facilities is integral to the logical and
cost-effective extension of the urban land use pattern. The economic provision of water, energy
and other public services is coordinated by the City and must be planned to adequately
accommodate future growth anticipated in the General Plan. The General Plan provides service
providers with important information on future service demands to allow the providers to
determine how they can best be met.
In 1996, Congress passed a sweeping new Telecommunications Act rewriting sixty years of
telecommunication laws. It significantly deregulated the telecommunications industry. As a
result, the historical distinctions among telephone, cable and computer are beginning to
disappear. Traditionally, GTE and computer communication utilized twisted copper wires.
More recently, fiber optic cabling is being used by GTE as well as Desert Hot Springs
Cablevision. It is cheaper, smaller, and has a greater capacity to carry large amounts of high
quality of video, data and sound. The City has a responsibility to monitor this new technology,
regulate the rush anticipated of multiple providers, and plan for its installation and the needs of
City residents.
WATER, SEWER AND UTILITIES GOALS, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
GOAL 1
Economical water, sewer and utility facilities and services, which safely and adequately meet
the needs of the City at build out.
GOAL 2
A citywide sewage collection and treatment system.
Policy 1
Monitor resource management activities of the MSWD, CVWD and Regional Water Quality
Control Board to preserve and protect water resources.
Policy 2 The City shall support the formation of neighborhood-wide Assessment Districts for
the purpose of sewer installation.
Program 2 A
The City shall cooperate with MSWD in their efforts to establish and prepare the preliminary
engineering estimates for assessment districts for sewer installation.
Responsible Agency: Public Works Department
Schedule: As necessary
                                              VI - 6
                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                           General Plan/Water, Sewer & Utilities Element
Policy 3
All new subdivisions of ten lots or more shall extend and be connected to sewer lines.
Policy 4
Should a sewer line exist in the right-of-way to serve a lot and a lateral line is the only
connection required, sewer connection shall be required at the time the lot is developed.
Policy 5
Where a sewer line exists in the right-of-way to serve a residential unit but the unit is served by
a septic system, at the point of sale every effort shall be made to have the septic system
properly abandoned and the unit connected to the sewer system.
Program 5 A
The MSWD shall provide the City with a list of residences and businesses not connected to the
sewer system.
Responsible Agency: Public Works Department; Community Development Department;
Mission Springs Water District
Schedule: 2001-02
Program 5 B
The City shall assist the MSWD in the development of a financial assistance program for sewer
installation in existing neighborhoods.
Responsible Agency: MSWD; Redevelopment Agency; Economic Development Office
Schedule: 2002-03
Policy 6
If soil conditions do not permit proper percolation, septic systems will be prohibited.
Policy 7
The City shall coordinate with Mission Springs Water District in monitoring County regulation
of septic tank pumping within the City and it Sphere-of-Influence.
Policy 8
The City should take a proactive role in forming a cooperative program with adjacent cities to
reduce the costs of electric service.
Program 8 A
The City shall investigate possible methods by which the cost of electric power is controlled or
lowered, including but not limited to entering into joint power purchase agreements with
adjoining cities.
Responsible Agency: Administration Department; City Council; Public Works Department;
adjoining cities
Schedule: 2001-02
Policy 9
Utility lines on major streets and scenic roadway shall have primary consideration for under-
grounding.
                                              VI - 7
                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                             General Plan/Water, Sewer & Utilities Element
Policy 10
Major utility facilities shall be sited to assure minimal impacts to the environment and the
community, and minimize potential environmental hazards.
Policy 11
The City shall encourage the coordinated and shared use of underground transmission corridors
as a means of minimizing repeated excavations into the streets.
Policy 12
The City shall proactively participate in the regional disposal of solid waste and the reduction
of the waste stream to landfills.
Program 12 A
Work closely with the solid waste hauling franchisee to ensure that all possible recycling
techniques are implemented within the City.
Responsible Agency: Public Works Department
Schedule: 2000
Program 12 B
Participate in the siting of transfer stations, which serve the region, and ensure that such stations
do not negatively impact the City’s economic growth.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department, City Manager
Schedule: Immediate, Continuous
                                                 VI - 8

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                          General Plan/Fire and Police Protection Element
FIRE AND POLICE PROTECTION ELEMENT
PURPOSE
The purpose of this element is to address two of the essential functions of government, which
are to assure the provision of police and fire protection services. The Element reflects the City’s
commitment which places high priority on the best protection services possible. Fire services
are state-of-the-art, with one station in Desert Hot Springs and another station planned for the
Rancho Royale area, at such time that the Fire Department determines the Station No. 37 can no
longer adequately serve the area. Contractual arrangements are also in place for police services,
to enhance service in the most cost-effective manner possible.
BACKGROUND
Government Code Section 65302(g) requires that a General Plan include a Safety Element, or
its equivalent, for the protection of the community from any unreasonable risk associated with
the effects of fire, crime or other threats. Public Resources Code Section 4125(a) also
references the State Board of Forestry, which classifies lands for the purpose of establishing
hazards and responsibility. Unclassified lands will fall under the jurisdiction of the City or
appropriate federal agency, such as the U.S. Bureau of Land Management or Forest Service.
Fire Protection Services
The threat of fire poses hazards to life and property. Given the City’s
generally sparsely vegetated open desert lands and hillsides, developed areas
are the source of most service calls. Fire protection is provided to the City by
the Riverside County Fire Department under contract with the California
Department of Forestry. Paramedic personnel and ambulance service is
provided by American Medical Response (AMR), which is dispatched to the
scene by the fire station. (Also see the Health Service Element).
The Riverside County Fire Department operates thirteen fire stations in the
upper Coachella Valley. The following fire stations are well situated to
provide fire protection services to the City and its Sphere-of-Influence, and
include one station located within the city limits. Each of the stations is
staffed by a minimum of one company officer and one fire fighter at any
given time. The Fire Department maintains mutual aid agreements with fire
stations in Morongo Valley, Palm Springs and Cathedral City.
Desert Hot Springs Station, No. 37 is located at 65958 Pierson Boulevard, next to the City Hall
building. This station is equipped with two 1,500 gallons per minute (gpm) Type-1 fire engines,
one squad, and one rescue vehicle. The station has seven active volunteers, with two more in
training.
                                                VI - 9

                                                                             TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                            General Plan/Fire and Police Protection Element
North Palm Springs Station, No. 36 is located on Dillon Road just west of Indian Avenue in
North Palm Springs. This station is equipped with two Type-1 fire engines and one squad, and
currently has twenty volunteers.
Sky Valley Station, No. 56 is located on Dillon Road, approximately three miles east of Desert
Hot Springs. The station has one Type-1 fire engine, but has no volunteers at this time.
National Fire Insurance Organizations and the National Fire Protection Association formally
recommend, respectively, a maximum three mile and five minute response parameter for siting
fire stations. Response times within the City range from zero to nine minutes. The highest
response times occur in the eastern portion of the City, in the vicinity of Hacienda Avenue and
Mountain View Road. The City and Fire Department have identified the need for a new fire
station in this area. It is anticipated that the new station will be constructed in several years.
Continued growth may stimulate the need for additional fire stations. The adopted Rancho
Royale Specific Plan, located in the northwestern portion of the City, is conditioned to construct
a new fire station during its first phase of development. The station will be located west of
Highway 62 and north of Pierson Boulevard. Although no definite site is called for, the
Olympus Specific Plan, located mid-way between existing City development and Highway 62,
also includes the possible siting of a fire station. Further consultation and coordination with
local fire officials will be required to determine the optimum location for additional future
facilities.
Police Protection Services
The City of Desert Hot Springs Police Department operates out of City Hall. In March 2000,
Police Department staff included 16 officers, although the City is budgeted for a total of 22
officers. The Department is equipped with 22 police vehicles, including unmarked cars, and
maintains mutual aid agreements with the California Highway Patrol and Riverside County
Sheriff’s Department. The Department strives to maintain a ratio of approximately 1.2 officers
per 1,000 population.
Police response times can vary significantly, depending on the location of patrol cars at the time
of a call. In 2000, average response time to a code 3 (extreme emergency) was 2.5 minutes, and
average response time to a code 1 (non-emergency) was 8 minutes. All calls are prioritized, and
response time is contingent on the number of calls pending and their urgency. Methods to
reduce or prevent crime include adequate street and security lighting, and the integration of
"defensible space" design concepts. Defensible space permits surveillance and provides the
highest possible level of security, use of appropriate security hardware, and building siting and
visibility.
The Police Department promotes and participates in a variety of community programs,
including Neighborhood Watch and a holiday program, which provides meals and gifts to
families in need. The Department sponsors Green Ribbon Month during the month of May, and
gives presentations on child safety to elementary and middle school students. The Police
League also sponsors various youth programs.
                                                  VI - 10

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                         General Plan/Fire and Police Protection Element
To understand the issue of crime it is imperative to consider geographic, demographic,
economic and other factors specific to a jurisdiction. The transience of the population, its
composition by age and gender, education levels, and prevalent family conditions with respect
to the family unit is correlated to crime statistics. Considering a jurisdiction's
industrial/economic base, economic conditions relating to median income, poverty level, job
availability, dependence on neighboring jurisdictions, and transportation systems are all key
factors in assessing and understanding the crime issue.
The strength and effectiveness of law enforcement in a city should also be considered when
comparing crime statistics. One city may report more crime than another, not because there is
more crime, but rather because its law enforcement, through proactive efforts, identifies more
offenses. A high ratio of officers-to-population allows identification and reporting of crimes
more effectively. Attitudes of the citizens toward crime influence their crime reporting
practices, especially concerning more minor offenses. This will have an impact on the volume
of crimes reported to police.
The timing of specific law enforcement needs, which would result from continued
development, cannot be estimated with confidence and will vary from community to
community. It can be expected that as development continues so will the need for expanded
police protection services and personnel.
Citizens on Patrol
The Citizens on Patrol (COP) program is a group of volunteers 18 years and over who
voluntarily patrol the City. The program currently has approximately 25 trained volunteers.
COP volunteers receive training by the Police Department and operate City vehicles. COP
provides assistance to the Police Department including routine patrols, vacation home checks,
traffic control and community-sponsored event support. The City provides shirts, jackets and
patches for the volunteers.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The distribution of land uses and anticipated development pattern will continue to directly
impact the City’s ability to provide adequate fire and police protection. The availability of staff
and equipment and the need to provide protection services within a minimum time frame affects
the responsiveness of the City’s police and fire departments. Development in the City that is
distant from services may risk longer response times, which must be considered in land use
planning, circulation/traffic planning, the provision of fire flows, and in emergency
preparedness planning. The timing of specific law enforcement will result from continued
development. Fire protection needs are established by and are highly dependant upon the
location, type and intensity of future development.
                                              VI - 11

                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                          General Plan/Fire and Police Protection Element
FIRE AND POLICE PROTECTION GOALS, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
GOAL
A high level of police and fire protection and service.
Policy 1
All new and improved developments shall be reviewed for their impact on safety and the
provision of police and fire protection services.
Program 1 A
Consult and coordinate with the Riverside County Fire Department to establish potential fire
station locations to provide for future adequate levels of service.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Riverside County Fire
Department
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Policy 2
Enforce fire standards and regulations in the course of reviewing building plans and conducting
building inspections.
Program 2 A
Coordinate with the Mission Springs Water District to assure adequate water supply and
pressure for all existing and proposed developments.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Mission Springs Water District.
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Policy 3
Potentially hazardous material use and storage shall be regulated by the City and other
appropriate agencies.
Program 3 A
The siting of facilities which involve the storage of hazardous, flammable or explosive
materials shall be conducted in such a manner as to assure the highest level of safety in strict
conformance with the Uniform Fire Code and other applicable codes and regulations.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Building Department; Riverside
County Fire Department
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Policy 4
Due to the fire hazard potential of hilly areas with slopes of 10 percent or greater, access
problems, lack of water or sufficient pressure, and excessively dry brush; special on-site fire
protection measures shall be specified during project review.
                                              VI - 12
                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                          General Plan/Fire and Police Protection Element
Policy 5
Emergency police, fire and paramedic vehicle access shall be provided with all new
development to the satisfaction of the City.
Policy 6
Utilize crime prevention principles through the integration of project planning which results in
“defensible space” or high security designs as a means of providing increased security in
residential, commercial and industrial development.
Policy 7
The City shall assist the Sheriff’s Department in promoting the Neighborhood COP Program.
Policy 8
The City shall support the Citizens on Patrol program.
Policy 9
As corporate limits are expanded, every effort shall be made to assure the same or greater level
of police and fire protection as currently provided to City residents.
                                               VI - 13

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                             General Plan/Schools and Libraries Element
SCHOOLS AND LIBRARIES ELEMENT
PURPOSE
This Element describes school and library facilities in the City, sphere-of-influence and
surrounding area. It also provides guidance and direction for decision makers to ensure support
and convenient access to these essential services. City residents of all ages deserve the
opportunity to gain a basic education and to continue to expand their personal and professional
horizons through these important educational and cultural resources. The convenient and safe
accessibility of the City’s school and library facilities depend upon the community’s land use
pattern, and the efficiency and safety of its streets, and the availability of bicycle lanes/paths
and public transit.
BACKGROUND
With continued residential development, a larger permanent population, and the increased
number of families with school-age children, pressures on the local school district have steadily
grown. All of the City and SOI are located within the boundaries of the Palm Springs Unified
School District. The Palm Springs Unified School District is required by law to provide school
facilities to accommodate students.
California Government Code Section 65302(a) requires that, among other things, the General
Plan assess the general distribution and location of educational facilities, and determine the
adequacy of these facilities.
Palm Springs Unified School District
The school district has declared that their facilities are overcrowded. In addition to permanent
classroom facilities, the District uses portable classroom buildings on most campuses.
School Descriptions
The Palm Springs Unified School District currently (2000) operates four elementary schools,
one middle school, one continuation high school, and one high school within the City and its
sphere. This Element includes a brief discussion of these schools, which are considered to
primarily serve residents of Desert Hot Springs. The District currently has no plans to construct
new schools in the planning area.
Edward L. Wenzloff Elementary
The Edward L. Wenzloff Elementary School, located on West Drive, opened at its current site
in 1975 and serves the levels of kindergarten through fifth grade. The school’s total capacity is
716 students, and school year 1999-2000 enrollment was 637 students.
                                               VI - 14

                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                            General Plan/Schools and Libraries Element
Julius Corsini Elementary
The Julius Corsini Elementary School first opened in 1982, is located on Hacienda Drive, and
serves the levels of kindergarten through fifth grade. The school can accommodate a total of
756 students. Enrollment for the 1999-2000 school year was 732 students.
Bubbling Wells Elementary
Opened in 1993, the Bubbling Wells Elementary School accommodates kindergarten through
fifth grades and is located on Camino Campanero. During the 1999-2000 school year, 620
students were enrolled in Bubbling Wells Elementary, although the school can accommodate a
total of 661 students.
Two Bunch Palms Elementary
The Two Bunch Palms Elementary School opened in 1998, and is located at West Drive and
Two Bunch Palms Trail. Two Bunch Palms Elementary can accommodate a total of 716
students from kindergarten through the fifth grades. Enrollment for the year 1999-2000 was 663
students.
Desert Springs Middle School
Opened in 1989, the Desert Springs Middle School is located on Two Bunch Palms Trail. The
school serves the sixth through the eighth grades. School year 1999-2000 enrollment totaled
1,101 students, although the school can accommodate a total of 1,191 students.
Las Brisas Continuation School
Las Brisas Continuation School is a satellite of Mt. San Jacinto Continuation High School in
Cathedral City and is located on Palm Drive. It provides alternative education for students in
ninth through twelfth grades, with a 1999-2000 enrollment of 18. The school can accommodate
a total of 20 students.
Desert Hot Springs High School
Desert Hot Springs High School opened in September 1999 and is located on Pierson
Boulevard. The school has a total capacity of 1,161 students, and its 1999-2000 school year
enrollment was 679.
When the State of California reduced funding for public schools, it passed legislation effective
January 1, 1987 to permit school districts to levy a per square-foot fee for new residential,
commercial and industrial development. These fees must be paid by developers directly to the
school district prior to the issuance of building permits. The fees are used to assist in the
construction or reconstruction of school facilities. In the year 2000, the residential school fee
was $1.93 per square foot and the commercial and industrial per square-foot fee was $0.31.
Private Schools
Three private schools also serve the City. The following descriptions and student enrollments
are for the 1999-2000 school year.
                                             VI - 15
                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                              General Plan/Schools and Libraries Element
•   The Palm Springs Christian School is located on Little Morongo Road, and provides
    classroom instruction for Kindergarten through Grade 12. The school can accommodate a
    total of 50 students, and 1999-2000 enrollment was 35 students.
•   Community Children’s Center is located at Acoma and Mesquite Avenue. The school
    provides preschool education and day care for ages 3.5 to 6 years, and elementary education
    for kindergarten through Grade 6. It also offers before and after school care for children
    ages 6 to 11. Current student enrollment is 85 students. The school can accommodate a
    total of 95 students, and will expand to accommodate 125 students by the year 2001.
•   Storyland Preschool is located on West Drive, and provides preschool education and day
    care for children ages 2 to 6. The school also provides before and after school care for
    children ages 6 to 11. Current enrollment is 58, but the school can accommodate a total of
    67 students.
In the future, should the state institute a Voucher Program, a redistribution of students between
public and private schools may result.
Libraries
Currently (2000), the Desert Hot Spring’s library is a branch of the joint library system of the
County of Riverside. The library is housed in a county-owned building, which comprises
approximately 3,500 square feet. In December 1999, the library contained approximately
29,278 volumes. Special resources include books and tapes for both adults and children, with
computer terminals and text-base access to the Internet. Library services include a delivery
system, which provides for the exchange of books and other resources between all County
libraries on a daily basis. A bookmobile, which is operated in conjunction with Sunline Transit
Agency and contains approximately 10,000 volumes, provides mobile library services to
residents within the unincorporated areas of the planning area and the Coachella Valley.
The County strives to maintain an unadopted standard of 2 volumes and 0.5 square feet of
library space per resident. As part of its mitigation fee review process, the County will soon
present to its Board of Supervisors a plan to provide a library facility of at least 10,000 square
feet in the City of Desert Hot Springs. The proposal could result in the construction of a new
library, or an expansion of the existing building in the next five to ten years.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The City’s schools and library are important community assets that support City children and
adults, and are an important barometer of the social health of the city and its quality of life.
These assets are also an important criteria for many considering residing in the City. Schools
and libraries are land use-sensitive, and their location requires consideration of many areas,
including student safety, accessibility, impacts from noise and other factors.
Public school districts are “responsible agencies” and have “lead agency” status for the siting,
planning and processing of development approvals. While consultation with local jurisdictions
is required, most decisions rest with the school district, with building planning and design
processed and approved by the State Architect’s Office. Nonetheless, the City can assist and
coordinate with the local school districts and state agencies in the planning and provision of
                                               VI - 16

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                             General Plan/Schools and Libraries Element
educational facilities to maximize opportunities for the education of residents of the
community.
The General Plan provides policies and programs to preserve and protect existing and future
school and library sites from excessive noise and traffic conditions, and help ensure
accessibility and compatibility with surrounding land uses.
SCHOOLS AND LIBRARIES ELEMENT GOALS, POLICIES AND,
PROGRAMS
GOAL
Educational and library facilities in the City of Desert Hot Springs providing quality services
and facilities, and convenient access to these important educational and cultural resources.
Policy 1
The City shall cooperate and coordinate with the Palm Springs Unified School District to
identify sites needed to meet future District growth demands. The City shall encourage that
potential school sites are planned within centrally located areas of residential development.
Program 1 A
Provide enhanced educational opportunities for the residents of the community, as part of the
City’s continuing effort to cooperate and coordinate with the Palm Springs Unified School
District in planning for new facilities.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Palm Springs Unified School
District
Schedule: Immediate, Continuous.
Policy 2
The Desert Museum staff shall be encouraged to cooperate and coordinate with the Palm
Springs Unified School District to use museum programs to enhance the educational experience
of District students.
Program 2 A
As part of a continuing effort to provide enhanced educational opportunities for the residents of
the community, the City shall encourage on-going cooperation and coordination between the
District and the Desert Museum to make museum resources available to District classes to the
greatest degree practical.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Palm Springs Unified School
District; Desert Museum
Schedule: Immediate, Continuous.
                                               VI - 17

                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                               General Plan/Schools and Libraries Element
Policy 3
The City shall review Palm Springs Unified School District development proposals and
environmental documentation, and shall otherwise coordinate and cooperate and work with the
District to encourage the provision of safe, secure, and permanent educational space for all
students.
Program 3 A
Preserve and protect existing and future school and library sites from excessive noise and traffic
conditions by encouraging the use of design and development solutions that mitigate these
impacts.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Palm Springs Unified School
District
Schedule: Immediate, Continuous.
Policy 4
Recognizing the importance of the library system for educational and cultural development
within the community, the City shall make every effort to assure that quality library facilities
and resources are accessible to all residents.
Program 4 A
The City shall coordinate efforts to expand and enhance library facilities, including library
space, more books, expanded electronic and Internet facilities; increased staffing and operation
hours; and outreach and education programs.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; County of Riverside; Palm
Springs Unified School District; other library systems
Schedule: Immediate, Continuous.
Policy 5
Support the expansion of educational opportunities for the City’s residents at all levels.
Program 5 A
Work with community college and university districts to encourage the development of
extension courses and/or satellite college facilities within the City.
Responsible Agency: City Manager
Schedule: 2001, On-going
                                               VI - 18

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                   General Plan/Health Services Element
HEALTH SERVICES ELEMENT
PURPOSE
The Health Services Element addresses the need for accessible health care services and
facilities for all residents of the community, as well as ensuring that planned emergency routes
between health-related facilities such as hospitals, clinics, and convalescent homes are in place
for the growing Desert Hot Springs population. The Element also provides goals; policies and
programs that define and direct the City’s role in assuring the provision of a variety of medical
care facilities to serve its diverse population. This Element of the General Plan has traditionally
received little attention in spite of its importance in enhancing the health and welfare of the
community’s residents. There has been a recent growth in awareness of the need for community
planning of health care services.
It is the intention of this Element to address principal concerns that arise during review of
development proposals, including proximity of health care services to all residents, especially
those who reside in senior or convalescent housing. The City has a particular interest in the
provision of accessible medical facilities, convalescent facilities and their services, as well as
facilities specializing in medical emergencies. Such related facilities also include: Home
Health Care, for those patients allowed to remain at home but requiring assessment and
treatment by a skilled nurse or therapist; Continuing Care Centers, offering sub-acute (long-
term) care or special intensive medical care for seriously ill residents; and Hospice services,
home services for the terminally ill and their families.
BACKGROUND
This Element is related to and shall be coordinated with other Elements of the General Plan,
including the Circulation, Emergency Preparedness, and Fire and Police Protection Elements.
Seniors over aged 65 make up over 14% of the City of Desert Hot Springs’ population. The
County of Riverside Health Department, the State of California, and the Hospital Planning
Association of Southern California are among the agencies that analyze all types of hospital
data and statistics on an area-wide basis to help measure the present and future needs of such
facilities and the populations they serve. The other key duties of health departments are:
developing standards of service, organizing review proposals for new facilities, and informing
public health practitioners of new standards. As the health planning field gains greater
recognition, health departments will continue to forecast needs for integrated services and
facilities, and analyze new trends in medical and health facilities planning.
Special Services/Mobile Health Services
Special mobile health services are periodically offered at the Senior Center located at the Carl
May Community Center on West Drive, through the Riverside County Public Health
Department. Primary care clinics are offered by participating physicians and include physical
examinations, diagnostic screenings, lab tests, immunizations, and health seminars.
                                                VI - 19

                                                                        TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                 General Plan/Health Services Element
Desert Hospital
Desert Hospital located approximately six miles south of the City and within the city limits of
Palm Springs, is a licensed 305 acute bed hospital, which functions as a notable intensive care
facility between Riverside County and the Arizona border. The Hospital has entered into a
long-term management agreement with Tenant Health Care, an owner and operator of more
than 140 acute care hospitals with headquarters in of Santa Barbara, California. Desert Hospital
has a twenty-four hour emergency room and a level II Trauma Care facility with a staff of
specially trained trauma surgeons to offer their aid in the event of a major injury. Desert
Hospital also has a Home Health Care department, which provides in-home nursing and
household maintenance service. Hospice of the Desert has been incorporated into the Desert
Hospital operations to provide specialized counseling for the terminally ill.
Eisenhower Medical Center
Eisenhower Medical Center, located in the City of Rancho Mirage, also is available to provide
services to residents of Desert Hot Springs. This hospital is licensed for 261 patient beds.
Twenty-four hour emergency facilities are also available, with at least one full time physician
on duty at all times. Located on the same grounds are the Betty Ford Center for chemical
dependency, the Annenberg Center for World
Health Sciences, and the Barbara Sinatra
Children’s Center. The Betty Ford Center is
currently undergoing an expansion, which will
include a new 20-bed residential facility and a
structure that will house the Children’s Program,
Training Services and Alumni Programs.
Eisenhower is also a provider of a wide variety of
outpatient and specialist services, and has recently
opened a birthing center that could offer service to
residents of the Desert Hot Springs Community.
The Andrew Allen Surgical Pavilion is currently
(2000) under construction and will consist of a
40,000 square foot state-of-the-art medical surgical
facility with ten operating rooms. The facility is             Eisenhower Medical Center
expected to open in Fall 2000.
Desert Rehab Services, Inc. (DRS)
Two drug and alcohol treatment facilities owned and operated by Desert Rehab Services, Inc.,
and one treatment facility operated by the Soroptimists are located in the area. DRS is licensed
and certified by the California Department of Drug and Alcohol Programs to operate The Ranch
facility and Hacienda Valdez.
The Ranch is a 46-bed all male facility which provides 5 to 7 day detoxification programs, as
well as a variety of primary services programs ranging from individual counseling to
recreational and social activities. The Ranch also provides extended care and treatment
programs for clients referred from other facilities, as well as a 6-month transitional housing
program. The Ranch (previously Lost Heads Ranch) is located at the end of Annandale Avenue
just north of the City limits.
                                             VI - 20

                                                                        TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                 General Plan/Health Services Element
Hacienda Valdez is located within the City limits and provides 6-month transitional housing
services, a 5 to 7 day detoxification program, and support counseling for women. Hacienda
Valdez is a 35-bed facility for women who have already completed a primary treatment
program and provides a structured and supported residential environment to help clients back
into the mainstream.
The House of Hope is located on Cielo Azul Way and is a 5 bed short-term (90 day) female
facility for drug and alcohol rehabilitation. The House of Hope also provides parenting and
other workshops, individual counseling, monthly community services, and social activities.
Residents also attend most of the Soroptimist meetings and community functions.
Inland Empire Community Health Center (IECHC)
The Inland Empire Community Health Center has offices on Mountain View Road within the
City limits. This private non-profit corporation is based in San Bernardino and provides general
practitioners, Ob/Gyns and pediatricians. The IECHC provides affordable, professional medical
services and has established strategic alliances with Desert Hospital and other for the provision
of special services. Fees are based on a sliding scale, which also extends to pharmaceuticals.
The IECHC is also a Child Health and Disability Prevention Program provider. These offices
typically see between 30 and 40 visitors each day.
Emergency Services
The City of Desert Hot Springs is served by two major emergency response organizations: the
Riverside County Fire Department and the City Police Department. Desert Hospital is located
six miles south of the current (2000) City limits, providing general med-surgical, acute care and
trauma center services. Advanced life support (ALS) ambulances and crews are posted at the
Pierson Boulevard fire station and also patrol the City and Sphere area. Ambulance services are
provided by American Medical Response (AMR), which has a service area encompassing the
entire Coachella Valley. AMR typically has ten ALS ambulances in the field, each with a crew
of two paramedics; AMR currently maintains between 14 and 16 units in its Desert Cities
district (Please see the Emergency Preparedness Element).
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The City currently has an urgent care type facility located on Palm Drive, which is staffed by a
Physician’s Assistant, supported by an adjoining physician. With the growing local population,
the community’s continued physical isolation from other medical providers, and a basically
health-conscience community, the City should have additional health and medical facilities.
Many of the local spa hotels and message specialists provide holistic health regimes that have
given the City its name and character. The community should build on this foundation and
attempt to attract more conventional and emerging medical/healthcare offices, clinics and
treatment facilities. The physically and psychologically healing effects of the hot mineral
waters should also be exploited.
                                              VI - 21

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                   General Plan/Health Services Element
HEALTH SERVICES
GOAL, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
GOAL
High quality health care facilities and services that are easily accessible to City residents and
promote good health and well-being.
Policy 1
Consult and coordinate with Desert Hospital, Eisenhower and other professional providers to
bring quality health care facilities and services that are accessible within the City of Desert Hot
Springs.
Program 1 A
The City shall consult with local providers to plan and develop facilities and provide services
on an on-going basis, and which meet the health care needs of the City residents.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; City Council; Desert Hospital;
Eisenhower
Schedule: Continuous.
Program 1 B
The City’s Economic Development efforts shall include the proactive recruitment of a 24-hour
emergency medical treatment facility.
Responsible Agency: City Manager
Schedule: 2001-2002
Policy 2
Cooperate in the continued development of medical and health care facilities in accordance
with the changing demographics of the community.
Program 2 A
As the City’s population continues to grow, the City shall coordinate with transportation service
providers and the local healthcare providers to maintain accessibility to health care facilities
and services so that residents in general and seniors in particular, will be served quickly and
efficiently.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Desert Hospital; Eisenhower
Medical center
Schedule: Immediate, Continuous.
                                               VI - 22

                                                                       TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                General Plan/Health Services Element
Policy 3
The City shall participate in the promotion of Desert Hot Springs as a health-conscious spa
resort community providing a wide range of mainstream and alternative therapies and
treatments.
Program 3 A
The City shall work with local health professionals from all segments of the profession, as well
as the hoteliers and Chamber of Commerce in refining the City’s health industry image and
promoting it to healthcare professionals and general public.
Responsible Agency: Community development Department, DHS Hotelier’s Association,
Healthcare Professionals; Chamber of Commerce
Schedule: 2001-02; Continuous
                                             VI - 23

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                           General Plan/Emergency Preparedness Element
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS ELEMENT
PURPOSE
The Emergency Preparedness Element identifies critical facilities necessary in the event of an
emergency, to assess the availability of emergency response services, and to discuss the
potential impacts of significant man-made and natural hazards within the community. The
purpose of the Element is to address concerns regarding the City's capability to respond to a
natural and man-made disaster. The Element sets forth the goal, policies and programs that have
been, or will be developed by the City to assure an effective response to the various
environmental and man-made hazards that the community faces.
BACKGROUND
The Emergency Preparedness Element is of particular relevance and importance to the City and
its residents and property owners. This element is directly related to the Geotechnical, Flooding
and Hydrology, and Hazardous and Toxic Waste Elements. The Fire and Police Protection
Element also has a direct relationship to the Emergency Preparedness Element, assuring
protection against structural and wild fires, and the maintenance of law and order during and
following emergencies. Another Element with an essential relationship of Land Use and
location-specific threats. The Circulation Element, which defines the availability of and need
for high-capacity roadways providing secure evacuation routes or access to the City in the event
of an emergency.
The City of Desert Hot Springs and the Coachella Valley are subject to significant
environmental and man-made hazards, which constitute significant threats to life and property.
The City’s substantial potential for major earthquakes, and flooding, are natural occurrences,
which cannot be prevented. Man-made threats include but are not limited to wildland and urban
fires, hazardous material spills and leaks, and major transportation accidents, including
automobiles, trucks and aircraft.
The Emergency Services Act was enacted in 1970 by the California Legislature to recognize the
State’s responsibility in mitigating the effects of natural, man-made or war-caused emergencies
(Government Code Section 8550). Among other things, this Act requires local governments and
utilities, to abide by the requirements of the Office of Emergency Services.
This Element is also recommended as an integral part of the a broader environmental hazards
discussion within the General Plan. Government Code Section 65302(g) states that the Plan
shall address “the protection of the community from any unreasonable risks associated with the
effects of seismically induced surface rupture, ground shaking, ground failure...; slope
instability leading to mud slides or landslides”.
In order to put into effect the requirements of the law, the City, other jurisdictions throughout
Riverside County and the County itself have prepared a series of integrated and coordinated
plans, including the Desert Hot Springs Multi-Hazard Functional Plan (MHFP, 1996). The Plan
                                               VI - 24

                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                           General Plan/Emergency Preparedness Element
addresses pre-emergency planning, normal and heightened readiness levels, emergency
operations and post-emergency recovery. Interagency planning and coordination is also an
integral part of the Plan.
Critical Facilities
Certain critical facilities will become essential parts of the response plan, in the event that the
emergency preparedness plan must be put into effect. Facilities that house emergency services
such as hospitals, fire stations, police and emergency services facilities, governmental
operations and utility facilities. Critical facilities also include communication networks
supporting police, fire and emergency personnel, as well as commercial radio stations that can
play an essential role in apprising the community of appropriate actions to take.
Emergency evacuation and access routes, peak load water supply and delivery systems, and
secure airport operations are also other critical facilities in the event of a major disaster.
Evacuation routes play an especially critical role in that they allow the evacuation and/or the
delivery of ground-based assistance access to the City. The difficulties with these facilities must
be anticipated to maximize the effectiveness of an emergency response plan.
Region-wide damage and injuries caused by the recent (1992) Landers and Big Bear
Earthquakes (please see Geotechnical Element) emphasized the need for an adequate
emergency shelter for those who cannot return to their homes. Currently (2000), the City does
not have this type of facility, although the soon to be constructed high school may serve in this
regard. Additional planning and discussion is needed to assure an adequate level of emergency
and basic service for Desert Hot Springs' growing population.
Emergency Transportation and Circulation
The deliverer of emergency personnel and supplies is one of the single most important activities
after a major disaster. Access to the community is restricted by natural and man-made barriers,
and each major ground route in the area is subject to significant damage from natural forces,
including earthquakes and flooding. Access to the City from the other incorporated
communities in the Coachella Valley could also be affected in the event U.S. Interstate-10
overpasses were damaged along its length.
As discussed in the Hydrology Element, the City has occasionally become cut off and isolated
from the neighboring communities by major storm water runoff. The lack of adequate flood
control facilities and the high cost of construction means that the City will require a higher
degree of self-sufficiency than its neighbors. Therefore, all-weather and earthquake-resistant
bridges, culverts, and road adjoining cut slopes must be given careful consideration and
prioritizing.
Programs can be developed in close coordination with CalTrans and the Federal Highway
Administration, Riverside County Transportation Commission, CVAG and neighboring
communities, as well as Sunline Transit, to assure the maximum functional integrity of major
roads and transportation systems serving the City.
                                               VI - 25
                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                          General Plan/Emergency Preparedness Element
The Palm Springs Regional Airport is located within fifteen minutes of the City and therefore
provides an important alternative means of access to the upper Coachella Valley for both fixed-
wing and helicopter aircraft. The airport is located some distance from major fault zones and is
outside the 100-year flood plain of the Whitewater River, enhancing its on-going availability.
Emergency Medical Facilities
Emergency medical services are provided in the City and the Sphere by American Medical
Response (AMR), which posts and patrols one of its Advance Life Support (ALS) ambulance
units at the Pierson Boulevard Fire Station. A heliport is located immediately north west of the
fire station. Each of the three County fire stations serving the City is staffed with personnel
trained in CPR and resuscitation. Desert Hospital in Palm Springs is a licensed 398-bed hospital
and functions as the most notable intensive care facility between Riverside County and the
Arizona border. This hospital has a twenty-four hour emergency room and a level II Trauma
Care facility with a staff of specially trained trauma surgeons to offer their aid in the event of a
major injury (also, please see the Health Services Element).
Emergency Operations Center
The Emergency Operations Center (EOC), located at City Hall, is the heart of the emergency
response system from which all emergency operations are coordinated. The operations of the
EOC are coordinated through the implementation of the Incident Command System (ICS),
which is an integral part of the Desert Hot Springs Multi-Hazard Functional Plan. The Plan was
adopted by the City Council in 1996.
Emergency Organization and Chain of Command
As the title implies, emergency preparedness is the extensive and comprehensive pre-planning
necessary to assure a timely, well-coordinated, efficient and effective response to emergencies
affecting the community. It requires a well thought out working relationship between numerous
City, County, State and Federal departments and agencies, which normally work largely
independently. Inter-governmental special purpose units may be established that are detached
from their normal day-to-day responsibilities. A command hierarchy is established with clear
lines of authority and communication. The City Manager serves as the Director of Emergency
Services in Desert Hot Springs, followed by the Director of Community Safety, and then the
Public Works Director. The Fire Chief or Senior law enforcement officer is then the next
available City employee with the highest degree of expertise following in the command
hierarchy.
Extended Organizational Structure & Assistance
There are a number of other agencies and capabilities brought to bear in an emergency. These
are made available through mutual aid agreements, which allow the City to expand otherwise
over-extended capabilities and staff, and to draw upon the resources of those other agencies. In
general, assisting entities may include other local cities and school districts, the County of
Riverside, State of California, federal and even international agencies.
                                               VI - 26
                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                          General Plan/Emergency Preparedness Element
The Red Cross may be called upon to open and operate shelters for victims of an emergency, as
well as to provide first aid, damage assessment, help with communications and the provision of
various other resources. This agency typically initiates its own emergency response, but close
coordination through the Emergency Operations Center is strongly encouraged. Military aid is
typically in the form of the National Guard, whose role is to assist rather than substitute for the
City’s response efforts. Requests for assistance of the Guard are to be channeled through the
County Office of Emergency Services.
Financial assistance to the City and victims of a disaster can come from several sources, with
the State and Federal governments being the most important. In order to qualify for this
assistance, the City must declare a local emergency within 10 days of the actual occurrence of
the disaster, have damages assessed, and must apply for aid within 60 days of declaring the
local emergency (Government Code Sections 8680- 8692).
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The Emergency Preparedness Element is implemented through the City Multi-Hazard
Functional Plan, which includes detailed organizational directives, scopes of responsibility,
operational priorities, authority and powers, emergency communication protocols and other
components of the framework needed for effective response in the event of an emergency. The
ability of the community to respond to emergencies will also be affected by the expansion of
land uses and the location of future fire stations and other public safety facilities. Enhanced
emergency medical capabilities will be included in this expansion of services.
Development standards, as set forth in the City Zoning Ordinance, will also influence how
effectively emergency personnel can respond to events affecting occupied structures. The
degree to which recommendations and policies and programs found in the Geotechnical,
Flooding and Hydrology, and Hazardous and Toxic Materials Elements are implemented, will
also impact emergency preparedness. Finally, establishing and maintaining contacts and
coordination with other responsible agencies will give future direction to emergency response
strategies.
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS GOAL, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
GOAL
A thoroughly coordinated, responsive and effective emergency preparedness implementation
plan in the City of Desert Hot Springs, assuring a high degree of readiness to respond to natural
and man-made disasters in a manner that maximizes City, County, State and Federal response
capabilities.
Policy 1
The City shall maintain and update the Multi-Hazard Functional Plan to keep it current with
staffing and technical capabilities of the City and cooperating agencies.
Program 1 A
Periodically schedule and direct the review and revision of the Emergency Plan through
responsible department heads and assure the annual review of the Plan by the City Council.
                                               VI - 27

                                                                      TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                       General Plan/Emergency Preparedness Element
Responsible Agency: City Manager; Community Safety Department; City Council
Schedule: Annually.
Policy 2
Coordinate with CalTrans and other appropriate agencies for the establishment of emergency
evacuation routes and plans to preserve or reestablish the use of Palm Drive, Mission Lakes
Boulevard, Pierson Boulevard, Dillon Road, Hacienda Avenue, Interstate-10 and State
Highways 62 as emergency evacuation routes.
Program 2 A
Establish and on-going liaison with CalTrans, Riverside County, Palm Springs and Cathedral
City to facilitate the establishment of emergency evacuation routes, and to provide for the
development of an emergency response plan that assures the timely repair of major roads and
highways damaged by earthquakes, flooding or other disasters.
Responsible Agency: City Manager; Community Safety Department; Community
Development Department; CalTrans; Riv. Co.; Adjoining Cities
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Program 2 B
Consult with CalTrans, the Federal Highway Administration and FEMA regarding funding
assistance for the construction, repair and/or upgrading of bridges, floodway crossings, cut
slopes and other drainage structures to minimize the potential isolation of the community and
surround facilities from ground-based assistance.
Responsible Agency: City Manager; Community safety Department; Community Development
Department; Riverside County; CalTrans; Federal Highway Administration; FEMA
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous
Policy 3
The Desert Hot Springs Multi-Hazard Functional Plan shall be coordinated and updated to
assure that it is compatible with and complements the Riverside County Plan and its
implementation procedures.
Program 3 A
Regularly confer with the Riverside County Fire Department, Emergency Services Division,
and shall share and coordinate plans to provide mutual aid assistance in the event of a disaster
requiring emergency response.
Responsible Agency: City Manager; CalTrans; Community Safety Department
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Policy 4
The City and the U.S. Geological Survey or Cal Tech shall establish on-going lines of
communications to assure the provision of earthquake predictions, which may impact the City
and surrounding area.
                                             VI - 28
                                                                        TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                         General Plan/Emergency Preparedness Element
Program 4 A
Establish a liaison with the appropriate office of the US Geological Survey and establish a
procedure by which the USGS contacts and informs the City of earthquake predictions, which
may affect the City and surrounding areas.
Responsible Agency: City Manager; Community Safety Department
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Policy 5
The Geotechnical and Flooding and Hydrology Elements of the General Plan shall be regularly
reviewed and updated to assure that seismic and flooding hazards are fully addressed in the
Emergency Plan.
Program 5 A
The City shall periodically review and update the Geotechnical and Flooding and Hydrology
Elements of the General Plan with the latest information and data available on the various
seismic and flooding threats facing the community, utilizing information from development
studies, as well as those from state and federal agencies. This process shall assure that
additional or refined measures are systematically incorporated into these Elements to protect
lives and property.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Community Safety Department;
City Council
Schedule: Annually; Continuous.
Policy 6
Cooperate and coordinate with Riverside County, the Mission Springs Water District and other
agencies and utilities in the preparation of public information materials to assist residents and
business owners in responding to local disasters.
Program 6 A
Coordinate with Riverside County, Mission Springs Water District, Southern California Edison,
Southern California Gas, and other agencies and utilities in the development and dissemination
of information and instruction on appropriate actions in the event of a local disaster.
Responsible Agency: City Manager; Community Safety Departments
Schedule: 2001-02; Continuous.
Program 6 B
Coordinate with local schools and appropriate public and quasi-public agencies to assure that a
public information program is developed and broadly implemented to advise the community on
how to prepare for and cope in an emergency.
Responsible Agency: City Manager; Community Safety Departments
Schedule: 2002-03; Continuous.
Policy 7
Thoroughly consider and assess vulnerability to natural and man-made disasters when
reviewing proposals for the siting and development of critical and essential public/quasi-public
facilities.
                                              VI - 29
                                                                          TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                           General Plan/Emergency Preparedness Element
Program 7 A
Incorporate an assessment of vulnerability to natural and man-made disasters when processing
or reviewing proposals to site and construct critical and essential facilities, as well as sensitive
land uses, to assure the maximum possible protection from environmental and man-made
hazards, including earthquakes and flooding.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Community safety Department
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Policy 8
The City shall take every action to assure the availability of emergency power generators in
essential City facilities, and shall encourage the installation of these backup facilities in other
important public and private facilities.
Program 8 A
The City shall assure the availability of backup emergency power generators at the Emergency
Operations Center and other critical City facilities. The City shall also contact and encourage
the installation of these facilities at other public and quasi-public facilities, as well as at radio
and television stations serving the area.
Responsible Agency: City Manager; Community Safety Department
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Policy 9
Coordinate with and integrate both commercial and private radio operators, including ham radio
operators, to establish a Radio Amateur Civil Emergency Service.
Program 9 A
Contact, coordinate with and integrate public and private radio operators in the establishment of
a Radio Amateur Civil Emergency Service (RACES) system to provide coordinated functioning
in the event of an emergency.
Responsible Agency: Community Safety Department
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Policy 10
Coordinate with the appropriate agencies and service providers to assure that emergency
preparedness plans include contingencies for large-scale urban and wildland fires.
 Program 10 A
Confer and coordinate with the Riverside County Fire Department and/or the California
Department of Forestry to assure that emergency plans are ready to implement in the event of a
major urban or wildland fire.
Responsible Agency: Community Safety Department; Riverside County Fire Department;
California Department of Forestry
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
                                                VI - 30
                                                                         TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                          General Plan/Emergency Preparedness Element
Policy 11
The City Multi-Hazard Functional Plan shall include programs and strategies to maximize the
availability and delivery of emergency medical services to those in need during and following a
local disaster.
Program 11 A
Confer and coordinate with Desert Hospital, AMR Ambulance Service, the Riverside County
Fire Department, and California Department of Forestry, and private providers to assure that a
coordinated plan is in place to provide an effective response during a major local emergency.
Responsible Agency: Community Safety Department; County Fire Department; Department of
Forestry; AMR
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Program 11 B
Emergency shelter and emergency medical stations shall be planned for and activated by the
City Manager. The need for one or more additional mobile medical service vehicles, above
those provided by private paramedic services, shall be investigated.
Responsible Agency: City Manager; Community Safety Department
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Policy 12
The Palm Springs Regional Airport shall be integrated into emergency preparedness planning in
the City of Desert Hot Springs as an important possible alternative means of access into the area
in the event of a local disaster.
Program 12 A
Develop contingency plans, which maximize the use of the Palm Springs Regional Airport in
the event of a local disaster, and provide for a coordinated plan of response, when it becomes
necessary to place the airport in an emergency response mode.
Responsible Agency: City Manager; Palm Springs Regional Airport ; Community Safety
Department
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
                                              VI - 31
                                                                              TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                         General Plan/Public Buildings and Facilities Element
PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES
ELEMENT
PURPOSE
The purpose of this Element is to provide background information on the various structures and
facilities in the City operated by public and quasi-public agencies, and describes some of the
long-term planning issues associated with them. It is also meant to provide sufficient
information to identify important and critical facilities and to assure coordinated planning and
development that keeps pace with growth in the community. The element also sets forth the
goal, policies and programs, which address the long-term planning needs of the community.
Public facilities are built to accommodate present and anticipated needs, some of which (most
notably utilities) play a major role in determining the location, intensity, and appropriate timing
of future development. Each year, local governmental agencies planning the construction of
capital facilities (including cities, counties, school districts, and special districts) must submit a
list to the planning agency (Government Code Section 65401) of proposed projects they would
like to implement in the City. In the case of Desert Hot Springs, the planning agency must then
review the projects for conformity with the General Plan.
BACKGROUND
A variety of public buildings and facilities exist in the City, and associated issues have long
been of concern in Desert Hot Springs. They range from City Hall, a community fire station,
water wells, electric power substations, and electric/telephone/cable television transmission
lines, to schools and a Community Center. Also falling under this category are roads and
bridges, traffic signals and support facilities, and bus shelters. This Element is directly related
to the Land Use, Circulation, and Community Design Elements. All six other Elements in the
Public Services and Facilities Chapter are interrelated and associated with this Element. Most
public buildings and utility sites are shown on the General Plan map.
Government Code Section 65103(c) states that the planning agency is to “annually review the
Capital Improvement Program of the City or County and the local public works projects of
other local agencies for their consistency with the General Plan...”. The local jurisdiction may,
however, emphasize the importance of this issue by requiring an optional Public Facilities
Element in the General Plan (Government Code Section 65303).
The City of Desert Hot Spring is a unique resort residential community with a wide range of
public buildings and facilities utilized for the benefit of community residents and visitors.
While much of the discussion focuses on buildings, lands and facilities of the City, utility
buildings and substations are also given special attention with regard to their compatibility with
surrounding land uses.
The location of public buildings and facilities is largely dependent upon their function in the
community. This functional criterion does not preclude the need for these facilities to be
                                                 VI - 32

                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                       General Plan/Public Buildings and Facilities Element
logically integrated into the existing and planned land use patterns of the City. Those public
buildings that serve as offices where residents and business people come to conduct business
should be conveniently located and provided with safe access and adequate parking.
Utility Infrastructure
Utility infrastructure, which includes electrical substations, and pumping and switching
facilities, can generate noise and detract from the scenic values of an area. Decorative block
walls and landscape buffers around major facilities is a method typically used to integrate utility
infrastructure with the surrounding area, as is the construction of telephone and other equipment
buildings in an architectural style compatible with the surrounding built environment.
Desert Hot Springs City Hall and Police Facility
The Desert Hot Springs City Hall is one of the newest office facilities in the City, and was
originally designed to house the City Police Department. It now includes City administrative
offices and houses the City’s Police Department.
Carl May Community Center
The Carl May Community Center houses the Council Chambers, offices of the Chamber of
Commerce, and the Senior Center, and is adjacent to the City Library building. The building is
located on West Drive, immediately north of the Pierson Fire Station.
Corporation Yard/Animal Shelter Facility
The Corporate Yard and Animal Shelter Facility consist of three metal buildings, a large metal
canopy cover for equipment vehicles, fuel dispensers and a large fenced area for storage and
City equipment. The main building of the Corporation Yard includes office space, tool rooms,
equipment storage and one restroom. The Animal Shelter is a block building containing two cat
rooms and ten indoor/outdoor runs for dogs.
Fire Stations
Geographic analysis of service area response time is the basis for the placement of fire stations
and is location sensitive. The City has made a concerted effort to assure the highest level of
community protection. The Riverside County Fire Department maintains thirteen fire stations in
the upper Coachella Valley, one of which is located within the city limits of Desert Hot Springs.
Two stations located in surrounding areas are well situated to provide fire protection services to
the City and its sphere-of-influence. The facilities are maintained by the County. Paramedic
services are provided by American Medical Response (AMR), a private ambulance company,
which is jointly dispatched by the Fire Department. These facilities are also discussed in the
Police and Fire Protection Element.
                                               VI - 33

                                                                             TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                        General Plan/Public Buildings and Facilities Element
Schools and Libraries
The Palm Springs Unified School District (PSUSD) provides public education to residents of
Desert Hot Springs, Rancho Mirage, Palm Springs, Cathedral City, and the northern portion of
Palm Desert and unincorporated areas in the vicinity, including Thousand Palms. Vast open
areas of desert and mountainous regions, which are largely uninhabited, make up the remainder
of the 507 square miles of the district. The Desert Hot Springs’ are is served by seven public
schools, including the following: Bubbling Wells Elementary on Camino Campanero, Edward
Wenzloff Elementary on West Drive, Julius Corsini Elementary on Hacienda Avenue, Two
Bunch Palms Elementary School located at West Drive and Two Bunch Palms Trail, Desert
Springs Middle School on Two Bunch Palms Trail, Las Brisas Continuation High School on
Palm Drive (a satellite of Mt. San Jacinto Continuation High School in Cathedral City), and
Desert Hot Springs High School located at Cholla and Pierson Boulevard.
Three private schools exist in the City: Palm Springs Christian Schools on Little Morongo Road
(35 students, K-12); Community Children’s Center at Acoma and Mesquite Avenue (85
students, ages 3.5 years to grade 6); and Storyland Preschool on West Drive (58 students, ages
2 - 11 years).
Currently (2000), the Desert Hot Springs Library is a branch of the joint library system of the
County of Riverside. The library is housed in a 3,500± square foot building and contained
29,278 volumes in December 1999. Library resources include a delivery system, which
provides for the exchange of books and other resources between all County libraries on a daily
basis. A bookmobile, which is operated in conjunction with Sunline Transit Agency and
contains approximately 10,000 volumes, provides mobile library services to residents within the
unincorporated areas of the planning area and the Coachella Valley.
Current unadopted County standards for the provision of libraries and facilities call for
approximately 0.5 square feet of library space and 2 books per capita.
While patrons continue to rely on books and other printed materials, future concepts of the
library include increasing reliance on electronic access to information resources. For further
discussion of these public facilities, please see the Schools and Libraries Element.
U.S. Post Office
A new U.S. Post Office facility opened in Desert Hot Springs in November 1999. The Post
Office is located at 66-311 Two Bunch Palms Trail and encompasses approximately 22,000
square feet. All the basic postal services are offered, including post office boxes, voter registra-
tion, mail boxes, shipping services and postage stamp sales. The site accommodates outdoor
postal vehicle storage and parking areas for customers and employees.
Utility Companies and their Facilities
Mission Springs Water District (MSWD), The Gas Company, Southern California Edison
(SCE), GTE California, and Desert Hot Springs Cablevision are the major utility companies
serving residents of the City of Desert Hot Springs. Utility company facilities include pumping
                                                VI - 34

                                                                              TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                         General Plan/Public Buildings and Facilities Element
stations, electrical substations, and telephone switching stations. Mission Springs Water
District’s administration offices are located on the northeast corner of Second Street and Palm
Drive, and their Corporation Yard is on Park Lane, east of Palm Drive.
MSWD also maintains two wastewater treatment plants: the Horton Sewer Treatment plant,
located on Verbena, south of Two Bunch Palms Trail, and the Desert Crest Sewer Treatment
plant, located off of Dillon Road, just east of Long Canyon Road.
Desert Hot Springs Cablevision’s offices are located on First Street, on the northwest corner of
First and Palm Drive. SCE maintains two substations, the Devers substation and the Coffee
substation, within the City’s SOI. GTE’s central office and facilities for Desert Hot Springs is
located on First Street, as well as several Remote Service Units (RSU’s) and multiplexes that
are placed throughout the City and its SOI.
“Critical Structures”
Critical structures are those facilities ranging from important to essential, which are located in
areas that are subject to natural hazardous occurrences, including earthquake, floods wildfires,
etc. Critical structures include those facilities required to provide emergency services following
an earthquake or other local emergencies, such as fires and floods. Fire and police stations,
hospitals, major roadways and the Palm Springs Airport are examples of facilities needed
during emergency operations. Where appropriate, the siting of these facilities should be located
in areas that would experience the least seismic or hazardous activities. Building design should
include allowances for the offset of building foundations resulting from surface displacements.
Due to the City’s high seismic damage potential occurring in Seismic Zone 4 as defined by the
Uniform Building Code, special consideration should be made in the development or expansion
of future “critical structures”. These should include thorough engineering analysis, building
siting and design, and compatibility. (Please see the Geotechnical and Emergency Preparedness
Elements for more information.)
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Although public facilities are built to accommodate present and anticipated needs, some (most
notably water, sewer, and electricity) play a major role in determining the location, intensity,
and timing of future development. Each year, local governmental agencies (including counties,
school districts, and special districts) planning the construction of capital facilities must submit
a list to the planning agency (Government Code 65401) of proposed projects, which they would
like implemented. For example, the considerations of access and timely response are crucial in
areas such as the Rancho Royale and Olympus Golf Course projects, which are segregated from
the City’s core. In the case of the City, the planning agency with jurisdiction must review all
future projects for conformity with the General Plan.
The development and implementation of a CIP provides the basis for annual expenditures of
acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, and replacement of public buildings and facilities such
as streets, streetlights, parks, police and fire facilities, libraries, city halls, and other public
facilities and buildings.
                                                 VI - 35

                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                       General Plan/Public Buildings and Facilities Element
PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES GOALS, POLICIES AND
PROGRAMS
GOAL
Compatible and aesthetic integration of public buildings and facilities providing existing and
future residents with dependable and cost-effective public services and facilities.
Policy 1
Coordinate with public utilities and special districts, utilities and other quasi-public entities to
assure the least intrusive and most compatible integration of related buildings and facilities into
the land use pattern of the community.
Program 1 A
Pro-actively encourage utility companies to involve citizen participation in the siting of
proposed facilities prior to seeking City approval for facilities, which may have an impact on
the surrounding community.
Responsible Agency: Appropriate utility companies; Community Development Department
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Program 1 B
Integrate all new maintenance areas and utility substations with surrounding land uses, and
regulate in order to maintain a compatible and aesthetically pleasing community through the
use of appropriate buffers, architectural design and landscape, and signage.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Program 1 C
To the extent appropriate and practical, the City shall require all utility facilities (with the
exception of substations, outdoor storage areas and pumping station) to be fully enclosed in
buildings, which are aesthetically compatible with the areas in which the are located.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Program 1 D
The City shall coordinate with Southern California Edison to identify and estimate future
demand for electricity and corresponding electric utility facilities required to serve local and
regional growth.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Southern California Edison
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Policy 2
Develop public buildings and facilities, which house City government activities in a functional,
aesthetically pleasing, and convenient place for residents and City officials to conduct business.
                                               VI - 36
                                                                            TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                       General Plan/Public Buildings and Facilities Element
Program 2 A
Design guidelines for all City government buildings should be developed to assure consistency
in style and to ensure the integration of those structures with the natural and built environment.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Policy 3
Critical structures located within the City shall be required to establish and maintain sufficient
structural integrity to remain functional following the maximum earthquake and associated
ground shaking at the site of the structures (Refer to Seismic Safety Element for more
information.)
Program 3 A
Restrict the location of critical structures and facilities (i.e. hospitals, fire, police, and airport
and communication facilities) from geologically and hydrologically hazardous areas whenever
possible.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; City Engineer
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Program 3 B
Require that all proposals for critical structures, regardless of location within the City,
demonstrate safety in terms of geologic and other engineering condition of the site.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; City Engineer
Schedule: Immediate; Continuous.
Policy 4
The City shall make every effort to assure the long-term availability of sites for the
development and expansion of City buildings, utility infrastructure, and other public facilities.
Program 4 A
The City shall confer and coordinate with public utilities and other public and quasi-public
agencies regarding their long-term needs, when periodically reviewing land use patterns and the
City Land Use Map.
Responsible Agency: Community Development Department; Public Works Department; City
Engineer; public and quasi-public agencies serving the City
Schedule: 2001-02; every five years
                                               VI - 37
                                                                           TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                      General Plan/Public Buildings and Facilities Element
Policy 5
The City shall maintain and regularly update its Capital Improvement Plan through yearly
evaluation of planned and proposed Capital Improvement Projects.
Program 5 A
The City shall carefully assess and, as scheduled, implement a master Capital Improvement
Program through annual review and revision every five years.
Responsible Agency: City Council; City Manager; All City Departments
Schedule: Annual review; comprehensive revision every five years.
Policy 6
The City of Desert Hot Springs recognizes and supports the Palm Springs Airport facilities as
important and essential facilities during normal operations and in times of local emergencies.
                                              VI - 38
                        TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                         General Plan
 CITY OF DESERT HOT SPRINGS
COMPREHENSIVE GENERAL PLAN
            CHAPTER VII
             GLOSSARY
                VII
                                                                   TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                                           General Plan/Glossary
                                    GLOSSARY
ADT                                    Average Daily Trips. The total volume of traffic on
                                       a given road averaged over a 24-hour period.
Air Basin                               A large region that shares a common geographical
                                       area and atmospheric interaction. The boundaries of
                                       an air basin are generally mountains, hills, or bodies
                                       of water.
Air Pollution Emissions                Discharges into the atmosphere, usually described
                                       in weight per unit of time for a given pollutant.
Alluvium                               Soil, sand, gravel, or similar material deposited by
                                       running water, sometimes miles from its source.
Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zone    Zones established under the California
                                       Alquist-Priolo Special Zone Studies Act, which
                                       define potentially and/or recently active earthquake
                                       faults, which could be hazardous to structures in the
                                       event of surface faulting or fault creep.
AQMT                                   Air Quality Management Plan. A plan to achieve
                                       and maintain ambient air quality standards in
                                       jurisdictions designated by the state legislature.
Aquifer                                A geologic formation which stores, transmits and
                                       yields significant quantities of water to wells and
                                       springs.
Bikeway                                Designated facilities classified, and specifically
                                       designated, constructed and intended for the use of
                                       bicycle travel.
Blowsand                               An environmental condition in which quantities of
                                       sand are blown in the wind. This condition may
                                       occur in areas of loose sand or sandy loam soils and
                                       strong prevailing winds.
Buffers                                Land uses which protect public safety and provide
                                       sufficient distance and barriers between
                                       incompatible land uses by lessening the effects of
                                       noise, dust, vibration, visual blight, or other impacts
                                       caused by a particular land use.
                                        VII - 1
                                                    TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                           General Plan/Glossary
CDBG                   Community Development Block Grant. Federal
                       allocation of funds to a jurisdiction for discretionary
                       disbursement, generally utilized for local
                       community development projects.
CEQA                   California Environmental Quality Act. State
                       legislation adopted in 1970, which ensures the
                       protection of the environment. This legislation also
                       required California governmental agencies at all
                       levels to develop standards and procedures
                       necessary to protect the environmental quality of
                       their jurisdiction, CNEL Community Noise
                       Equivalent Level. The average equivalent
                       A-weighted sound level during a 24-hour period,
                       obtained after addition of five decibels to sound
                       levels in the evening from 7 p.m. to 10 p.m., and
                       after addition of 10 decibels to sound levels before
                       7 a.m. and after 10 p.m.
Cogeneration           The process of generating electricity using waste
                       heat from an industrial, commercial, or
                       manufacturing process. Conservation The
                       management of natural resources to prevent waste,
                       destruction, or neglect.
Contiguous Development Development, which is adjacent to already existing
                       development, even if separated by roads, streets,
                       utility easements, and railroad rights-of-way.
CVAG                   Coachella Valley Association of Governments. An
                       association of local governments that have
                       jurisdiction within the Coachella Valley.
dbA                    A-weighted Sound Level. The sound pressure level
                       in decibels as measured on a sound level meter
                       using the A-weighted filter network. The
                       A-weighted filter de-emphasizes the very low and
                       very high frequency components of the sound in a
                       manner similar to the response of the human ear,
                       and gives good correlation with subjective reactions
                       to noise.
Design Criteria        Specific standards and regulations, which guide the
                       design of a project.
                        VII - 2
                                                       TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                              General Plan/Glossary
Earthquake                A shaking or trembling of the earth's crust that is
                          volcanic or tectonic in nature.
EIR                       Environmental Impact Report. An informational
                          document used in the decision-making process,
                          which identifies the effects of a proposed project or
                          activity on the natural and man-made environments.
                          It must be prepared in accordance with the
                          California Environmental Quality Act, and must
                          address nine mandatory issues: project description,
                          environmental setting, adverse environmental
                          effects, short and long term use, irreversible
                          environmental changes, growth inducement,
                          alternatives to the project, and natural and human
                          environmental resources.
Endangered Species        A species or subspecies of bird, mammal, fish,.
                          amphibian, reptile or invertebrate for which the
                          prospects of survival and reproduction are in
                          immediate jeopardy from one or more causes,
                          including loss of habitat, change in habitat,
                          over-exploitation, predation, competition or disease.
Fault                     A fracture in the earth's crust forming a boundary
                          between rock masses that have shifted.
Fault Hazard Zone         A designated area of possible fault movement.
Fuel Modification Program A fire prevention program for those developable
                          areas surrounded by natural open space. The
                          program should include the graduated decreases in
                          native plan densities and the substitution of
                          fire-resistant plants near development areas. The
                          pattern of vegetation removal and introduction of
                          new vegetation should be consistent with wildlife
                          habitat conservation, thus minimizing impacts to the
                          biological composition of the area. Provisions for
                          continued maintenance should also be developed
                          and implemented.
Fire Response Time        The amount of time it takes for the fire department
                          to respond to a first alarm fire.
Floodplain                The land areas that are subject to flooding from the
                          100 year flood, but not including the actual
                          floodway.
                           VII - 3
                                                 TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                         General Plan/Glossary
Floodway             The channel of a river or other watercourse and
                     adjacent land areas necessary to discharge the
                     waters from the 100 year flood without increasing
                     the water surface elevation of that flood more than
                     one foot at any point.
Freeway              A highway upon which the abutter's right of access
                     is controlled and which provides separated grades at
                     intersecting streets,
General Plan Road    Any road indicated in the Circulation Element of
                     the General Plan.
Geothermal Resources The natural heat of the earth, the energy in whatever
                     form below the surface of the earth present in,
                     resulting from, created by, or from which may be
                     extracted natural heat, and all minerals in solution
                     or other products in whatever form obtained from
                     naturally heated fluids, brines, associated gases and
                     steam, excluding oil, hydrocarbon gas or other
                     hydrocarbon substances.
Goal                 An expression of a general, ultimate ideal to be
                     sought. It reflects basic community values and
                     establishes the emphasis for formulating objectives,
                     policies and implementation measures. They are
                     general, often timeless, and do not lend themselves
                     to measurement.
Ground Rupture       A break in the ground's surface resulting from the
                     movement of a fault.
Groundshaking Zone   A designated area that can be expected to
                     experience a groundshaking intensity during a
                     maximum probable "design" earthquake.
Groundwater          Subsurface or underground water resource.
Hazardous Waste      A waste or combination of wastes, which because
                     of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical
                     or infectious characteristics poses a substantial
                     present or potential hazard to human health or
                     environment.
                      VII - 4
                                                     TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                            General Plan/Glossary
High Fire Hazard Areas An area where, due to slope, fuel, weather or other
                       fire-related condition, the potential loss of life and
                       property from a fire necessitates special fire
                       protection measures and planning before
                       development occurs.
Historic               Important, significant, famous or decisive in
                       history. Infilling The building out or completion of
                       development of an area before starting development
                       of adjacent undeveloped lands.
Infrastructure         The physical systems and services which support
                       development and people, such as streets and
                       highways, transit services, airports, water and sewer
                       systems, etc.
LAFCO                  Local Agency Formation Commission. A State
                       agency with the responsibility and authority to
                       approve or deny (with or without modification) all
                       proposals for the establishment (incorporation) of
                       cities and special districts, reorganization or
                       dislocation of them, and/or proposals to annex. The
                       LAFCO must also establish a Sphere of Influence
                       for cities and special districts.
Land Use Category      The classification, which identifies allowable land,
                       uses for a project site, based upon the availability of
                       public services and facilities, the adequacy of the
                       circulation system and surrounding area
                       development.
Landfill               A system of trash and garbage disposal in which
                       waste is buried between layers of earth to build up
                       low-lying land.
Ldn                    Day-night sound level.
Leach Field            That portion of the septic tank system, which
                       disperses, dissolved waste products into the
                       surrounding soil.
Liquefaction           A temporary fluid condition in water-saturated
                       loose sandy soil caused by shock, such as an
                       earthquake. It can cause serious soil settlement,
                       slumping, or failure of structure foundations.
                        VII - 5
                                                  TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                         General Plan/Glossary
Mitigation          The lessening or elimination of the impacts of an
                    action or project through changes in the proposed
                    action or project, or the undertaking of additional
                    measures.
NEPA                National Environmental Policy Act. Federal
                    legislation passed in 1969 which insures that federal
                    actions are not going to lessen environmental
                    quality, This legislation also required public
                    agencies to consider the environmental costs of
                    their actions and provide full disclosure of
                    environmental effects for public review and
                    comment.
Noise Contour       A line on and passing through points exposed to the
                    same sound level. Contours form bands of varying
                    widths centering on a noise source.
Noise Impacted Area The noise impact area, in square statute miles, is the
                    total land area within the noise impact boundary
                    less area deemed to have a compatible land use.
                    One Hundred Year Floodplain The land areas that
                    are subject to flooding from a flood caused by a
                    storm with the statistical likelihood of occurring
                    once in a hundred year time span.
Open Space          Land or water, which is essentially unimproved.
Overdraft           The condition of a groundwater basin where the
                    amount of water withdrawn by pumping exceeds
                    the amount of water replenishing the basin.
Paleontology        A science that deals with the life of past geologic
                    periods and is based on the study of fossil remains
                    of plants or animals.
Percolation Test    Test of a soil's ability to absorb and permit seepage
                    of sewage effluent.
Physical Constraint A physical feature or characteristic of land which
                    prevents or limits the development of that land.
Policy              A statement which sets forth guidelines for future
                    action.
                     VII - 6
                                                 TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                         General Plan/Glossary
Prehistoric          Relating to times predating written history.
Program              Series of tasks designed to implement policies set
                     forth in the General Plan.
Rare Species         A species or subspecies of bird, mammal, fish,
                     amphibian, reptile or invertebrate that, although not
                     presently threatened with extinction, is in such
                     small numbers throughout its range that it may be
                     endangered if its environment worsens.
Reclamation          The combined process of land treatment that
                     minimizes water degradation, air pollution, damage
                     to aquatic or wildlife habitat, flooding, erosion, and
                     other adverse effects from surface mining
                     operations including adverse surface effects
                     incidental to underground mines, so that mined
                     lands are reclaimed to a usable condition which is
                     readily adaptable for alternate land uses and creates
                     no danger to public health and safety.
Redevelopment Agency An agency comprised of City staff and/or elected
                     officials, to supervise and allocate funds for the
                     improvement of blighted or otherwise rundown
                     areas of the City.
Retrofitting         Supplying an existing building or facility with new
                     equipment, parts, or features, usually in an effort to
                     improve the efficiency of energy use.
Rights-of-way        The entire width of property for the use of
                     highways, flood and drainage works, overhead and
                     underground utilities, or any related improvements.
Road Alignment       The location of a road in relation to other roads such
                     that they form a connected circulation system.
RSA                  Regional Statistical Area. A group of census tracts
                     or districts used for economic analysis.
SCAG                 The Southern California Association of
                     Governments. An association of cities providing
                     regional demographic and legislative information
                     for the Southern California area.
                      VII - 7
                                                  TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                          General Plan/Glossary
Scenic Corridor      The land area outside of the highway right-of-way
                     within the line of sight, which can be realistically,
                     subjected to protective land use controls.
Seiching             An earthquake-induced wave in a lake, reservoir or
                     harbor.
Seismicity           The quality or stated being of, subject to, or caused
                     by, an earthquake.
Septic Tank          A tank in which the solid matter of continuously
                     flowing sewage is disintegrated by bacteria.
Shall                Indicates an unequivocal directive.
Should               Signifies a slightly less rigid directive than "shall"
                     to be honored in the absence of compelling
                     considerations.
Slump                Soil failure resulting from a slope, which is too
                     steep for the soil's resistance capacity, being barren
                     and exposed to water.
Solid Waste          All solid, semisolid, and liquid wastes, including
                     garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes,
                     industrial wastes, demolition and construction
                     wastes, abandoned vehicles and parts thereof,
                     discarded home and industrial appliances, manure,
                     vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes, and
                     other discarded solid and semisolid wastes.
Specific Plans       A tool to implement the General Plan which details
                     land use and circulation plans for a specific site.
                     Specific Plans are required in sensitive areas or
                     those designated for combined commercial and
                     residential uses.
Spheres of Influence The probable ultimate physical boundaries and
                     service area of a local governmental agency.
Subsidence           The gradual, local settling or sinking of the earth's
                     surface with little or no horizontal motion.
                     Subsidence is usually the result of gas, oil, or water
                     extraction, hydrocompaction, or peat oxidation, and
                     not the result of a landslide or slope failure.
                      VII - 8
                                                     TN/City of Desert Hot Springs
                                                            General Plan/Glossary
Surface Mining          All, or any part of, the process involved in the
                        mining of minerals on mined lands by removing
                        overburden and mining directly from the mineral
                        deposits, open-pit mining of minerals naturally
                        exposed, mining by the auger method, dredging and
                        quarrying, or surface work incidental to an
                        underground mine.
Tectonics               Of or pertaining to the forces involved in, or the
                        resulting structures or features of the upper part of
                        the earth's crust.
Threatened Species      Any species, which is likely to become an
                        endangered species within the foreseeable future
                        throughout all or a significant portion of its range.
Transportation Corridor The area adjacent to major transportation routes.
Trip Generators         Person and vehicular travel generated in accordance
                        with the type and intensity of land use.
Water Basin             The drainage or catchment area of a stream or lake.
Watercourse             A permanent stream; intermittent stream; river,
                        brook, creek, channel or ditch for water, whether
                        natural or manmade.
Watershed               The total area above a given point on a watercourse
                        that contributes water to its flow; the entire region
                        drained by a waterway or which drains into a lake
                        or reservoir.
Zoning                  A legal device used by local jurisdictions to control
                        development density and insure that land uses are
                        properly situated in relation to one another.
                         VII - 9





















































































































