1 n TRANSPORTATION AND ±U CIRCULATION
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
The city's transportation network has three functions: (1) to provide for the safe and efficient movement of traffic (people and goods) in and out of the community; (2) to provide a logical framework for local development; and (3) to provide access to property for purposes of public safety.
The Transportation and Circulation chapter considers the street and highway system, alternative transportation systems, and the routing of utilities. It includes policies and implementation measures to guide the development of the transportation network. Key issues concern establishment and maintenance of acceptable levels of service, assigning priorities for road improvements, and determining responsibility for providing improvements to serve new developments.
The goals of this chapter focus on minimizing the transportation related impacts of growth, and on developing transportation options for movement of people and commodities. The role of the transportation network in determining the future development pattern of Watsonville cannot be overstated.
Traffic congestion can be lessened by implementing Transportation System Management programs such as coordinating traffic signals to provide a smoother flow of traffic and reduce waiting time.
The Transportation and Circulation chapter policies and recommendations are an effort to coordinate a variety of transportation related programs. In 1989, the City Council adopted the 1988-2005 Major Street Master Plan as developed by Barton-Aschman Associates. Because the land use proposals of Watsonville 2005 differed somewhat from those used in the previous plan, the traffic model used in the 1988-2005 Master Plan was revised and rerun reflecting the land use proposals of Watsonville 2005. Barton-Aschman has prepared a memo describing the modifications made and the outcomes that function to amend the 1988-2005 Major Street Master Plan. The Master Plan is coordinated with the Regional Transportation Plan and the Draft Congestion Management Plan to the extent possible.
COMMUNITY CONCERNS
Based on the responses to the public opinion survey, concern about transportation is growing.
There was general agreement on the desire for corrective action to reduce citywide congestion and eliminate confusion associated with circulation patterns in the central business district. The following questions represent these and other specific transportation concerns raised by the public and addressed in this plan.
1.	Can travel through the downtown area be made easier, faster, and safer?
2.	What kinds of transit vehicles and service would encourage more people to use it?
3.	How can pedestrian/automobile and bicycle/ automobile conflicts be reduced?
4.	How can parking in the central business district best be provided?
5.	How can truck traffic in the downtown and residential areas be reduced or prohibited?
6.	Is there any potential for passenger rail service or use of the Pajaro River for transportation?
129
Watsonville 2005
7.	What kinds of improvements can be made to existing streets to make them safer and more attractive?
EXISTING TRAFFIC PATTERNS
The urbanized portions of the Watsonville Planning Area are located almost exclusively to the east of Highway 1. Highway 1 provides access north through Santa Cruz to San Francisco and south to Monterey and beyond. Travel across the Planning Area occurs primarily on a series of seven major arte-rials: Riverside Drive, Beach Street, East Lake Avenue, Main Street, Freedom Boulevard, Green Valley Road, and Airport Boulevard. Four of the seven have direct freeway access and three of the seven are state highways. Riverside Drive (Route 129), Main Street, and East Lake Avenue (Route 152) link Watsonville and Santa Cruz County to southern Santa Clara County and Route 101, which is a major north-south route through the San Francisco Bay Area. Freedom Boulevard is the major northwest/ southeast corridor, connecting the unincorporated areas of Freedom, Pinto Lake, and Corralitos to the city (see Figure 10-1).
The 1990 Census found that 52 percent of Watsonville residents actually work within the City limits of Watsonville and 87 percent work within Santa Cruz County. For all urban and rural areas of Santa Cruz County combined, only 31 percent of the residents work in the jurisdiction they reside and 78 percent work within Santa Cruz County. The mean travel time for Watsonville residents to their place of work is 18.5 minutes compared to 24.3 minutes for Santa Cruz County. Overall, Watsonville residents work closer to home than other residents of Santa Cruz County.
FUNCTIONAL STREET CLASSIFICATION
In addition to the major arterials, the city's road network consists of minor arterials, collectors, and local streets. The hierarchy of streets, based on function, is described below. Additional definition is included in the Glossary.
Freeway: A divided highway with limited access, designed for high speed, long distance travel and large traffic volumes.
Major Arterial: A relatively high speed, long distance surface street designed to move large volumes of traffic across the urbanized area and to provide access to the freeway.
Minor Arterial: Medium speed, medium capacity surface street used primarily to move traffic within the urbanized area primarily to and from residential areas to areas of employment or business.
Collector: A relatively low speed, low volume street, used for neighborhood circulation and access to private property; also used to collect traffic from local streets and distribute it to the arterial network.
Local Street: A low speed, low volume roadway providing direct access to primarily residential property; characterized by multiple driveways and on-street parking.
Figure 10-1, the major street system to the year 2005, shows arterial and collector streets in the city and its vicinity.
LEVEL OF SERVICE (LOS)
Levels of Service (LOS) are measures of congestion and operating conditions on roadway segments and at intersections (shown in Figure 10-2). Level of Service designations are based on aftemoon/evening peak period traffic. For example, a segment of road with LOS E during peak hours may actually be traffic-free throughout most of the day. Level of Service A represents free flow conditions and Level of Service F represents jammed or capacity conditions.
Level of Service D provides an acceptable level of operation for urban areas and is generally used for planning purposes. Watsonville 2005 requires street improvements when traffic volumes exceed LOS D except for those accepted to operate at less than an LOS D in the 1988-2005 Major Streets Master Plan as updated in 1992. Maintaining a minimum LOS D will require roadway improvements that anticipate future population.
130
Legend
A/ City Limit as of 1997
CITY OF WATSONVILLE
Major Street System
Source: 1988 - 2005 Major Street Master Plan, updated 1992
This graphic is not intended to be used (or site-specrfic decision making. Consult the City or County for do tailed information
This document is a graphical representation only of best available sources. The Crty of Watsonville assumes no responsibility for any errors.
Propared by Watsonville GIS Contor 4.20-08
Figure 10-1
TRANSPORTATION AND CIRCULATION, Chapter 10
Figure 10-2 Levels of Service for Urban and Suburban Arterlals
Level of Service	Description
A	Relatively free-flow. No restrictions to vehicle maneuverability or speed. Very slight delay.
B	Stable flow. Some slight reduction in maneuverability and speed. Vehicle platoons form. This is a suitable level of operation for rural design. Slight delay.
C	Stable flow or operation. Higher volumes. More restrictions on maneuverability and speed. This level of operation is suitable for urban planning purposes. Acceptable delay.
D	Approaching unstable flow or operation. Queues develop. Little freedom to maneuver. Tolerable delays for short periods.
E	Unstable flow or operation. Low operating speed; momentary stoppages. This condition is not uncommon in peak hours. Congestion; intolerable delay.
F	Forced flow or operation. There are many stoppages. The highway acts as vehicle storage area. Jammed.
Source: Highway Capacity Manual, HRB Special Report, 1987
The plan includes policies which link new development with traffic improvements necessary to maintain acceptable traffic flows.
MAJOR STREET MASTER PLAN
Traffic volumes on major arterials have risen significantly since 1980 when a Major Street Master Plan was prepared and traffic volumes were recorded. In 1988, the City hired Barton-Aschman Associates, Inc. to update the Master Plan which was subsequently adopted as the 1988-2005 Major Street Master Plan.
As previously noted, the 1988-2005 Major Street Master Plan is revised as shown in the Watsonville Major Street Master Plan 1992 Update to reflect the population and land use projections of Watsonville 2005.
The objectives of the Master Plan as amended are to:
•	ensure consistency with Watsonville 2005
•	evaluate the Master Plan in light of recent development
•	determine the feasibility of a Level of Service D policy for the Watsonville circulation system
• identify the transportation improvements needed for the projected 2005 population and employment base.
In order to accomplish this, traffic counts were used to determine existing needs and to project future needs based on Watsonville 2005 population and employment growth assumptions. Existing deficiencies in the roadway system and future deficiencies (assuming no improvements are made) were identified. Improvements needed to maintain acceptable Levels of Service were also identified.
Several different land use scenarios were applied to the traffic model. The scenarios varied in the amount of housing placed in the Buena Vista/Calabasas/ Freedom area (Northwest Specific Plan Area) and the area south of the Corralitos Creek (South of Corralitos Creek Area). The overriding constraint for the housing capacity of the Buena Vista/Calabasas/ Freedom area according to the traffic model was the traffic volume capacity of the road system where Calabasas Road/Buena Vista Road and Freedom Boulevard converge and intersect. The traffic model indicated that the improvements needed to this area
133
Watsonville 2005
to accommodate more than 1,000 units would require substantial right-of-way acquisition, resident and business displacement and road construction beyond what was financially supportable by the proposed development, particularly assuming the goal to be the development of significant amounts of affordable housing. As a result, 1,000 housing units was accepted as the maximum capacity for the Buena Vista/Calabasas/Freedom area.
The model indicated that the primary constraint to the development of housing in the area South of Corralitos Creek and west of East Lake Avenue was the traffic capacity of East Lake Avenue. The traffic consultant studied East Lake Avenue and determined that additional traffic lanes could be added to East Lake for the most part within the existing constructed section. This relatively low cost, low impact improvement resulted in additional housing capacity on the lands south of Corralitos Creek. With those improvements incorporated in the model, the housing capacity of the lands south of Corralitos is 1,800 units.
The 1992 Update of the 1988-2005 Major Street Master Plan describes the improvements that are needed to the street system to accommodate a Level of Service D in Watsonville, based on the land use and population projections that are the basis of Watsonville 2005. This includes 1,000 housing units in the Buena Vista/ Calabasas/Freedom Area and 1,800 units in the area south of Corralitos Creek and West of East Lake Avenue.
It is important to recognize that under the LOS D policy only 7.1 miles (4.3 percent) of the roadway system within the urban limit line will operate at LOS D, and it will only operate at that level for a small portion of the time, such as peak commute hours. An additional 7.9 miles (5 percent) will operate at LOS E or F for short time periods, also likely during peak commute hours. The majority of the road sections operating at LOS E and F do not result from the land use scenarios proposed in Watsonville 2005, but do so because of existing conditions that cannot be remedied, such as the Pajaro River Bridge, and were projected to operate at those same levels under the 1988-2005 Major Street Master Plan. Major street improvements needed to accommodate the
adopted General Plan and preferred Sphere of Influence are shown in Figure 10-3.
Four of the thirteen intersections analyzed in the Master Street Plan would operate at LOS D. One of those intersections, Green Valley Road at Freedom Boulevard, was functioning at LOS F in 1988 and is proposed in this plan to be brought up to an LOS D. Freedom Boulevard and Lincoln Street were functioning at LOS D in 1988 and will be brought up to LOS C as the result of this plan.
The City and County will need to coordinate efforts to improve the Freedom-Airport and the Freedom-Green Valley intersections depending on City and County jurisdictional boundaries at the time the improvements are needed.
State highway safety in the Watsonville Planning Area is an additional concern. Both Highway 129 (Riverside Drive), the designated truck route, and Highway 152 (Main Street, East Lake/East Beach) have high accident rates according to the Santa Cruz County Regional Transportation Plan. Safety and capacity improvements on Highway 129 and 152 will be a high priority for the City and Caltrans over the next 10 to 20 years.
CONGESTION MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
In response to the requirement of AB 471, the Regional Transportation Commission adopted a Congestion Management Program (CMP) for Santa Cruz County in November 1992. While state law does not require the incorporation of the CMP into the local General Plan, Watsonville will be required to comply with the CMP if the City desires to continue to receive its local share of state transportation funds.
A key objective of the CMP is to establish roadway performance standards for the most heavily travelled roadways and associated intersections in the County, including state highways and other regionally significant arterials providing access to major activity centers. Those designated roadway sections in Watsonville and vicinity include:
State Highways
• Highway 1
134
TRANSPORTATION AND CIRCULATION, Chapter 10
Figure 10-3	Proposed Road Segments and Intersections Requiring Improvements to Maintain LOS D under
Future (2005) Projected Traffic Conditions
Road	Segment	Recommended Improvement
Riverside Drive	From Union Street to Lakeview Drive	Add two lanes
Airport Boulevard	From Highway 1 to Green Valley Road	Add two lanes
Green Valley Rd.	From Harkins Slough to Highway 1	Add two lanes
Green Valley Rd.	From north of Cowles Rd. to Amesti Rd.	Add two lanes
Green Valley Rd.	From Holohan Rd. to Amesti Rd.	Add one lane northbound
East Lake Avenue	From Holohan Rd. to Lincoln St.	Add two lanes
Walker Street	From Riverside Drive to Ford St.	Add two lanes
West Beach Street	From Pine St. to Rodriguez St.	Add two lanes
Wagner Street Ext.	To Crestview Drive	Construct two new lanes
Wagner Street Ext.	From East Lake Ave. to Bridge Street Ext.	Construct two new lanes
Brewington Ave. Ext.	From Crestview Dr. to Atkinson Ln. Realignment	Construct two new lanes
Atkinson Ln. Realignment	From Freedom Blvd. to Brewington Ext.	Construct two new lanes
New Road	From Calabasas Rd. To Freedom Blvd.	Construct two new lanes
Freedom Blvd.	From Airport Blvd.	Add two lanes
Holohan Road	From Green Valley Rd. to East Lake Ave.	Add two lanes
Clifford Extension	From Main St. to Harkins Slough Road	Construct four new lanes
Errington Road (Landmark Parkway)	From Harkins Slough Rd. to West Beach St.	Construct two new lanes with right-of-way for four lanes
Bridge Street Ext.	From Joyce Drive to East Lake Avenue	Construct two new lanes
Harkins Slough Rd.	From Study Area Entrance to Highway 1	Add two lanes
Harkins Slough Rd.	At the bridge that crosses over Highway 1	Add two lanes
Harkins Slough Rd.	At two locations east of Highway 1 where flooding occurs	Construct bridges
Intersections and Interchanges Requiring Improvements		
•	Walker Street and West Beach Street	"	• Green Valley Road and Freedom Blvd. •	Freedom Boulevard and Lincoln Street	• Freedom Blvd. and Airport Blvd. •	Green Valley Road and Main Street	• Harkins Slough Road and Highway 1		
Source: 1998-2005 Major Street Master Plan, as updated in 1992.
Revised March 25, 1997
135
Watsonville 2005
•	Highway 129
•	Highway 152
Arterials
•	Freedom Boulevard from Highway 1 to Highway 152 (the portion in Watsonville)
•	Main Street between Beach Street and the Monterey County Line
•	Green Valley Road between Freedom Boulevard and Highway 1
CMP - designated intersections include:
•	Highway 1 (Northbound) and Riverside Drive
•	Highway 1 (Southbound) and Riverside Drive
•	Freedom Boulevard and Green Valley Road
•	Freedom Boulevard and Main Street
•	Main Street and Riverside Drive
•	Main Street and Green Valley Road
•	Main Street and East Lake Avenue
•	Main Street and East Beach Street
If a particular roadway segment or intersection will exceed the LOS standard established by the CMP, then a Deficiency Plan must be prepared. These plans must include an analysis of the cause of the deficiency; a list of the road improvements proposed to correct the deficiency and bring the road section or intersection up to the LOS standard and the estimated cost of those improvements; and a list of alternative improvements and their costs that will improve the LOS operation of the system and contribute significant air quality improvements.
Generally, road sections and intersections are not permitted to drop below LOS D, although the CMP provides lower LOS standards where the existing network already falls below LOS D. In addition, the CMP provides that lower income housing is exempt from the LOS standard determined by the CMP. Watsonville 2005 adopts an LOS standard of D, consistent with the CMP.
REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION PLAN
The State Transportation Improvement Program (STIP) process requires that each regional transportation planning agency prepare, adopt and submit a Regional Transportation Program (RTIP) to the California Transportation Commission every two years. This program is a seven-year capital improvement program for transportation projects in the countywide area of Santa Cruz. State highway projects, county and city road projects using state or federal funds, transit and bicycle facility projects using state funds, and airport projects using state or federal funds are included. Implementation measure 10.D.1 of the Watsonville 2005 General Plan is intended to ensure that the objectives of the RTIP are consistent with the land use and community development objectives of the General Plan.
TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM MANAGEMENT
Transportation System Management (TSM) is a viable alternative in Watsonville. According to the 1990 Census, 24 percent of Watsonville residents travelling to work in personal vehicles carpool with at least one other person. This compares to 14.5 percent countywide. TSM will play a key role in efforts to maintain Level of Service D on major streets, meeting the requirements of the CMP and meeting the requirements of the Air Quality Management Plan.
Approaches to TSM are exemplified by the Freedom Boulevard project where signals were modified in order to provide a smoother flow of traffic and reduce waiting time. Other TSM efforts will focus on major employers who will be encouraged to incorporate transit, jitney services, ride sharing programs, flexible work programs, walking and bicycling into their operations. The densities and locations for housing and job creation help to promote the effective use of TSM programs.
Even with successful TSM programs, the need for improvements to the existing system will grow with additional employment and residential development. The policies and programs set forth in this chapter transfer some of the responsibility for roadway improvements to developers whose projects increase traffic volumes. A combination of City-,
136
TRANSPORTATION AND CIRCULATION, Chapter 10
State-, and privately-funded improvements, in addition to actively promoting transit and other TSM approaches, will be used by the City to mitigate growth-related traffic impacts.
TRANSIT SERVICE
The private automobile remains the first choice for personal transportation. The Santa Cruz County Transportation Commission estimates that 2-3 percent of the daily trips taken in the Watsonville area are via transit - either fixed route buses or paratransit. Local service is provided to Watsonville residents by both Santa Cruz Metropolitan Transit District (SCMTD) and Monterey-Salinas Transit (MST). Regional service to and from Watsonville is provided by Greyhound. Private taxi cab service and a number of senior and social service agencies provide door-to-door transportation, primarily for elderly and/or disabled persons.
A survey of Watsonville transit users conducted by JHK and Associates in 1985 shows a trend which mirrors the County as a whole: Watsonville transit riders are generally transit-dependent, meaning that they do not have a car available to them for daily, personal use. While public transit is currently not a significant factor in the total transportation network, it is clearly important, because it provides a necessary service to those who do not have access to a private automobile. Reflecting the ethnic character of Watsonville, the survey also showed that more than 50 percent of the riders are Hispanic.
Changes have been made in the routes for Santa Cruz Metropolitan Transit District service to the Watsonville area. The focus of the changes is to reduce waiting times and transfers, and to improve connections to Santa Cruz and the mid-county area. These changes, along with construction of a downtown transit center facility, are intended to increase transit use within the Watsonville area and between Watsonville and northern areas of the county.
The Watsonville Transit Center is currently located at Rodriguez Street and West Beach Street. A new transit center is to be located at that location, one block from the central business district. That facility will include a 4,000-square foot structure, with conces-
sions, restrooms and an information and ticket sales area. Bicycle and vehicle parking areas and covered loading platforms are also proposed
Policies and implementation measures in Watsonville 2005 emphasize the importance of transit not only for the transit-dependent population, but for a wide range of residents and commuters who could benefit from increased service. The land use patterns in Watsonville 2005 include high-density residential development in expansion areas and high job-generation densities largely in the southwest quadrant of the city. These land use distribution policies result in improved opportunities to utilize transit. Major employers will be encouraged to make transit incentives a cornerstone of their Transportation System Management (TSM) programs. Policies and programs to provide transit improvements including shelters, pullouts, and reinforced pavement are included in this plan. Finally, in anticipation of increased use of bicycles, parts of the proposed greenbelt offer the potential for future bike routes. Plans for bikeways are described on the next page.
RAIL SERVICE
Watsonville is provided with rail freight service by the main line of the Southern Pacific between San Francisco and Los Angeles. This is a vital freight link between population centers and the food processing plants located in Watsonville and northern Monterey County (Pajaro). Limited freight service is also available between Watsonville, Santa Cruz, and Davenport.
A freight train shares the road with automobiles. These trains are vital to the distribution of materials to and from Watsonville.
137
TRANSPORTATION AND CIRCULATION, Chapter 10
1.	A bike-lane system adjacent to the arterials in the City would effectively serve the community's needs.
2.	Where bike lanes cannot be achieved due to right-of-way requirements or safety reasons, adequately signed bike routes should be considered to provide for a continuous bikeway system.
3.	Bikeway implementation should begin with the state highway segments and the city arterials that connect with them.
4.	A combination of Transportation Development Act Funds, State Highway funds, and developer contributions should be sufficient to finance the proposed bikeway plan.
5.	The Caltrans Highway Design Manual planning and design criteria should be adhered to, wherever possible, in the development of the bikeway plan.
6.	The emphasis of the bikeway system should be to serve schools and parks and to encourage bicycle commuting to job sites within the Planning Area.
By the end of the first quarter of 1992, more than eight miles of bike lanes and designated bike routes had been added to city streets. A map of the proposed and existing bikeway system is shown in Figure 10-5. Additional discussion of bicycle facilities occurs in the 1992 Parks and Open Space Master Plan.
The pedestrian plan integrates pedestrian facilities with the overall street plan. In addition to providing sidewalks or separate pathways, the goal of the policies and implementation measures is to ensure planning sensitive to the needs of pedestrians and to encourage more pedestrian travel. Areas where pedestrian facilities are generally absent are those areas outside the City limits; improvements in unincorporated areas will require assistance from the County.
Figure 10-4, Needed Sidewalk Improvements, shows the existing gaps in the system, measured in linear feet of sidewalk necessary. Some limitations exist due to soil and slope instability as well as lack of right-of-way. For the most part, areas of deficiency within the City limits can be improved as part of adjacent development in conjunction with roadway
projects. The County has addressed improvements to the bikeway and pedestrian system in its jurisdiction as part of its Freedom Area Traffic Study (June, 1989), which proposes to finance such improvements with developer fees.
TRUCK TRANSPORTATION
The Pajaro Valley, as an agricultural area, is dependent on trucks for commodity movement. As industry becomes a more significant part of the economic base, the amount of truck traffic is likely to increase. The problems associated with Watsonville's interdependence on trucking - noise, safety, speed, and damage to pavement and other roadway facilities -are addressed in the policies and implementation measures.
By early 1992, more than eight miles of bike lanes and designated bike routes had been added to city streets.
139
Watsonville 2005
Figure 10-4 Needed Sidewalk Improvements
INCORPORATED CITY			Length (FT)
Street	Limits	Sides	
Main Street	Green Valley to Pennsylvania	South	3,500
Green Valley Road	Main to Pennsylvania	North	1,000
Airport Boulevard	Westgate to Freedom (Portions)	East	4,000
Beach Street	Errington to Walker	West	3,600
TOTAL			12,100
Street	UNINCORPORATED AREA Limits	Sides	Length (FT)
Lake Avenue	City Limits to Fairgrounds	West	9,000
Green Valley Road	Pennsylvania to Pinto Lake	West	6,000
Freedom Boulevard	Green Valley to Area Limits	Both	5,000
Airport Boulevard	Freedom to Green Valley	Both	2,500
	TOTAL		22,500
Source: 1988-2005 City of Watsonville Pedestrian Plan, with revisions
Two recent actions are of particular importance. The City, working in conjunction with Caltrans and the County Transportation Commission, designated Highway 129 as the truck route between Watsonville and Highway 101. This action was taken in response to the hazard created by trucks using Highway 152, a steep curving and narrow highway running north of, and generally parallel to, Highway 129. Funds have been approved for some curve widening and straightening on Highway 152; however, Highway 129 will continue to be the designated truck route.
As part of the Major Street Master Plan, truck routes have been designated within the city to limit intrusion into residential neighborhoods and reduce traffic problems caused by truck travel through the downtown area. It is expected that a major effort of the joint study being coordinated by AMBAG for the corridor extending south from Route 129 to Route
156 in Monterey County, will be to determine other appropriate truck routes for commodity movement between Highway 1 and Highway 101.
UTILITY ROUTING
The provision of adequate utilities for the projected 2005 population is discussed in the Public Services and Facilities chapter (11). The Transportation and Circulation chapter considers utilities only in terms of the potential impacts their routing could have on the community. Routing should be carefully considered to avoid potential hazards, to ensure efficiency, and to correct or prevent adverse visual impacts.
140
KEY
•••• Existing Bikeway
Proposed Bikeway
Bikeways System: Existing and Proposed
Source: Parks and Open Spaco Master Plan. Callander and Associates, 1992
Thii g/apnic it not niandad io ba used to/ ma tpaafc daaston making. Consutt ffta City or County to/dataitod mto/maicn.
Figure 10-5
TRANSPORTATION AND CIRCULATION, Chapter 10
GOALS FOR TRANSPORTATION AND CIRCULATION
The goals for transportation and circulation reflect a careful evaluation of community concerns and the long-range need to provide for alternatives to private automobile use.
Goal 10.1 Street and Highway Facilities
Plan and provide for a safe, efficient, and environmentally sensitive network of streets and highways for movement of people and goods.
Goal 10.2 Transit Facilities and Service
Promote the use of transit as an alternative to the automobile for all types of travel.
Goal 10.3 Rail Facilities and Service
Plan and provide for the continued use of rail to move industrial/agricultural commodities and encourage the establishment of passenger service to the Watsonville area.
Goal 10.4 Bicycle Circulation
Plan for and provide a safe, convenient network of bicycle facilities.
Goal 10.5 Pedestrian Circulation
Recognize the importance of pedestrian travel, alone, or in combination with other travel modes, and to encourage walking.
Goal 10.6 Aviation Facilities
Maintain, protect, and improve the facilities and services of the Watsonville Municipal Airport as part of the regional transportation network.
Goal 10.7 Aesthetic Considerations
Plan and provide for a circulation network that preserves and enhances scenic amenities.
Goal 10.8 Truck Transportation
Recognize the importance of truck transportation to the Watsonville area and to plan for the safe, unobtrusive movement of trucks.
Goal 10.9 Utility Routing
Ensure the adequate provision of necessary public utilities in a way which minimizes their visual impacts and potential hazards to the safety of residents.
Goal 10.10 Emergency Access
Ensure sufficient provision of emergency or secondary access and maintain acceptable response times for all parts of the service area.
POLICIES AND IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
Policy statements and implementation measures for transportation and circulation have been developed both to improve the existing circulation network and also to provide additional capacity for projected growth.
Policy 10.A Street And Highway Improvements
The City shall pursue a program of regularly scheduled maintenance and street improvements, accompanied by the planned extension of roadways to serve new development.
Implementation Measures
10.A.l Improvement Scheduling - The City shall use the Capital Improvement Program to ensure that needed road improvements are scheduled for timely completion.
10.A.2 Costs of Improvements - The City shall use the development review process to ensure that new development projects creating a need for additional roadway improvements pay an appropriate share of the costs, based on traffic impact fees and assessment districts.
10.A3 Coordination of Improvements - The Planning Department shall consult with the Public Works Department to ensure that short-range roadway improvements and exten-
143
Watsonville 2005
sions are consistent with long-range policies for land use and community development.
10.A.4 Arterial Improvements - The City shall use the Capital Improvements Program, and recommendations of the 1988-2005Major Street Master Plan, as updated inl992, to complete a network of major arterials. Arterial street design includes two-lane capacity in each direction, center-divider planting, controlled parking, limited driveway access, and pedestrian and bicycle facilities where feasible. Water conservation guidelines and dual water systems shall be considered in median development.
10.A.5 Alley Improvements - For new developments adjacent to existing alleys, the City shall require that alleys be improved to a minimum standard of 20 feet.
10.A.6 Congestion Management Planning - The City shall cooperate, to the extent practical, with the efforts of the Congestion Management Planning Agency to minimize traffic congestion on primary transportation routes and mitigate transportation impacts on air quality.
10.A.7 Signal Synchronization - The City shall continue its efforts to synchronize traffic signals to reduce extended periods of idling and stop-and-go traffic.
Policy 10.B State Highway Improvements
The City shall encourage improvements to state highways within the Planning Area in order to increase their efficiency in the regional and local circulation network.
Implementation Measures
10.B.1 Highway 129: Bridge Crossing - The City shall encourage and support the upgrading of Highway 129 to minimum state highway standards to better accommodate the transport of agricultural commodities and reduce accidents. The upgrade shall include construction of a new bridge at the Salsipuedes Creek.
10.B.2 Highway 129: Truck Route - The City shall continue to encourage the use of Highway 129 as the designated east-west truck route. Encourage the addition of two lanes from Union to Lakeview.
10.B.3 Highway 152: Scenic Corridor - The City shall support the designation of Highway 152 as a scenic corridor from Highway 1 east to the Santa Cruz County line. To this effect, the City shall support measures to prohibit large trucks on scenic Highway 152. Encourage the addition of two lanes from Holohan to Lincoln.
10.B.4 Highway 1: Freeway - The City shall support upgrading the section of Highway 1 between the Santa Cruz/Monterey County boundary and Castroville to freeway design standard (four lanes). The City shall advocate widening Highway 1 between Highway 17 and Highway 129 to provide for at least three lanes in each direction and the provision of off- and on-ramps to Highway 1 at Green Valley.
Policy 10.C Level Of Service
The City shall maintain a minimum Level of Service D (LOS D) on all arterial and collector streets serving the City except for those accepted to operate at less than an LOS D in the 1988-2005 Major Streets Master Plan as updated in 1992.
Implementation Measures
10.C.1 Improvement Project Programming - The City shall include and prioritize within the Capital Improvements Program the street and intersection improvements called for in the 1992 Update of the 1988-2005 Major Street Master Plan.
10.C.2 Project Funding - The City shall require as a condition of approval that all development or rezoning which would contribute to a deterioration of existing service levels below LOS D, provide the necessary improvements, contribute to their provision through the payment of traffic impact fees, or
144
TRANSPORTATION AND CIRCULATION, Chapter 10
otherwise mitigate impacts to maintain at least an LOS D. Where existing conditions are already below LOS D, any new development must mitigate traffic conditions to the extent of preventing further deterioration in level of service or, if possible, improving level of service.
Policy 10.D Project Priority
The City shall maintain liaison with county, regional, and state transportation planning agencies to ensure the highest priority for completion is given to transportation system improvements that serve to implement the long-range land use policies of Watsonville 2005.
Implementation Measures
10.D.1 Project Evaluation - The City shall continue to monitor and evaluate the project and program recommendations within the Regional Transportation Plan (RTP) and the Congestion Management Program (CMP) for Santa Cruz County as prepared by the Santa Cruz County Regional Transportation Commission (SCCRTC), to ensure that objectives of the RTP and the CMP are consistent with the land use and community development objectives of Watsonville 2005.
10.D.2 Resident Participation - The City shall
encourage Watsonville residents to lobby the SCCRTC on setting funding priorities for transportation improvement projects within the Watsonville Planning Area.
Policy 10.E Public Transit Facilities And Services
The City shall take an active role in transit planning by the Santa Cruz Metropolitan Transit District (SCMTD) for the Watsonville Planning Area. Implementation Measures
10.E.1 Transit Vehicles - The City shall encourage the use of small, fuel-efficient jitney type buses for local transit in the central business district and between residential areas and employment centers.
10.E.2 Transit Center Development - The City shall continue to participate in a coordinated planning effort for the development of a downtown transit center with the SCMTD as the lead agency.
10.E3 Transit Stop Locations - The City shall cooperate with the Santa Cruz Metropolitan Transit District in the evaluation of, and recommendation for, location of transit stops and shelters. Transit stops and shelters should be designed to be compatible with through traffic, bicycle, and pedestrian movements.
Policy 10.F Planning For Transit
The City shall use its land use planning authority to enhance the use of transit.
Implementation Measures
10.E1 Provision of Transit Facilities - The use of transit to and from new development shall be promoted by requiring new development to include transit facilities such as bus shelters and turnouts where appropriate.
10.E2 Land Use Designation - Medium- and high-density residential designation shall be assigned to properties adjacent to existing or planned major arterials and transit corridors where the negative impacts of traffic on residential uses can be mitigated.
10.E3 Mixed Use Designation - In order to reduce dependence on the automobile and encourage the use of transit, centrally located commercial developments shall be encouraged to provide housing adjacent to or above the commercial uses.
10.F.4 Transportation Systems Management - The City shall encourage major public and private employers to prepare and implement a Transportation Systems Management program (TSM), which may include, but is not limited to, ride sharing, van pooling, preferential parking, flex-time, employee bus pass programs, and other incentives for transit use.
145
Watsonville 2005
10.F.5 TSM Incentives - The City shall provide
incentives to developers to encourage them to include TSM measures in their projects. Incentives may include allowing less parking in exchange for company sponsored car or van pooling, ride sharing or transit use.
10.F.6 Special Population Needs - The City will
consider the transportation needs of special populations such as children, youth, families, the elderly, and other special need populations when planning public transit facilities and services and reviewing development proposals.
Policy 10.G Transit Promotion
In order to encourage use of transit by all age groups and for all purposes, the City shall ensure that transit centers and stops are safe, attractive and do not deter transit use.
Implementation Measures
10.G.1 Transit Amenities - As part of the Capital Improvements Program and development review process, the City shall ensure that transit centers and major transit stops are accessible, well lighted, and protected from the elements.
10.G.2 Transit Center Security - The City shall make police patrol of transit centers and major stops a high priority in order to discourage criminal activities in these locations.
10.G.3 Other Fixed-Route Service - The City shall consider fixed route transit options other than the bus for major travel corridors adjacent to urban development.
Policy 10.H Paratransit
In order to encourage all types of transit use, the City shall support transit options for paratransit and other private transit.
Implementation Measures
10.H.1 Demand-Responsive Service - In order to best serve the transit needs of elderly and
disabled persons, and inhabitants of the less densely populated areas of Watsonville, the City shall encourage development of demand-responsive service for evenings and weekends when fixed-route service is unlikely to be utilized.
10.H.2 Private Transit Operations - The City shall encourage private transit and paratransit operations, including bus and taxi companies, to operate in Watsonville, in order to provide for the increased mobility of Watsonville residents.
Policy 10.I Rail Facilities Use
The City shall support existing and future use of rail facilities for both commodity and passenger transportation.
Implementation Measures
10.1.1	Right of Way Preservation - When new land uses are proposed near existing rights-of-way, those rights-of-way shall be preserved for continued or future freight or passenger use.
10.1.2	Prevention of Conflicting Land Use - The City shall not permit conflicting new land uses that could preclude the use of rail rights-of-way for future commodity or passenger uses.
10.13 Railroad Mitigation Measures - Development adjacent to existing railroad rights-of-way shall be required to use mitigating measures for noise and viewscaperc protection in anticipation of future rail service.
Policy 10.J Future Passenger Rail Service
The City shall consider all options for future fixed guideway passenger service.
Implementation Measures
10.J.1 Rail Service Options - The City shall encourage discussion and study by both private and public agencies of options for passenger service on existing alignments.
146
TRANSPORTATION AND CIRCULATION, Chapter 10
10.J.2 Reservation of Right-Of-Way - Whenever
feasible, areas within new development shall be reserved to accommodate future fixed guideway transit by siting new development to reserve space for future rail service on existing rights-of-way.
10.J.3 Transit Corridor Study - As part of the
development of the specific plans proposed, the City shall identify transit corridor alternatives for consideration in the planning and development process.
10.J.4 AMTRAK/Caltrans Service - The City shall support addition of an AMTRAK/Caltrans passenger stop at Watsonville Junction.
10.J.5 Fixed Guideway - The City supports the
development of a fixed guideway transportation system between Santa Cruz and Watsonville.
Policy 10.K Bicycle Facilities Development
The City shall plan for, and implement a comprehensive network of bicycle facilities in order to promote the bicycle as an alternative to the private automobile.
Implementation Measures
10.K.1 New Construction and Improvements -
New construction and improvements to designated streets shall include facilities for safe bicycle travel consistent with the City's Bicycle Plan.
10.K.2 Designation of Bicycle Lanes - The City shall designate specified arterials for the development of bicycle lanes, consistent with the Bicycle Plan.
10.K.3 Design for Bicycle Lanes - The City shall
require new development projects to include bicycle lanes as part of the project proposal, consistent with the Bicycle Plan.
10.K.4 Coordination of Planning - The City shall coordinate local and Santa Cruz County plans for bicycle lanes and walkways.
Policy 10.L Bicycle Facilities Maintenance
Bicycle facilities shall be kept clean and clear of obstructions.
Implementation Measures
10.L.1 Bike Lane Sweeping - The City shall continue a regular bicycle lane sweeping program.
10.L.2 Parking Enforcement - The City may institute parking restrictions along major designated arterials which are designated bike routes.
10.L3 Conflict Elimination - The City shall work with the Santa Cruz County Transportation Commission Bicycle Committee and Watsonville Police Department to identify "conflict bike lanes" and to eliminate the occurrence of conflict between bicyclists and motorists.
Policy 10.M Bicycle Support Facilities
The City shall encourage bicycle facilities in new developments, as a commute alternative. Implementation Measures
10.M.1 Bicycle Storage - The City shall use the
development review process to ensure that new commercial, industrial, and public projects provide secure bicycle storage areas for their employees, customers, clients, and attendees.
10.M.2 State Design Standards - Where possible, bikeways shall be constructed and marked in conformance with Caltrans Planning and Design Criteria, and be consistent with the Bicycle Plan.
10.M.3 Bicycles on Bridges - The City shall require that all bridges be constructed with sufficient width (four feet minimum on each side) to safely accommodate bicycle travel.
10.M.4 Sensing Devices for Signalized Intersections - Vehicle sensing devices at all signalized
147
Watsonville 2005
intersections shall be sensitive enough for bicyclists to activate the signal in the absence of a car.
Policy 10.N Pedestrian Travel
The City shall plan for, and implement a comprehensive network of safe pedestrian facilities in order to promote pedestrian travel.
Implementation Measures
10.N.1 Construction/Improvement - The City shall require facilities for safe pedestrian travel as part of new construction or improvements to existing streets.
10.N.2 Design of Walkways - The City shall require new development to include pedestrian walkways adjacent to new streets and/or connecting the development to existing streets.
10.N.3 Sidewalk Standards - Sidewalks on new or existing streets shall be designed and constructed according to minimum City standards, including curb cuts to facilitate use by persons with physical disabilities.
Policy 10.0 Walkway Aesthetics And Safety
Pedestrian walkways should be designed to promote walking by providing a safe and aesthetically pleasing path of travel.
Implementation Measures
10.0.1 Walkway Lighting - Walkways and parking areas shall be required to include lighting fixtures at regular intervals sufficient for public safety.
10.0.2 Parking Lot Design - New developments and remodeling or use changes for existing parking areas shall take pedestrian travel into consideration.
10.0.3 Accessible Pedestrian Areas - All parking lots and pedestrian pathways shall be constructed in compliance with the City and/or State's accessibility standards.
10.0.4 Landscaping - Walkways in private developments shall be landscaped to the standards adopted by the City.
Policy 10.P Pedestrian Access
Access for pedestrian travel shall be maintained where it already exists and provided where it does not, in order to prevent or eliminate barriers to pedestrian travel.
Implementation Measures
10.P.1 Access to Adjoining Land Uses - The City shall require pedestrian access between adjoining multiple family residential developments, and from such residential developments to adjacent recreational or commercial areas.
10.P.2 Retention of Existing Access - Where alley-ways, arcades, or similar pedestrian pathways already exist, new development or development associated with a change in land use shall be required to retain or replace the existing access.
10.P3 School-Related Walkways - When sites are considered for neighborhood schools and/or recreational areas, access to these sites from adjacent residential areas shall be designed in order to minimize the necessity for automobile transportation and potential automo-bile/pedestrian conflicts. School and recreational areas that lack pedestrian amenities shall be considered for retrofitting of such amenities.
10.P.4 High Density Commercial Areas - New or redeveloped commercial areas shall be designed to promote walking rather than driving within the area, by clustering and/or concentrating the commercial uses and through pedestrian sensitive design.
Policy 10.Q Aviation Facilities
As the only general aviation airport in Santa Cruz County, the Watsonville Airport shall be protected from adjacent development which is incompatible with existing and future services as outlined in the
148
TRANSPORTATION AND CIRCULATION, Chapter 10
Airport Master Plan and Regional Airport System Plan.
Implementation Measures
10.Q.1 Cooperative Planning - The County of Santa Cruz and the City shall coordinate land use planning for parcels impacted by airport operations. The City shall encourage the County to revise the Pajaro Valley General Plan to be consistent with Watsonville: 2005.
10.Q.2 Zoning for Safety - The City shall maintain strict zoning and land use controls within the Airport Operations Impact Area.
10.Q.3 State Guidelines - The City shall use the State's guidelines to review and manage development within the airport's area of influence.
Policy 10.R Airport Operations
The City shall continue to emphasize the economic importance of airport operations to the Watsonville Planning Area and to the regional transportation system.
Implementation Measures
10.R.1 Airport Improvements - The City shall continue to seek available funding sources and make appropriate capital improvements consistent with the recommendations of the Airport Master Plan.
10.R.2 Project Funding - The City shall work with the local transportation commission, California Department of Transportation, and State Transportation Commission to ensure that projects at the Watsonville Airport are given funding priority in the State Transportation Improvement Program.
10.R.3 Master Plan Update - The City shall review the Airport Master Plan at least every five years, beginning with the 1994 update, to determine the need for additional updating.
Policy 10.S Aesthetics
The City shall seek to preserve and enhance scenic vistas to and from the transportation corridors. Implementation Measures
10.5.1	Scenic Vistas - The City shall investigate the use and development of scenic vistas and roadside rest areas when major roadway improvement and extension projects are undertaken.
10.5.2	Visual Clutter - The City shall use land use regulations, design review, and conditions of project approval to control the size, type, and location of commercial signs, utility equipment, and trash containers to avoid visual clutter and preserve scenic vistas.
Policy 10.T Landscaping
The City shall encourage the use of vegetation to create or enhance scenic vistas and to serve as buffers for transportation facilities.
Implementation Measures
10.T.1 Plant Type, Size and Location - The City
shall use the design review process to establish conditions for the type, size, and location of plant species along transportation corridors and in parking areas.
10.T.2 Tree Preservation - The City shall design roadway improvements to avoid the destruction of landmark trees, individual specimen trees, and clusters of trees whenever possible.
10.T.3 Screening - The City shall use appropriate plant types to screen drainage structures and other related facilities associated with roadway improvement projects.
Policy 10.U Truck Facilities And Routing
Commodity movement utilizing trucks shall be encouraged and facilitated while related impacts on City streets are minimized to the extent possible.
149
Watsonville 2005
Implementation Measures
10.U.1 On-Site Facilities - The City shall use the development review process to ensure that new development which depends on large truck transportation provides on-site facilities sufficient to mitigate the impacts related to truck size, weight, and noise.
10.U.2 Access Improvements - The City shall
require developers of commercial and industrial property to improve the street immediately adjacent to the project access point to standards which accommodate the weight and length of trucks entering the project site.
10.U3 Damage Control - The City shall require that damage done to public streets by trucks involved in the construction process be repaired, or the City shall be appropriately compensated.
10.U.4 Truck Maneuvering - The City shall use the development review process to require that commercial and industrial development projects provide adequate on-site commercial delivery space that does not block access to adjacent streets, or require backing maneuvers on public roads for either entering or leaving.
Policy 10.V Commercial Truck Routes
The City shall take all reasonable actions to prevent heavy truck traffic from using neighborhood collector streets.
Implementation Measures
10.V.1 Truck Route Designation - The City shall plan and adopt truck routes and associated regulations for the purpose of keeping large trucks out of residential neighborhoods and limiting the truck size and hours of operation in noise sensitive areas.
10.V.2 Truck Route Signing - The City shall continue efforts to clearly designate appropriate truck routes and discourage the use of neighborhood collector streets for commercial truck use.
10.V.3 Commercial Truck Parking - The City shall regulate the docking location and permitted hours for commercial truck parking to avoid conflict with commercial and residential traffic.
Policy 10.W Transportation of Hazardous Materials
The City shall develop a process for ensuring that hazardous wastes being transported out of and through the city are carefully monitored. Implementation Measures
10.W.1 Permit Conditions - As part of the truck route designations, specific provisions or guidelines shall be established for the hours, method, route, and amount of hazardous waste being transported. These provisions shall be used to develop permit conditions for land uses within the city which generate hazardous wastes.
10.W.2 Spill Cleanup - The City shall cooperate with the California Highway Patrol to develop a plan for cleaning up hazardous substance spills which might occur on State Highways and other streets within the city.
Policy 10.X Utility Routing
The City shall continue to cooperate and work with public utilities in the routing for transmission or transportation of water, electricity, or natural gas in order to best serve the community.
Implementation Measures
10.X.1 Utility Location - The City shall consider
enacting an ordinance requiring public utilities to submit their plans for new transmission utilities to the Planning Department for review and comment prior to right-of-way acquisition.
10.X.2 Seismic Hazards - Where possible, the City shall avoid crossing areas of known seismic activity with underground utilities. When such a route cannot be avoided, special design shall be utilized to ensure the highest
150
TRANSPORTATION AND CIRCULATION, Chapter 10
level of safety and prevention of underground ruptures.
Policy 10.Y Emergency Access
The City shall ensure that emergency or secondary access is provided for all new development in the city's service area.
Implementation Measures
10.Y.1 Coordinated Planning - The City's police
and fire departments shall participate in the review of new projects in order to ensure that project design and circulation, and access allows maintenance of minimum emergency response time.
10.Y.2 Access Requirements - The City shall use the Zoning Ordinance and development guidelines to require sufficient access for emergency services in new development.
10.Y.3 Secondary Access - For those developments where size and/or location present potential emergency access problems, the City shall require provision of secondary access, including crash gates and emergency roads, where necessary or appropriate.
The policy-to-goal relationship is displayed in the matrix on the following page.
151
Watsonville 2005
Transportation and Circulation Goals and Policies
		Policies 10A	10B	10C	10D	10E	10F	10G	10H	101	10J	10K	10L	
Goals	10.1	• • •	
	102		• • • •
	10.3		• • • •
	10.4		
	10.5		
	10.6		
	10.7		
	10.8		
	10.9		
	1010		
10M	10N	100	10P	10Q	10R	10S	10T	10U	10V	10W	10X	10Y		
	10.1	
	102	
	10.3	
•	10.4	
• • •	10.5	0 o
• • • •	10.6	OJ W
• • •	10.7	
• • •	10.8	
•	10.9	
•	1Q10	
152﻿1 PUBLIC FACILITIES AND 11 SERVICES
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND

addressed in this chapter strongly support the goals and policies of the Land Use and Community Development chapter (4).
In planning for public facilities and services, it is important to assure a balance between service costs, safety, environmental protection, and achieving the desired land use pattern.
This chapter of Watsonville 2005 addresses the need to maintain a balance between the rate of private development and the provision of public services to the city and Planning Area. Goals and policies are provided for infrastructure development, water supply, wastewater management, solid waste management, library services, educational services, and public safety.
All of these urban support services are of concern to Watsonville, although not all of them are under the direct authority of the City Council. The subjects
COMMUNITY CONCERNS
Community concerns related to the provision of public facilities and services have been evaluated and are summarized below:
1.	Can the city allow urbanization to proceed without a corresponding reduction in the level of public services and urban amenities now enjoyed in the city?
2.	Will urban development within the urban limit line provide adequate fiscal resources to maintain current levels of public services and additional facilities to accommodate population growth?
Figure 11-1 Ranking of Public Service and Facilities Issues
Statement		Ranking		
		Agree	Not Important	Disagree
1.	The city needs to develop more public parks and recreation facilities	62%	18%	20%
2.	The city needs a multilevel downtown parking structure	53%	15%	32%
3.	The city should provide additional library services	62%	20%	18%
4.	Existing roads should be widened	82%	11%	7%
5.	Additional athletic fields are needed	46%	26%	28%
6.	New neighborhood parks are needed	58%	18%	26%
7.	New development should be allowed only if schools, parks, roads, sewers, and other facilities are adequate	87%	5%	8%
8.	An 18-hole golf course is needed	25%	28%	47%
Source: Watsonville 2005 General Plan Questionnaire
153
Watsonville 2005
3.	Can new growth be provided with adequate water supply from the available sources and distribution system?
4.	Will the wastewater management system be adequate for both population growth and new industrial development?
5.	Can the solid waste disposal site accommodate the waste load that will be generated by community development and anticipated population growth?
6.	Will the existing downtown location of the Watsonville Library be adequate to serve new community development in the northern and eastern portions of the city?
7.	Will the Pajaro Valley Unified School District be able to acquire new school sites and develop new facilities within the existing City limits or the area immediately adjacent?
8.	Will police and fire service be able to keep pace with the needs of a growing population base?
The general plan questionnaire contained several statements related to the provision of public facilities and services. Figure 11-1 shows the ranking given to each statement based on 753 returned questionnaires.
FIRE SERVICES
Watsonville is currently served by two fire stations,	?
one at Second and Rodriquez Streets and the second located at the Watsonville Airport. The quality of fire suppression capabilities is demonstrated by the Insurance Services Office (ISO) rating of 3A, the highest in Santa Cruz County.
Staffing in 1990/91 consisted of 30 fire personnel, one secretary, and 34 reserve firefighters. During fiscal year 1990/1991 the department responded to 1,905 calls for assistance, over five per day. Figure 11-2 shows the distribution of responses by type.
The Fire Department actively pursues fire prevention and public education in the Watsonville community.
In 1990 the department made approximately 7,500 contacts with members of the community in pursuit of fire prevention and public education goals. A great amount of time is spent checking building plans and inspecting facilities to make sure fire and hazardous materials hazards are under control. The department is actively involved with the schools in promoting fire safety with the children.
In order for the City to maintain current service levels while servicing a projected population of 51,600
Figure 11-2 Fire Department Response: July 1, 1990- June 30,1991
Response	Number of Calls	Percent of Calls
1. Structure Fires	104	5.5
2. Vehicle Fires	50	2.6
3. Other Fires	118	6.2
TOTAL FIRE RESPONSE	272	14.3
4. Vehicle Accidents	164	8.6
5. Medical Emergencies	952	50.0
6. Hazardous Materials	73	3.8
7. All Other Types	444	23.3
TOTAL	1,633	100.0
Source: Watsonville Fire Department Annual Report, 1990-1991
154
PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES, Chapter 11
in the year 2005, another fire station will be required. If staffing levels are to be maintained at historical (pre-1991) levels, the additional fire station and work load demand may require an increase in staffing as follows: 14 firefighters, three battalion chiefs, two fire inspectors, and an additional secretary.
The entire city is served by fire hydrants that can deliver 1,500 to 3,000 gallons per minute for up to two hours, and 1,000 to 4,000 gallons per minute for one hour to four hours in commercial and industrial areas. The department had an inventory of 18 vehicles including six pumper engines, one aerial ladder truck, one service ladder truck, one aircraft crash unit, two pickups, and six passenger vehicles, and a hazardous materials response vehicle in 1993.
The Fire Department has the important responsibility of regulating, monitoring, managing, and cleaning-up hazardous materials. The department has formed a six-member Hazardous Materials Incident Team made up of existing fire suppression personnel and one fire inspector from the Fire Prevention Bureau. The Fire Department prepares safety evaluations for the Planning Department on proposed development. In addition, in cooperation with the County, a countywide hazardous materials plan has been completed, as required by state legislation.
POLICE SERVICE
The Watsonville Police Department actively pursues the goal of improving the quality of life in its neighborhoods and business areas through "personalized" police services that reduce crime and violence, while enhancing the relationship between residents and police department employees.
The Watsonville Police Department is committed to making crime prevention the joint responsibility of the police and the local residents.
The Watsonville Police Department is staffed by 53 police officers. This includes 41 in the Patrol Bureau, seven in the Detective Bureau, and six in the Administration and Support Sections. In addition, the department staff includes eight civilian personnel. The department has 15 marked patrol vehicles, 13 detective/administrative vehicles, two motorcycle
units, one transportation van, and three specialty vehicles.
In addition to contacts made on routine patrols, the police department currently responds to approximately 3,000 calls for service per month. In order to maintain current service levels for police response, staffing shall be maintained at the current police officer/population ratio of 1:600. For the year 2005, this ratio should also include one support staff person for every three officers.
The City shall continue to support youth programs in the Police Department as they relate to youth and schools:
1.	Youth Services Police Officer liaison with all schools within the city limits.
2.	Police Officer assigned to juvenile crime.
3.	Police Officer assigned to Child Sexual/Physical Abuse.
4.	Drug Abuse Resistance Education (DARE) program taught in fifth grade by a Police Officer.
5.	Tenth grade curriculum of (a) Juvenile Justice System, (b) Driving while intoxicated, (c) Drug Abuse.
6.	Gang Intervention Team (GIT) participation with School District, City Recreation, and community based organizations or its equivalent).
7.	Truancy Abatement (TACS) or its equivalent program which combines with the school district to remove truants from the streets and return them to school.
8.	Maintain staffing to continue to offer, maintain, and supervise a Law Enforcement Explorer Scout Post.
The City shall continue to provide for its residents an answering point to report emergencies and through which emergency services can be dispatched. This can be done by enhancing the current 911 emergency center administered by the Police Department or by joining Joint Powers Authority to operate a shared emergency dispatch center with other government entities. In either case, the City shall provide modem equipment and infrastructure as well as highly trained emergency dispatchers.
155
Watsonville 2005
The City shall provide for the humane care of animals that are lost or have strayed from their owners and continue to prevent cruelty to animals by either maintaining its own animal shelter and animal patrol service or by contracting animal welfare and control services to a private company or business, or to a semi-public entity such as the Humane Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals.
The Police Department also prepares public safety evaluations for the Planning Department on project design features to help reduce traffic hazards and improve police services.
RECREATION AND PARKS
The City's Recreation and Parks Department operates a system of sixteen city parks, a senior center, and youth recreation center. This activity is currently staffed by 18 persons. The City is provided with policy direction from a seven-member Recreation and Parks Commission. The 1992 Parks and Open Space Master Plan proposes a standard of five acres of parkland per 1,000 population.
A City limit population of 50,500 (which excludes Interlaken) would require a continuing program of parkland acquisition, facilities development, and higher personnel levels. There may be a need for ten additional full-time park employees and four additional full-time recreation employees. Additional standards for park facilities, land requirements and
Photo: Courtesy ot Register-Pajaronian
Staff members assist a student with a research paper at the Watsonville Library, which is open six days a week.
156
PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES, Chapter 11
recreational programs are discussed in the Parks and Recreation chapter (8).
LIBRARY SERVICE
Library services are an integral part of the community's cultural, social, and academic activities. Watsonville is a member of the Monterey Bay Area Cooperative Library System (MOBAC). Among the services provided is a comprehensive collection of Spanish language books for both children and adults. The library also offers a variety of non-print material including records. The existing library is 16,200 square feet and operates with a staff of 12 fulltime equivalent employees.
In 1991, the library staff completed a study of the city's library needs through the year 2010. This plan, the Watsonville Public Library Building Program, dated July 1991, called for the provision of Library space at 0.6 square feet per city resident. Staff needs were projected at one staff member for each 2,000 people in the city. The population projection for the year 2005 used in this study was 41,587. The population projection for the year 2010 was 43,708. The 2010 projection was used for library expansion planning purposes. The study called for the library to be expanded to 26,200 square feet with a service staff of 21 full-time equivalent employees.
Using the same standards as the July 1991 Watsonville Public Library Building Program, the year 2005 population projection results in a year 2005 library square footage need of approximately 30,300 and a full-time equivalent staff of 25. This results in a 4,100 square foot deficit by the year 2005 in the library expansion proposed in the July 1991 plan. As the city develops into the new areas of the Sphere of Influence, the need for library services in the newly developing areas will increase.
The growing population under 18 and ever tightening budgets for educational services will place additional burdens on the Watsonville library to provide a variety of educational services through 2005. Library planning should continue to be pursued throughout the time frame of the General Plan. Opportunities for the joint venture financing and use of these facilities should also be considered.
WATER SUPPLY
Water supply is an important issue in the Pajaro River Basin. In 1991, total water use in the Basin was approximately 70,000 acre feet per year. The city uses approximately 6,900 acre feet per year. Overdraft in the Basin is a significant concern. The annual average overdraft for the Basin has been estimated to be at least 11,000 acre feet. The Basin has been in an overdraft condition for about forty years. Seawater intrusion has affected numerous coastal wells in both the Santa Cruz and Monterey County portions of the PVWMA. Saline groundwater also has been encountered at depths of 700-1,000 feet below sea level at several inland locations, such as the vicinity of Panabaker Lane, the access road to the Wastewater Treatment Plant.
Water use in the Watsonville Planning Area consists of a combination of residential, agricultural irrigation, and water-intensive food processing/industrial uses. About 90 percent of the metered water supply is obtained from the operation of 10 City-owned groundwater wells within the Pajaro River Basin. These wells range in depth from 200 to 600 feet. The remaining 10 percent is obtained from the surface supply of the Corralitos and Browns Valley Creeks. The Corralitos Water Filtration Plant, which treats this surface water supply, went out of service as a result of the October 1989 Loma Prieta Earthquake. The City designed a project to repair the facility. It is anticipated that this project will be completed by the fall of 1994. Storage for city water is provided by eight reservoirs with a combined capacity of 11.6 million gallons.
Watsonville provides water to more than 11,950 (1990) metered accounts within a service area that extends over nine miles from Browns Valley on the north to the City limits on the south. Watsonville also serves the Pajaro Dunes residential complex at the edge of Monterey Bay.
Total water usage in 1990 was approximately 6,900 acre feet (an acre foot is 325,830 gallons) compared with 7,365 acre feet in 1986. This decline in water usage is attributed to voluntary residential conservation efforts, the closing of a major food processor, and discontinuance of service to the community of Pajaro in Monterey County. Of the 6,900 acre feet of
157
Watsonville 2005
use approximately, 4,400 acre feet is residential use and 2,500 acre feet is commercial and industrial use.
The Pajaro Valley Water Management Agency (PVWMA) is the regional agency responsible for water resource management, including contracting with the Central Valley Project Manager, the Bureau of Reclamation, for imported water. The agency can contract for up to 20,000 acre feet per year. However, the PVWMA, by law, can do very little until it has an adopted Basin Management Plan (BMP). The BMP was prepared and adopted in 1993. The BMP identified a preferred alternative for balancing the Basin's water demand and supply within a 50-year planning horizon. To accomplish this objective, the preferred alternative will provide approximately 28,000 acre feet of water annually by 2040. One or more major elements will be featured, such as a pipeline for importing water from the Central Valley Projects or an off-stream reservoir for storing Pajaro River winter flows. The major element or elements will probably require at least 10 years to bring to fruition. The preferred alternative will also include strong conservation measures and a mix of small-scale recharge and supply augmentation programs that will bring near term relief and contribute to the overall BMP objective.
Water conservation is one method to slow the rate of increasing groundwater overdraft. The Watsonville water system is fully metered providing significant opportunities to institute and monitor water conservation among its users. The agricultural and industrial users in the remainder of the Pajaro Basin are on unregistered and unmetered wells making it difficult to institute and monitor water conservation. How the PVWMA will address this issue is yet unknown.
The City Council has directed the staff of the Water Division to prepare aggressive water use reduction programs in order to reduce the demands upon the groundwater and still accommodate growth within the water service area. To date, the Council has approved a prohibition against the waste of water, a school education program, a toilet retrofit rebate program, rate increases to fund the water use reduction plans, and the initial phases of a public education program. The City is also committed to working cooperatively with the PVWMA in the development and implementation of plans prepared in conjunc-
tion with the Basin Management Plan. The goal of the City water use reduction program is to reduce demands upon the groundwater by at least 16 percent from 1991 usage levels by the year 2002. The City believes this can be accomplished through a combination of programs including water conservation, plumbing fixture retrofitting, landscape replacements, Building Code changes, industrial water use changes, and reclamation and reuse.
SOLID WASTE
Watsonville's Public Works Department provides solid waste planning, collection, and disposal service within the City limits. The existing 50-acre landfill site is located off San Andreas Road approximately 1.5 miles west of the City limits. A 53-acre site purchased by the City in 1991, located immediately adjacent to the existing landfill, is anticipated to provide waste disposal through approximately the year 2015.
The existing landfill area and the proposed expansion areas are shown in Figure 11-3. Figure 11-4 shows the landfill capacities for the various landfill phases. The utilization time frame for each of the areas will vary depending on the success and implementation time frames for materials recovery programs (e.g. recycling, composting, and other nonlandfill waste management concepts) in the city.
The City is required by the State to institute programs that will significantly reduce the solid waste going to the landfill. The state mandate for all communities, including Watsonville, is a 25 percent reduction by 1995, and a 50 percent reduction by 2000. The majority of materials in most landfills consists of paper that could be recycled and yard waste that could be composted. These two categories of materials are the emphasis of Watsonville's efforts. However, the City's degree of success in diverting materials from the solid waste stream will depend upon the success of local and regional market development efforts targeting the use of the recovered materials.
The City of Watsonville needs both a materials recovery program and capacity in its landfill to address future needs. The City is currently committed to two joint studies with the County. One study is looking
158
Existing Watsonville Sanitary Landfill
KEY
Watsonville Sanitary Landfill Expansion Area
Buena Vista Landfill (Santa Cruz County)
■■■ibb Watsonville City Limits
Planning Area Boundary
Sanitary Landfill Area: Existing and Proposed
Source: City of Watsonville Department ol Public Works. 1992
Thu prapfic it not niondod to bo usad tor sita-spoafic do a non makmg Consist tha Gt/ Of Count/ tor datailad intofmahon
Figure 11-3

PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES, Chapter 11
Figure 11-4 Landfill Capacity
Phase	Site	Status	Capacity
Phase I	Existing Site	Inactive	
Phase II	Existing Site	Permitted	2 years
Phase III	Final cell at existing site	Permitted	8 years
Phase IV	First 1/2 of 53 acre expansion site	Conditionally Permitted	7 years
Phase V	Second 1/2 of 53 acres expansion site	Not yet permitted	8 years
Note: Landfill capacity estimates based on solid waste generation rates for the City of 3 lbs. per person per day (current), 2.25 lbs. per person per day (1995), and 1.5 lbs. per day (2000). These numbers include commercial and industrial solid waste generation.
Source: David Koch, Director of Watsonville Utilities, 12/17/91
into the establishment of a materials recovery facility that would jointly serve Watsonville and the County. The City has the options to: joint venture with the County on such a facility, develop one of its own, or contract with another facility in another community for materials recovery services. The second joint study is looking at the potential for the establishment of joint City/County landfill operations that would coordinate and combine operations at the City and County landfill sites. Planning Area residents outside the City limits are serviced by the County landfill, located near the City's landfill on San Andreas Road.
A major concern regarding the landfill is the improper disposal of household hazardous wastes with other domestic waste. Major safety issues and potential health hazards can result for people collecting the waste, and working at the landfill site. In addition, the potential for ground water contamination resulting from leaching of hazardous wastes through the soil is significant.
The Fire Department, in cooperation with the Utilities Department and the County of Santa Cruz, is developing a household hazardous waste program to minimize the quantity of household hazardous waste that is not properly handled. It is proposed
that the landfill have a household hazardous waste storage area pending approval by all regulatory agencies.
SEWER SERVICE
Watsonville provides wastewater treatment for the city area, Freedom County Sanitation District, Sal-sipuedes Sanitation District, Pajaro Dunes, and the Pajaro County Sanitation District in Monterey County. The wastewater system in 1992 services a population of approximately 45,000 people. The existing wastewater treatment plant is located two miles west of City Hall on Panabaker Lane adjacent to the Pajaro River. This site is in the Watsonville Coastal Zone. The design capacity was increased to 16.5 mgd of advanced primary treatment capacity by improvements made to the plant in 1988/89. These improvements meet California Ocean Plan standards. The City is in the early planning stages of evaluating and planning for secondary wastewater treatment.
Average daily flows to the plant in 1991 were 5.5 mgd which is a decrease from flows experienced in the late 1980s of 8 to 9 mgd. The reduction of flow is the result of water use conservation attributed to the drought and the closing of major food processing
161
Watsonville 2005
facilities in Watsonville. Sixty percent of the current flows are attributed to residential uses and 40 percent are attributed to industrial and commercial uses.
The projected 2005 service area population of 65,000 will generate an average daily domestic waste water flow, of approximately 75 gpd per person, totaling approximately 4.9 million gallons. The remaining capacity of about 11.6 mgd will be available for industrial flow and to assist toward the upgrading of the treatment plant to secondary treatment.
Wastewater outflow is provided by a service line that extends more than 7,000 feet into Monterey Bay to the 65 foot depth contour. The Monterey Bay was
designated as a National Marine Sanctuary. Implementation of the sanctuary should be carefully monitored for potential impact on the outflow facility and the required level of effluent quality. This recent designation may result in more stringent requirements for ocean discharge.
Sludge from the wastewater treatment plant is currently hauled to the City's landfill for disposal. The Wastewater Division is reviewing alternatives for beneficial uses for that material, rather than landfill disposal.
The City of Watsonville registers and monitors nonpoint source discharges through its source control
Photo: Register-Pajaronian
In a partnership, the City and the Pajaro Valley Unified School District rebuilt the performing arts center for the entire community at Watsonville High School following the earthquake in 1989. Funds from Watsonville's Measure E ballot initiative and state-matching funds were used for the project. The Henry J. Mello Center for the Performing Arts seats 834.
162
PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES, Chapter 11
Figure 11-5 Pajaro Valley Unified School District Enrollment K-12
Year	Enrollment	Change
1981	12,390	
1982	12,688	+298 (2.4%)
1983	12,983	+295 (2.3%)
1984	13,579	+596 (4.6%)
1985	13,849	+270 (2.0%)
1986	14,221	+372 (2.7%)
1987	14,734	+513 (3.6%)
1988	15,345	+611 (4.1%)
1989	15,962	+617 (4.0%)
1990	16,388	+426 (2.7%)
1991	16,275	-113 (-0.1%)
TOTAL CHANGE SINCE 1981		+3,885 (31.3%)
Source: Pajaro Valley Unified School District, Business Office, 10/15/91
office. The City should continue to register these sources and monitor legislation and regulation applicable to non-point source water discharge.
SCHOOL SERVICE
Public education in the Watsonville Planning Area is provided by the Pajaro Valley Unified School District. District facilities include 14 elementary schools, four middle schools, and three high schools. Out of that group seven of the elementary schools, two of the middle schools, and two of the high schools are in the Watsonville-Freedom area. The balance are in the Aptos area and the rural areas beyond the City limits.
Between 1969 and 1991, the total enrollment of the Pajaro Valley Unified School District grew from 11,898 to 16,388. The nineteen year increase of 4,490 students represents an average annual growth of 195 students per year although 87 percent of the growth has been in the last 10 years.
Figure 11-5 shows the recent growth in enrollment. The total increase is 24 percent with the largest increases occurring in 1984,1988 and 1989.
The Association of Monterey Bay Area Governments (AMBAG) has projected a school district enrollment of 21,200 by year 2005. This represents a 23 percent increase over the 1990 enrollment of 16,388.
The May 1987 Site and Facility Commission Report, prepared by the Pajaro Valley Unified School District concluded that population growth within the district has generated a need for three additional schools in the Watsonville area, including an elementary, junior high, and high school. In addition, it was determined that 300 students should be transferred from Watsonville High School to Aptos High to relieve overcrowding.
The 1990 Census indicated that 77 percent of the population 17 years of age or younger is Hispanic. This is an important aspect of the provision of primary and secondary education in Watsonville.
163
Watsonville 2005
GOALS FOR PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICE
The issues of concern to the community have been incorporated into long-term planning goals.
Goal 11.1 Service Availability
Maintain or increase the current availability of public services and facilities consistent with projected population growth in the City limits and Sphere of Influence and according to the fiscal resources of the City.
Goal 11.2 Public Services
Assure new development can be served by adequate public services and facilities.
Goal 11.3 Water Supply
Construct and maintain a water system and institute water management policy that will provide a sufficient quantity of appropriate-quality water to meet the needs of the existing and planned community.
Goal 11.4 Wastewater Management
Continue the safe and efficient collection, treatment, and disposal of domestic and industrial wastewater to meet the needs of the service population, protect the environment, and comply with all applicable regulations.
Goal 11.5 Solid Waste Management
Operate an efficient waste management program that protects the health of area residents, prolongs the useful life of the landfill site, and encourages recycling of any and all materials found to be feasible for recovery and reuse.
Goal 11.6 Library Services
Continue to improve the present library facility and services. Explore the development of a second facility to serve population growth in the eastern and northern portions of the city and Sphere of Influence.
of neighborhood parks, the construction and management of joint recreational facilities, the location of new schools, and the identification of potential school sites. Support efforts to locate advanced educational facilities in and near Watsonville.
Goal 11.8 Public Safety
Maintain public protection service levels consistent with City standards for acceptable risk levels.
Policies for public services and facilities carry out long-term goals. The following policy statements serve to implement the goals of this chapter.
Policy 11 .A Facilities Coordination
11.A.1 Coordination - The City shall coordinate
developer-financed site improvements with publicly-financed improvements through the Capital Improvement Program.
11.A.2 Master Plan Consistency - The City shall
evaluate, and may place conditions on, new development to achieve consistency with the master plans for streets, parks, water supply, and waste-water management.
11.A.3 Development Fees - The City shall maintain a schedule of development impact fees that is commensurate with the increased need for public services and facilities generated by new development.
11.A.4 Consolidation of Services - The City shall encourage the consolidation of service districts to avoid duplication of services and promote more efficient service delivery.
Policy 11.B Infrastructure
Goal 11.7 City-School District Coordination
Coordinate facilities planning and land use planning between the City and the Pajaro Valley Unified School District, especially related to the distribution
The City shall identify public infrastructure needs and use the Capital Improvements Program to schedule improvements necessary for achieving
164
PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES, Chapter 11
long-term land use and community development objectives.
Implementation Measures
11.8.1	Growth Management - Through the use of specific plans in new growth areas, the City shall regulate the timing and location of future urban development to be consistent with the service capacity and financial capability of current support services and the five-year Capital Improvement Program schedule.
11.B.2 Fiscal Management - The City shall provide and monitor special funds established for specific expenditures to ensure that adequate funding levels are maintained for individual service functions.
11.B3 Incremental Costs - The City shall require that new development projects pay additional incremental public service costs which they generate.
11.B.4 Cost Sharing - The City shall support extension of utilities to serve new development only when the cost is borne by that development and the extension is consistent with land use and community development policies and/or is necessary to serve public uses.
Policy 11 .C Water System Design
The water system shall be designed, constructed and managed to provide a sufficient quantity of appropriate-quality water for the existing and planned community.
Implementation Measures
ll.C.l Water Supply Master Plan - The City shall revise the 1979 Water Supply and Distribution Master Plan to ensure that the water system can provide adequate water, of appropriate quality, to meet the density of development in accordance with the City's development policies throughout the existing and proposed water service area for the City.
11.C.2 On-going Planning - The Water Division
and the Planning Department shall monitor growth, and project future growth centers, at no more than three year increments. The Water Division shall maintain a five, ten and fifteen year plan of capital improvements for the Water System. The City shall use the five-year capital improvement schedule to implement a program of replacement for all water mains that are at least 40 years old, on an "as needed" basis.
11.C3 Pajaro Valley Water Management Agency (PVWMA) - The City shall participate in development of the Basin Management Plan (BMP) being prepared by the PVWMA in 1991 and 1992.
11.C.4 Water Supply System Management - The
Water Supply System shall be managed and operated as an enterprise.
11.C.5 Site Improvements - New projects within
the urbanized area shall be required to complete on-site water connection improvements consistent with water quality standards of the Water Department.
11.C.6 Well Management - The City shall continue a program of well monitoring and provide annual status reports on water consumption and quality. The City shall continue the program to identify abandoned wells and have them sealed to prevent aquifer contamination.
Policy 11 .D Water Service Policy
The City shall follow a water service policy to ensure that the priority water service needs of the City can be met.
Implementation Measures
ll.D.l Allocation Policy - The City shall establish a system for prioritizing the allocation of water connections in the event of a water connection cutback.
11.D.2 New Water Demand Mitigation - New
demand for water shall be mitigated to the
165
Watsonville 2005
greatest extent possible. The City shall continue its present policy of demand reduction requirements for the new development and the payment of groundwater impact fees for residential construction. The policies shall be extended to other types of development on an equitable basis.
Policy 11 .E Water Use Reduction
The City shall develop a program of water use reduction that utilizes a combination of water conservation, replacements, education, and reclamation and reuse.
11.E.1 Water Use Reduction Program - The City of Watsonville shall develop and put into operation a water use reduction program by the end of 1992 aimed at reducing the demand upon the groundwater resources. Potential program elements include residential, commercial, and industrial water conservation guidelines; guidelines for low water use/ drought tolerant landscape; incentives for efficient water use; design guidelines to encourage the creation of groundwater recharge areas; water fee structures; and water reclamation.
Policy 11.F Wastewater Management
The City shall continue to provide adequate waste-water treatment levels to meet the needs of the City and the service area users. Compliance with applicable state and federal standards will be pursued to the extent possible.
Implementation Measures
ll.F.l Facility Funding - The City shall pursue federal Ocean Water Grants, Revenue Bonds, the Sewer Improvement Fund, and other funding sources for future wastewater system improvements determined to be practical or required.
11.F.2 Sludge Management - The City shall utilize the Watsonville solid waste landfill for the storage of digested sludge and shall pursue other feasible alternative sludge uses and disposal methods.
11.E3 Connection - The City shall require connection to the wastewater treatment system for all areas in the Freedom and Salsipuedes Sanitation Districts which are now served by septic tanks.
11.F.4 Fees - The City shall assess sanitation impact fees on new development in proportion to the amount of wastewater they are anticipated to generate and the cost of extending services unless alternative funding resources are available.
11.F.5 Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary Designation - The City shall continue to monitor requirements connected with the designation of the Monterey Bay as a National Marine Sanctuary, particularly those related to the impact on the City's wastewater outflow facilities.
Policy 11 .G Solid Waste Management
The City shall continue to operate an environmentally sensitive solid waste management program and encourage the recycling of paper, glass, plastics, and metals. The City shall encourage waste minimization and source reduction of all wastes, with special emphasis on hazardous materials.
Implementation Measures
ll.G.l Landfill - The City shall use the best available technology and management practices to prevent contamination of groundwater by solid waste materials stored at the Watsonville landfill site.
11.G.2 Hazardous Wastes - The City shall regulate the disposal of hazardous wastes at the current landfill site, and comply with state, federal, and local regulations for the disposal of commercial and household hazardous wastes.
11.G.3 Litter Control - The City shall continue an aggressive program of street cleaning and litter abatement in order to prevent pollution of wetlands and provide for a cleaner urban environment.
166
PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES, Chapter 11
11.G.4 Waste to Landfill Reduction - The City shall continue to pursue compliance with the state-mandated waste to landfill reduction requirements of 25 percent by 1995 and 50 percent by the year 2000. Residential, commercial, and industrial waste stream reduc-tion/material recovery programs will be implemented.
11.G.5 Landfill Expansion-The City shall continue to pursue the permitting of landfill expansion areas to ensure future landfill capacity adequate to meet the needs of Watsonville. The development of joint City and County landfill operations shall be evaluated.
11.G.6 Materials Recovery - The City shall continue to pursue the development of a materials recovery facility as: a sole developer, as a joint City/County effort, or as a contractual arrangement to use a facility in another community. The City shall also investigate composting, or other beneficial use, of municipal sludge and other biodegradable materials.
11.G.7 Reclamation - The City shall study the
potential for reclamation of the current landfill site for use as a recreational facility or other open space use, including agriculture, after the year 2005.
11.G.8 Agency Coordination - The City shall participate with other agencies in long-range planning for: solid waste management, ecological protection, materials recovery, hazardous materials management, and eneigy production from solid waste.
Policy 11 .H Library Services
The City shall maintain and improve library services for residents of the City of Watsonville. Implementation Measures
11.H.1 Library Master Plan - The City shall update the July 1991 Library Building Program every five years to ensure that the library services needs of the residents can be met.
11.H.2 Library Expansion - The library staff shall continue to pursue the expansion of the existing library to address the needs of the projected population.
11.H.3 Expanded Library Facilities - By 1996, the City shall conduct a study to determine the need for, cost of, and, if appropriate, identifying possible sites for a second library facility to serve the residents of the eastern and northern portions of the city and Sphere of Influence. Alternative financing and contractual arrangements with the County shall be explored.
11.H.4 Community Service - The City shall provide multipurpose rooms within the library for community meetings, special exhibits, and events.
11.H.5 Library Agreement - The City of Watsonville shall continue to work cooperatively with the County of Santa Cruz to manage the library in accordance with the Library Agreement.
11.H.6 Children, Youth and Families - The library staff shall develop programs, as resources allow, to assist in the education and training of children, youth, and families in the city.
11.H.7 Cultural Diversity Awareness - The library shall develop programs for all population sectors encouraging an understanding, awareness, and respect for the cultural diversity of Watsonville.
Policy 11.1 Joint Planning
The City shall continue to work closely with the Pajaro Valley Unified School District in planning for all facets of school site acquisition and facilities development. The City shall encourage the development of advanced educational facilities in and near Watsonville.
Implementation Measures
Measure 4.F.11, which addresses higher education opportunities, also implements this policy.
167
Watsonville 2005
11.1.1	Site Identification - The City and the Pajaro Valley Unified School District shall, by 1995, identify specific sites for the three new schools required to accommodate the projected population growth in Watsonville. These sites shall then be identified on the General Plan Diagram. Programs to facilitate acquisition shall be developed.
11.1.2	Recreation and Parks - The City shall work with the School District to explore new ways of using school facilities for neighborhood recreation and opportunities for joint development of facilities.
11.13 Improved Educational Success - The City
shall formulate a special task force made up of City officials, School District officials, representatives of the City's Hispanic and special need populations, and local business leaders to develop a program of community based efforts to improve the overall success of education and training in the community and better address special needs populations.
11.1.4	Advanced Educational Opportunities - The City shall lobby and support efforts to establish a branch campus of the California State University system in the region, particularly as it relates to reuse opportunities for Fort Ord in Monterey County. The City shall actively seek expansion of the Cabrillo College facilities in Watsonville.
11.1.5	Population Projections - The City shall coordinate population growth and residential land use planning with planning for school site location and enrollment.
Policy 11.J Public Protection
The City shall continue to provide sufficient funding, trained personnel, and all necessary equipment and facilities to maintain city standards for public safety and response time.
Implementation Measures
ll.J.l Project Review - The City shall continue to use Police and Fire Department project
review to ensure that new development projects allow for built-in fire and police alarms and other public safety features, and to allow for review of potential traffic impacts on response time.
Police
11.J.2 Response Time - The Police Department
shall strive to maintain a 24-hour emergency response time of four minutes or less to all parts of the city and personnel and equipment necessary to meet this standard.
11.J3 Law Enforcement - The Police Department shall maintain a degree of public order which is consistent with personal freedom and the public welfare. The Police Department shall provide a consistent approach to law enforcement which recognizes the needs of the community, guarantees the rights of all parties concerned, and protects the safety and security of the residents of the community.
11.J.4 Crime Prevention - The Police Department shall reduce the opportunities for criminal action through: highly visible law enforcement within the city, the swift investigation and apprehension of suspected criminals, and increased public awareness of personal safety and property security techniques.
11.J.5 Juvenile Crime - The Police Department
shall direct the behavior patterns of juveniles predisposed to the commission of crimes through the application of programs outside of the criminal justice system. The Police Department shall promote education and information programs through the area schools.
11.J.6 Community Participation - The Police Department shall develop community resource programs which emphasize increased community involvement and participation in defining community needs, establishing priorities, and developing programs to meet these needs. The Police Department shall promote neighborhood
168
PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES, Chapter 11
crime prevention programs such as the Neighborhood Watch.
11.J.7 Traffic Safety - The Police Department shall preserve life and property on the highways through: the reduction of accidents and injuries, facilitation of the safe and expeditious flow of commercial and private vehicular traffic, and the public's voluntary compliance with traffic regulations due to a combination of education and enforcement.
Fire
11.J.8 Training - Fire Department training shall include: leadership and management, fire suppression, prevention, public education, hazardous materials, emergency medical services, disaster preparedness, and rescue-related subjects.
11.J.9 Response Time - The City shall strive to provide properly staffed and equipped fire stations to provide a response time of four minutes or less from the nearest fire station to all portions of the city as measured by the Fire Chief, except for residential neighborhoods which have Fire Department approved built-in protection. There would be a special planning effort by the Fire Department to provide a four to six minute response time for a first response for emergency medical service.
11.J.10 Fire Prevention Bureau - The City shall operate and adequately staff a Fire Prevention Bureau that will continue current efforts to reduce fire losses by proper code enforcement, public education, fire investigation, and fire prevention.
11 J.ll Hazardous Materials Division - The City shall maintain and adequately staff a Hazardous Materials Division to oversee hazardous material emergency management, and proper control of hazardous wastes to include source reduction and waste minimization.
11.J.12 Fire Staffing - The City shall strive to maintain an adequate number of personnel to accomplish an aggressive initial attack with at least three firefighters per first out fire engine for each station, and adequate reserve personnel to prevent major fire spread and/ or conflagration.
11.J.13 Emergency Medical Services - The City shall establish an acceptable level of service for emergency medical services and find the most cost-efficient, effective way of providing paramedic services to meet that level.
11.J.14 Disaster Readiness - The City shall identify and plan for disaster threat scenarios, such as earthquakes, flood, fire, or major hazardous materials release. The recommendations of the Hazard Mitigation Plan prepared as follow-up to the Loma Prieta Earthquake (October 17,1989) shall be implemented as discussed in the Public Safety chapter (12).
11.J.15 Joint Fire Protection Efforts - The City shall continue to investigate the value of joint fire protection efforts with neighboring fire districts in the Planning Area. A joint powers contract or consolidation effort could result in effective and improved fire protection in the Planning Area. The City shall actively pursue agreements with neighboring fire districts to perform joint fire protection efforts which offer measurable improvements to the City fire protection service with no substantial liabilities or extra costs.
11.J.16 Built-in Fire Protection - The Fire Department shall pursue methods of encouraging the installation of built-in fire protection such as automatic fire sprinkler systems and fire alarm systems. Local ordinances requiring built-in protection should be strengthened for defined residential and commercial hazards.
169
Watsonville 2005
Each policy for public facilities and services implements one or more of goals, presented below in the form of a matrix.
Public Facilities and Services Goals and Policies
		Policies 11A	11B	11C	11D	11E	11F	11G	11K	111	11J
Goals	11.1	
	11.2	•
	11.3	• • •
	11.4	•
	11.5	•
	11.6	•	I
	11.7	•
	11.8	•
170﻿12 PUBLIC SAFETY
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Watsonville 2005 addresses public safety and noise control through analysis of conditions and hazards that have the potential to cause loss of life, injury, property damage, economic loss, and social dislocation. For Watsonville, these constraints include seismic and other geologic hazards, flooding, urban and wildland fires, hazardous materials, aviation hazards, and harmful effects of noise. The city cannot be made hazard free, but the planning process can be used to minimize exposure to dangerous conditions. This is the concept of acceptable risk and it is an inherent part of the environmental planning process.
COMMUNITY CONCERNS
The safety concerns expressed by the community have already been noted in the Environmental Resource Management chapter (9) and the Public Facilities and Services chapter (11). They focus on the protection of people and physical environments from natural and built hazards by maintaining a high level of fire, police and other public services.
ACCEPTABLE RISK
Every community must decide what public safety standards are acceptable and the actions needed to maintain those standards. For planning purposes, an acceptable level of risk is one at which a hazard is deemed to be a tolerable exposure to danger, given the expected benefits to be gained. For some types of risk, e.g. noise and/or air pollution, numerical measures have been defined to identify the threshold of acceptable risk. In the case of seismic or flooding hazards, for example, specific locations are identified as unacceptable based on their distance from known faults or elevation.
Environmental impact review is frequently used to assist in the decision-making process. Each identifi-
able risk must be addressed with mitigation measures that eliminate or minimize potential hazards. The measures include limitation of use of locations which are prone to hazard, special construction techniques and site planning, programs to respond to hazardous conditions, and the restriction or elimination of specific operations.
GEOLOGIC HAZARDS
Watsonville lies between two major fault zones, the San Andreas to the north and east, and the San Gregorio, offshore to the west. Other active or potentially active fault zones that could affect Watsonville include the Zayante and Corralitos in the Pajaro Valley, and the Monterey Bay fault zone to the west. Figure 12-1 shows the regional location of these zones.
The U.S. Geological Service has estimated that the San Andreas fault could produce an earthquake of 8.5 magnitude on the Richter scale. In this event, the potential for surface rupture would be high. Other ground failures such as landslides and liquefaction are also possible depending on the intensity and duration of an earthquake. A large portion of Watsonville's urbanized area would be subjected to loss of soil strength resulting from liquefaction and settlement in the event of an earthquake with a magnitude similar to the 1906 San Francisco occurrence.
Liquefaction is a process by which water-saturated granular soils transform from a solid to a liquid state because of sudden shock or strain. Liquefaction is associated with saturated soils, having high sand and silt content. These soil conditions occur along broad bands which follow the creeks, sloughs, rivers and lakes that drain the Planning Area. Areas with soil subject to moderate or high potential for liquefaction are shown in Figure 12-2. Much of downtown Watsonville is in a zone of moderately high liquefaction potential. Site-specific investigations should be used to assess the potential for liquefaction-induced ground failure and identify possible mitigation measures.
171
Watsonville 2005
The Loma Prieta Earthquake
On October 17,1989, at 5:04 PM, a magnitude 7.1 earthquake on the Loma Prieta Fault rocked Watsonville and much of the San Francisco/ Monterey Bay area. The epicenter was five miles from the City and shook the City for approximately 22 seconds. The initial shock was followed by some 8000 aftershocks, eight of which measured five or more on the Richter scale. The earthquake caused $60 million in structural damages in Watsonville. Nineteen hundred structures sustained some level of damage, and 700 buildings were severely damaged. Twelve hundred persons were left homeless, 500 people were injured and there was one death.
Approximately 90 percent of the structural damage resulted from the failure of unreinforced masonry construction and wood frame construction not properly attached to a foundation. Significant earthquake damage was noted in the older portions of town where much pre-1940’s construction still existed and where soil is subject to liquefaction. Liquefaction and subsidence were identified as a major source of damage to streets, water systems, sewer systems, and other public infrastructure.
in 1986, the City had initiated a Multi-Functional Guidance Plan format for disaster planning and commenced significant staff training efforts. As a result, the City was able to respond well to the after-quake emergency. Since 1989, the City has made an assessment of its emergency response and developed the Hazard Mitigation Plan for the City of Watsonville to improve response capability for future emergencies.
The Hazard Mitigation Plan discusses in detail the successes and problems incurred during the Loma Prieta response. This document includes a work program of 26 items to mitigate problems before they occur and improve future emergency response. The City is in the process of implementing the findings of this report.
Failure of unreinforced masonry structures is another earthquake related concern in Watsonville. Unreinforced masonry structures are particularly susceptible to crumbling and failure during earthquakes. Prior to the Loma Prieta Earthquake, Watsonville was in the process of addressing the issue of unreinforced masonry structures in the city. The City proposes to develop a program in conformance with state law to identify and address the remaining suspected unreinforced masonry structures in the city.
Areas adjacent to the San Andreas fault possess high potential for landslides. The blockage of Hecker Pass Road, northeast of the city, in 1982 temporarily disrupted access to Watsonville. Appropriate land uses on unstable slopes include open space, agriculture or very low-density residential.
Seismic sea waves or tsunamis are large oceanic waves induced by sea floor faulting. A seiche is a similar wave but occurring inside a bay or harbor. Although the urbanized area of the Watsonville Planning Area would not be directly affected by these phenomena it is likely that persons living along the coast are at risk and would use San Andreas Road and Beach Road to seek temporary shelter in Watsonville.
FLOOD HAZARDS
Figure 12-3 shows the portion of the Planning Area prone to inundation by a 100-year flood, a flooding event that has a one percent probability of occurring in any given year. More detailed information on flood-prone areas is available in the form of Flood Insurance Rate Maps produced by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). These maps are available to the public and are used by the Public Works Department to determine the necessity for issuance of Flood Hazard Permits.
The Pajaro River and Corralitos Creek have a long history of flooding, as occurred in 1955 and 1975, and can be expected to flood again. In future flooding events, the extent of damage will depend upon the area inundated and the level of urbanization that exists in flood-prone areas. Under the Flood Insurance Program, new construction within the flood
172
KEY
Alquist-Priolo Special Study Zones
Other Zones of Potential Surface Rupture
Watsonville City Limits as of 1992 Planning Area Boundary
0	1.900	3,800
ScaJo in Fool
CITY OF WATSONVILLE
J

PLANNING DEPARTMENT
Seismic Surface Rupture Potential
Sourco: USGS Maps - Stale of California Spocial Studies Zones. 1976; and. Faults and their Potential Hazards in Santa Cruz County. 1974
Tht Qfaphtc is noi ntondod io bo used lot utt-spocifc dtasion making. Consult ifio City ot County lot dttulod in/otmaten.
Figure 12-1
Figure 12-2
Figure 12-3
PUBLIC SAFETY, Chapter 12
plain must be elevated above the 100-year flood level or flood proofed and will be at an acceptable level of risk.
Watsonville participates in the Pajaro Valley Task Force, a group comprised of representatives of public agencies and private interests, to address drainage concerns in the Pajaro Valley drainage basin. In October of 1991, this group recommended the establishment of Santa Cruz County Flood Control and Water Conservation District Zone 7, which is proposed to encompass the Pajaro River Valley Drainage Basin. In late 1991, both Watsonville and Santa Cruz County established Zone 7. Monterey County had not agreed to its establishment.
Since the formation of Zone 7, assistance from the Army Corps of Engineers has been requested to prepare a study to determine improvements that could be made throughout the Pajaro Valley Drainage Basin to improve flood capacity. In. the Watsonville area, this study may make recommendations relative to the Corralitos and Salsipuedes Creeks and the Pajaro River. In addition, the City and County are currently working with the Department of Fish and Game to allow some clearing of vegetation, which could improve the carrying capacity of these channels by an additional three-year storm capacity. (Storm events, similar to flooding events, are described by the frequency a given magnitude storm event will occur on the average. A three-year storm is a storm that has an intensity that, on average, will occur only once every three years.)
Without major improvements, some flooding is inevitable. The existing channel and levee system along the Pajaro River has approximately a 20-year storm capacity. The Corralitos and Salsipuedes Creeks have five- and seven-year storm capacities respectively. The Monterey County North County Area Plan (1984) has designated the entire course of the Pajaro River from San Benito County to Monterey Bay as a flood-prone area (100-year floodplain).
When streets, buildings, and parking lots cover the natural ground surface, adequate storm drainage facilities must be substituted for the soil's ability to absorb rainfall. In Watsonville, the natural drainage pattern has been supplemented by a system of structures which is described in the 1980 Storm Drainage
Master Plan. There are five separate drainage zones within the Planning Area:
•	Watsonville Slough
•	Struve Slough
•	West Branch Struve Slough
•	Downtown
•	Salsipuedes Creek.
New development is required to provide adequate mitigation measures to accommodate storm water run-off.
Willow trees and underbrush are cleared from the channel bottom of the Salsipuedes Creek, which flows into the Pajaro River. The work is designed to improve creek and river flow and to help control flooding of the Pajaro River during winter storms.
179
Watsonville 2005
The Watsonville Zoning Ordinance provides for a Flood Protection Zoning District (EM-F). It serves as an overlay district to regulate the uses of land in areas subject to flood inundation.
FIRE HAZARDS
For land use planning purposes, fires are classified in two categories: (1) wildland fires that occur in undeveloped areas; and (2) urban fires that involve structures and vehicles. Both types pose a threat to life and property in the Watsonville Planning Area.
Residential fire potential is high in certain areas of the city due to the age of the housing stock (approximately 3,000 units are over 40 years old), overcrowding (2,500 units were classified as overcrowded by the 1990 Census), and substandard building conditions. Based on the 1992 Citywide Housing Survey, 1,167 housing units in the city were found to be in need of some level of repair. Of these, only two units were considered dilapidated and eight units were in need of substantial repair. The remainder required minor or moderate repair. In addition, access to units located in certain areas is poor due to narrow alleys and limited on-site parking.
As a major food processing center, Watsonville has a highly concentrated aggregation of cold storage plants, freezing plants, canneries, and packing plants. The large buildings, intense use of plant equipment, chemicals and methods of production pose a potential fire safety problem. However, important fire prevention precautions have been taken to achieve an acceptable level of risk, including: extensive use of sprinkler systems, fire detectors linked to an approved central receiving station, frequent inspections, and improved access.
Wildland fires occasionally break out in the grasslands and on the dry, chaparral-covered hills. They are normally contained long before they pose a threat to the urbanized area. The California Division of Forestry has primary responsibility for fire suppression in watershed areas; but under provisions of mutual aid agreements, the City will provide reciprocal aid to other jurisdictions in time of emergency. The Freedom, Salsipuedes and County fire depart-
ments each have district boundaries and primary response within portions of the Planning Area.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Hazardous materials include substances which are corrosive, poisonous, radioactive, flammable or explosive. Watsonville has taken action to identify and address safety issues associated with the use, storage, and transport of hazardous materials in the city. Emergency preparedness planning has been undertaken by the Watsonville Fire Department to address the issue of hazardous materials. In response to the Tanner bill, the City has adopted its own hazardous material management plan.
ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELDS
Considerable debate has occurred over the past 10 years regarding the health impacts associated with the electromagnetic fields surrounding power lines and electrical appliances. While some linkage between exposure to electromagnetic fields and health problems, such as cancer, has been demonstrated,1 it should be noted that safe levels of exposure have not yet been determined by experts. As a result, no standards for the regulation of exposure have been developed. The City of Watsonville will continue to monitor this issue and require it to be addressed for projects in close proximity to power transmission lines as a part of the environmental review process.
AIRPORT HAZARDS
The Watsonville Airport is considered a reliever airport for general aviation from the San Francisco Bay area. Approximately 350 aircraft are located at the airport. By the year 2005, the number of aircraft based in Watsonville could increase consistent with the Airport Master Plan. There are 330 average daily
1. Various studies referred to in the Environmental Impact Report for the Silicon Diversified Residential Development and the “Evaluation of Potential Health Risks Due to Powerline Electric and Magnetic Fields for the Buena Vista Estates Environmental Impact Report,” prepared by Andrew A. Marino, Ph.D., June II, 1991.
180
PUBLIC SAFETY, Chapter 12
aircraft operations (landings and takeoffs) from the Watsonville Airport.
The Watsonville Airport has a good safety recond. Between 1973 and 1992, over one million operations have occurred at the airport with only 14 aircraft accidents (one death and four off-airport incidents). None of the recorded accidents involved a serious injury to a civilian or resident not involved with flying the aircraft.
Safety issues regarding compatibility between airport operations and the surrounding environment include noise impacts, ground safety, and flight hazards. The Airport Master Plan focuses on airport safety and noise abatement for future airport operations. An Airport Safety Committee meets regularly to address safety and noise issues. The City will work to aggressively manage airport noise and airport safety issues in the future.
The primary means of reducing the population's exposure to noise and accident risks is controlling land use density and limiting high occupancy structures such as schools, hotels, and hospitals.
An update of the Airport Master Plan began in 1991. Subsequent updates will be undertaken at least every five years to ensure that the airport's development is carried out in a manner that maintains an acceptable level of risk for the airport and the surrounding areas.
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
The policies for environmental constraint management and public safety have been developed in an effort to protect lives and property by preventive measures. Watsonville also recognizes the need to remain prepared should disaster strike. The City has prepared a state-approved Emergency Preparedness Plan and has identified evacuation routes for the relocation of residents from any part of the Planning Area experiencing hazardous conditions. As illustrated in Figure 12-5, routes have been selected to move the population toward any point of the compass depending on the nature of the emergency.
In addition, the Hazard Mitigation Plan, developed after the Loma Prieta Earthquake, identifies several
emergency preparedness improvements that are of benefit in emergencies other than earthquakes. The implementation of the recommendations in that Plan will improve the city's overall emergency response capability.
The City has developed and adopted a Community-based Disaster Response Plan, which describes a method of organizing the efforts of the entire community around disasters. This plan includes coordinating the efforts of governmental agencies as well as schools, hospitals, businesses, non-profit agencies, and other community groups and addresses shortterm and long-term recovery needs.
NOISE
Noise generated from existing and proposed transportation sources has been identified as the predominant source of noise in Watsonville. Noise contours can be used as a guide to establish a land use pattern that minimizes the exposure of residents of the community to excessive levels of noise. The maximum exterior sound level acceptable in residential and noise-sensitive areas (e.g., parks, churches, schools, etc.) is 60 dBA. If a noise-sensitive development is projected to lie within the 60 dBA contour, measures can be taken to minimize noise impacts, such as providing for adequate setback of developments from roadways or the incorporation of special designs into the proposed roadway or development site. The maximum allowable interior noise level is 45 dBA.
The noise environment has a significant impact upon a city's overall quality of life. Noise is generally defined as "unwanted sound," and the standard unit or measurement is the decibel, abbreviated dBA (see Figure 12-4). Sound levels measured in dBA are calculated on a logarithmic basis similar to the scale used to measure earthquakes. Therefore, an increase of 10 dBA represents a 10-fold increase in the sound energy being released.
The decibel scale exhibits the following characteristics:
• A 10-dBA increase in an existing sound level approximately doubles the perceived loudness of the sound.
181
Watsonville 2005
Figure 12-4 Acoustical Scale
HUMAN RESPONSE

		
		
—	Intrusive	
—		
—		
	Quiet	
—	Threshold of Hearing	
Source: August 1989 Draft Watsonville 2005
OUTDOOR
INDOOR
sonic boom siren at 50'	
jet take-off at 200'	
	rock band at 30'
motorcycle at 20'	
power mower	
freight train at 50'	
overhead plane at 1,000'	food blender at 3'
freeway traffic at 50'	alarm clock
average traffic at 100'	vacuum cleaner
	electric typewriter at 10'
	normal conversation
light traffic at 100'	refrigerator at 3'
	whispering at 15'
leaves rustling at 10'	
•	For each doubling of distance away from a line source of noise, such as a road, noise levels are reduced by 3 to 5 dBA. Doubling the distance away from a point source reduces the noise level by 6 dBA.
•	The addition of two equivalent noise sources will equal a new value 3 dBA higher than the original sounds. If one sound is greater than 10 dBA higher than an adjacent sound, the lesser sound will not contribute to the resulting sound level.
•	According to the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and various noise studies, the effects of noise on people include the following:
•	Noise levels above 40-50 dBA can disturb a sleeping person.
•	Speech interference begins to occur at 45-50 dBA, becoming severe at 60 dBA and above.
•	Work performance can be affected at noise levels of 65 dBA and above.
182
KEY
----------- 60 Decibel Ldn Sound
Level
PLANNING DEPARTMENT
Existing Noise Contours: 1988 Transportation Sources
Source: Barton-Aschman / Ergo Engineering. 1989
Thit graphs is not niondod lo bo usod tot siio-spodhc doasion mtking. Const* tho City of County tot dotvlod intotmoion
Figure 12-7
PUBLIC SAFETY, Chapter 12
• Damage to the human ear can occur at about 70 dBA, and sounds above 70 dBA can cause physical stress, such as muscular tension, increased heartbeat, and adrenaline flow.
Measuring the effects of noise is subjective at best, since individuals have different perceptions about noise effects. The State Department of Health Services has developed average levels of sound acceptability which define noise exposure levels for varying land uses (see Figure 12-6).
The level of noise within a community is typically represented on noise contour maps. Noise contours are lines drawn about a noise source indicating constant or average dBA levels of sound during a 24-hour period exposure, as measured by the Ldn level. The noise contour for 60 dBA sound levels was used as the critical value in this analysis.
The 60 dBA sound level is consistent with the state exterior noise level standard of 60 dBA or less. Inherent in the 60 dBA exterior-noise standard is a recommended maximum interior noise standard of 45 dBA. Using normal construction techniques, it is assumed that typical building reduces outdoor noise levels by 10 to 15 dBA with open windows, and 20 to 24 dBA with closed windows. Where exterior sound levels are greater than 60 dBA, an acoustical analysis for projects may be required to ensure that the indoor standards can be achieved.
The Federal Highway Administration (FWHA) has developed a method for predicting noise generated by constant-speed traffic. This method predicts the energy of a reference noise level and adjusts it for grade, traffic flow, vehicle classification, and shielding. By using the peak-hour volumes for daily traffic, an estimate of noise level can be determined at a given distance from a source. The model was adjusted to also calculate the distance for a given level of sound. Using the standard noise level of 60 dBA, the distance that this sound level occurs can be calculated and the corresponding noise contours developed.
DEVELOPING NOISE CONTOURS
Traffic counts provided by Caltrans and the Santa Cruz County Transportation Commission were used for estimating noise levels on the highway and arterial system. The locations of the 60 dBA, 65 dBA, and 70 dBA noise contours from the road centerline were developed for each roadway link. The transportation model of the 1988-2005 Master Street Plan provided the future traffic volumes used to determine the future noise contours.
Noise contours for the airport operations were developed in the Watsonville Airport Master Plan in May, 1985. These contours were based on yearly runway operations, ranging from 215,000 to 230,000 per year. TTie Airport Master Plan is being updated during 1991 and 1992, and noise contours for the Airport will be updated as necessary based on information provided in the Plan.
Railroad noise is concentrated primarily in the industrial triangle formed by Route 1, Harkins Slough Road, and Beach Street. In general, rail operations are limited, and therefore have little impact on daily level of noise in the city. Although sound levels generated by train passbys have been measured at 86 dBA at 50 feet, and whistle blasts may be as high at 98 dBA, these sound levels are of very short duration and occur infrequently. The existing daily frequency of freight operations is not expected to generate sound levels in excess of desirable standards. A noise analysis should be considered if and when additional freight or passenger rail operations are contemplated, particularly if operation is proposed during the evening hours.
The highway and airport noise contours were combined for the development of the noise contour maps. The worst case between the two LOS networks was used to identify the future noise level contours. It was found that the difference between the C and D networks was very minor. The existing and future noise contours arc presented in Figure 12-7 and Figure 12-8.
Transportation noise effects are concentrated along the highways with the greatest volume of traffic and highest speeds. The largest noise areas that exist presently and will exist in the future are in the
185
Watsonville 2005
Figure 12-6 Land Use Compatibility for Community Noise Environments
COMMUNITY NOISE
INTERPRETATION
LAND USE CATEGORY
. NORMALLY I—-1 ACCEPTABLE
Transient Lodging Motel, Hotel
Residential - Single Family Duplex, Mobile Home
Residential - Multi-Family
School, Library, Church, Hospital, Nursing Home
Auditorium, Concert Hall, Amphitheatre
Sports Arena, Outdoor Spectator Sports
Playground, Neighborhood Park
Golf Course, Stable, Water Recreation, Cemetery
Office Building, Business, Commercial & Professional
Industrial, Manufacturing, Utilities, Agriculture
Ldn orCNEL, dB
55 60 65 70 75 80
Specified land use is satisfactory, based upon the assumption that any buildings involved are of normal conventional construction, without any special noise insulation requirements.
CONDITIONALLY
ACCEPTABLE
New construction or development should be undertaken only after a detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements is made and needed noise insulation features included in the design. Conventional construction, but with closed windows and fresh air supply systems or air conditioning will normally suffice.
S3 NORMALLY UNACCEPTABLE
New construction or development should generally be discouraged. If new construction or development does proceed, a detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements must be made and needed noise insulation features included in the design.
CLEARLY UNACCEPTABLE
New construction or development should generally not be undertaken
Noise Source Characteristics
The land use - noise compatibility recommendations should be viewed in relation to the specific source of the noise. For example, aircraft and railroad noise is normally made up of higher single noise events than auto traffic, but occurs less frequently. Therefore, different sources yielding the same composite noise exposure do not necessarily create the same noise environment.
Suitable Interior Environments
One objective of locating [both single and multi-family] residential units relative to a known noise source is to maintain a suitable interior noise environment at no greater than 45 dB CNEL or Ldn.
This requirement, coupled with the measured or calculated noise reduction performance of the type of structure under consideration, should govern the minimum acceptable distance to a noise source.
186
KEY
_____________ 60 Decibel Ldn Sound
Level
PLANNING DEPARTMENT
Future Noise
Contours: 2005 Transportation Sources
Source: Barton-Aschman / Ergo Enginooring. 1989
Tht pap/vc is not ntandod io bo usod lor sitospoofic dodsion makmQ. Consult tho City or County lor detailed inlormabon.
Figure 12-8
PUBLIC SAFETY, Chapter 12
vicinity of the airport and along Highway 1. A large portion of the city is shielded from Highway 1 noise by the natural contours in the area. However, where direct line of sight to Highway 1 is possible, the 60 dBA contour reaches out in excess of 1,000 feet.
Another area of significant noise impacts occurs along Route 129. The noise intrusion band along Route 129 is nearly 600 feet wide on both sides of the highway. This is primarily because of the high speed of the facility and the flat terrain.
The major difference between the existing and future noise conditions is the growth of noise sensitive areas (60 dBA and higher) along the peripheral roads of the city, such as Martinelli and Bridge-Wagner Streets. New streets, such as Errington Road, will introduce a new noise source in the areas they traverse.
The use of landscaped earth berms and sound walls can be used along new and existing corridors to mitigate potential noise increases. For example, the use of earth berms on Highway 1 substantially reduces the area of noise impact. In the residential areas in the north side of the city, it may be useful to lower the travel speeds of the peripheral routes in order to reduce anticipated sound levels. A plus or minus of 3 dBA change in the level of sound can occur by doubling or halving the traffic volume, or by a changing the speed by ±7 miles per hour.
The primary purpose for establishing the noise contour maps is to provide the City of Watsonville with a means to plan for the compatibility of projected land uses with the expected noise environment. If, during the project review process, a proposed noise-sensitive development is found to lie within the 60 dBA contour, measures can be taken to minimize noise impacts, such as providing for an adequate setback of the development from the roadway. A special noise analysis may be required for the project to ensure that the structure will be designed to achieve the interior noise level standard of 45 dBA.
GOALS FOR PUBLIC SAFETY
The goals for this element address state mandates for Safety and Noise. They also reflect community concerns for emergency preparedness and personal safety.
Goal 12.1 Land Use Safety
Plan for and regulate the uses of land in order to provide a pattern of urban development which will minimize exposure to hazards from either natural or human-related causes.
Goal 12.2 Seismic and Other Geologic Hazards
Reduce the potential for loss of life, injury, and economic damage resulting from earthquakes and associated geologic hazards such as landslides and liquefaction.
Goal 12.3 Flood Hazard Reduction
Reduce the potential for loss of life and property damage in areas known to be flood prone.
Goal 12.4 Fire Safety/Protection
Ensure that all existing structures in the city are maintained at adequate levels of fire suppression standards, that new structures conform to current fire safety standards, and that coordination is maintained between urban and rural fire districts for the prevention and suppression of structural and wildland fires.
Goal 12.5 Hazardous Materials
Reduce the potential danger related to the use, storage, transport, and disposal of hazardous materials to an acceptable level of risk for city residents.
Goal 12.6 Personal Safety
Ensure that community standards for personal safety are enforced.
Goal 12.7 Emergency Preparedness
Anticipate the potential for disasters; maintain continuity of life-support functions during an emeigency; and maximize efforts for post-emergency recovery.
191
Watsonville 2005
Goal 12.8 Noise Hazard Control
Evaluate new and existing land uses in the city for compatibility related to noise effects and require, as appropriate, mitigation where harmful effects can be identified and measurable improvement will result.
toward reduction of risks to life and property. It is recognized that good planning and management can reduce risk potential, but the city cannot be made risk free. For additional policies and implementation measures on public safety, see the Public Facilities and Services chapter (11).
Policy 12.A Environmental and Public Safety
The City shall plan for and maintain development standards that minimize risks to human lives and property resulting from environmental and man-caused hazards.
The City shall protect neighboring residential development from the immediate threats of potentially hazardous industrial or agricultural materials and airport hazards through careful land use planning. Implementation Measures
12.A.1 Airport Compatibility - The City shall use its development review process to ensure that proposals within the Airport Operations Impact Area are carefully analyzed to prevent and minimize potential hazards. Projects shall be consistent with the city's and state's guidelines for buildings and land uses compatible with airports.
12.A.2 Airport Operation Buffer - Those areas
within the safety sensitive airport operations buffer area shall be maintained in open space which serves agricultural, recreational, alternative transportation, and/or environmental protection needs.
12.A3 Industrial Buffer Zones - The City shall
require new industrial projects to provide a clear zone between industrial structures and adjacent residential land use.
12.A.4 Notification - In addition to establishing agricultural buffer areas, the City shall encourage notification of residents of abutting residential property when applications of insecticides or other dangerous substances are scheduled.
12.A.5 Risk Reduction - The City shall identify,
avoid, and/or minimize natural and human-caused hazards in the development of property and the regulation of land use.
12.A.6 Electromagnetic Fields - The City shall continue to pursue the evaluation of the impact of electromagnetic fields associated with power transmission lines as a part of the project environmental review process.
Policy 12.B Seismic Hazards
The City shall use the development review process to ensure that potential geologic hazards are evaluated and mitigated prior to construction.
Implementation Measures
12.B.1 Geologic Review - The City may require a geotechnical report prepared by a registered professional prior to the issuance of a building permit.
12.B.2 Structural Design - The City shall place
structural design conditions on new development to ensure that recommendations of the geotechnical evaluation are implemented.
12.B.3 Setbacks - The City shall require that all
structures be located a minimum of 50 feet from any active or potentially active fault trace.
12.B.4 Essential Facilities Integrity - The City shall evaluate the ability of essential public facilities to maintain structural integrity as defined by the state in the event of a strong
192
PUBLIC SAFETY, Chapter 12
earthquake. Those facilities unable to maintain structural integrity shall be modified in order to bring them into conformance. Emergency guidelines shall be developed in those buildings where structural modification is not feasible.
12.B.5 Safety Conditions - The City shall require the application of seismic safety use conditions for development in the Seismic Safety District (EM-SS) as described in the Zoning Code.
12.B.6 Unreinforced Buildings - The City shall
establish a program to evaluate, and mitigate where possible, potentially hazardous buildings constructed prior to the adoption of building codes for earthquake resistant design. The focus of this evaluation shall be buildings constructed of unreinforced masonry walls.
12.B.7 Seismic Hazard Mapping - The City shall
update current seismic hazard zone maps as new information becomes available and use those maps in the development and application of an environmental constraint matrix to evaluate proposed building sites.
12.B.8 Public Information - The City shall participate with other appropriate agencies to provide the public with information on what actions to take before, during, and after an earthquake.
Policy 12.C Soil Constraints
The City shall take all appropriate actions to ensure that current land use activities and new developments are mitigated to prevent soil failure and other soil-related dangers.
Implementation Measures
12.C.1 Risk Mitigation - The City shall identify and mitigate to an acceptable level of risk new development proposed in areas with geologic, seismic, flood, or other environmental constraints.
12.C.2 Soils Investigation - The City shall require a soils investigation report prior to new development on sites deemed to have a high potential for soil erosion, landslide, or other soil-related constraints.
12.C3 Foundation Design - The City shall require that new development provide for appropriate foundation design to comply with city building standards and recommendations of the soils investigation.
12.C.4 Slope - The City shall not permit new development on soils that are subject to landslide.
12.C.5 Final Soil Grade - The City shall require that soil grading blend with natural topography and that final cut slopes shall be no steeper than three horizontal to one vertical (33 percent).
Policy 12.D Flood Hazard Reduction
The City shall pursue the protection of new and existing development from the impacts of flooding up to the 100-year event.
Implementation Measures
12.D.1 Flood Protection - The City shall require new development to conform to the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance and the guidelines of the National Flood Insurance Program.
12.D.2 Storm Water Retention - The City shall condition new development to provide for onsite retention and percolation of storm water run-off.
12.D.3 Storm Drains - New development shall be required to pay for or extend all necessary storm drains to serve the project site.
12.D.4 Storm Water Collection - The City shall require street design to include curbs and gutters that collect and direct storm water run-off to drainage facilities.
12.D.5 Flood Mitigation - The City shall pursue planning and financial support for the
193
Watsonville 2005
improvement of flood conditions along the Corralitos and Salsipuedes Creeks, the Pajaro River, and other areas of the drainage basin impacting Watsonville as recommended by the Santa Cruz County Flood Control and Water Conservation District Zone 7.
Policy 12.E Hazardous Materials Control
The City shall strictly enforce ordinances and regulations for the use, storage, transport, and disposal of hazardous materials.
Implementation Measures
12.E.1 Inspections - The City shall conduct periodic safety inspections of industrial and commercial facilities that use and store hazardous materials and dangerous chemicals.
12.E.2 Training - The City shall conduct periodic training exercises for the identification, containment, decontamination, and disposal of hazardous materials.
12.E3 Planning - The City shall conduct periodic review and update of all Hazardous Materials Management Plans, as well as the city’s Area Plan, for responding to and controlling hazardous materials emergencies.
12.E.4 Education - The City shall conduct public
education programs on the safe use, storage, and disposal of hazardous materials.
12.E.5 Collection and Disposal - The City shall follow state and federal regulations to ensure that hazardous wastes are collected, and disposed of, in a manner that prevents contamination to air, soil, or water. Special effort shall be made to develop a Hazardous Waste Disposal Program for low-level users (i.e., households, small business).
12.E.6 Identification of Potentially Hazardous New Businesses - The City shall use the development processing and business license process to identify potential hazardous uses and to require preventative programs including, but not limited to, the development of neigh-
borhood, area evacuation plans, and hazardous material handling and disposal plans.
Policy 12.F Fire Safety Standards
The City shall use development approval authority, code enforcement, and periodic inspections to ensure that fire prevention standards are maintained. Implementation Measures
12.E1 Access - The City shall require that new driveways and roadways meet minimum standards of the Uniform Fire Code or subsequent standards established by city ordinance.
12.F.2 Cul-de-Sacs - New cul-de-sac streets shall have a minimum 32-foot turning radius.
12.F.3 Private Access Roads - All private access roads shall be maintained by a responsible party to ensure safe and expedient passage to the Fire Department at any time. All locking devices shall be subject to approval of the Fire Department.
12.F.4 Road Construction - Roadways shall be "all-weather" type, as defined by city standards.
12.F.5 Width and Vertical Clearance - All roadways shall maintain city standards for minimum width and vertical clearance.
12.F.6 Alleys - Existing alleyways shall be
upgraded to city standards for emergency access, street addressing, and available water supply.
12.F.7 Emergency Access - On dead end streets longer than allowed by city development standards, secondary emergency access shall be required for use by emergency vehicles or approved built-in fire protection provided.
12.F.8 Fire Flow - New development shall be conditioned to provide adequate water for fire suppression in accordance with city standards for minimum volume and duration of flow.
194
PUBLIC SAFETY, Chapter 12
12.F.9 Open Area - Property owners shall be
responsible for maintaining vacant sites free of trash, weeds, or other fire safety hazards.
12.F.10 Building Safety - Property owners shall be responsible for maintaining their structures at a reasonable degree of fire and life safety as identified by the uniform fire, building, mechanical, electrical and other such adopted codes and city ordinances.
12.F.11 Built-In Fire Protection - The City shall continue to promote the installation of built-in fire extinguishing systems and early warning fire alarm systems. The City acknowledges the fact that built-in fire protection is a better substitute than expanding public fire protection services.
12.F.12 Street Name and Numbering - The City shall ensure that new developments within the city do not duplicate areawide street names and that address numbering follows a logical progression.
12.F.13 Fire Cause Investigation - The Fire Department shall determine the cause of all fires responded to and support law enforcement agencies in their investigation of deliberately set fires.
Policy 12.G Fire Safety Education
The City shall use Fire Department personnel to perform effective fire safety and prevention programs. Implementation Measures
12.G.1 Public Schools - The City shall provide fire safety and prevention programs for the Pajaro Valley Unified School District.
12.G.2 Institutions - The City shall provide classes in fire safety for high occupancy institutional land uses, and commercial and industrial occupancies.
12.G.3 Community Groups - The City shall provide presentations on fire safety to community groups and forums.
12.G.4 Child Fire Setters - The City shall provide
counseling services under the Child Fire Setter Counseling Program.
Policy 12.H Fire Suppression Planning
The City shall maintain a level of fire protection for the community that emphasizes an aggressive initial attack to stop fires in early stages as well as to have adequate staff and equipment (including mutual aid) to prevent a conflagration.
Implementation Measures
12.H.1 Level of Service - The City shall strive to provide properly staffed and equipped fire stations to provide a response time of four minutes from the nearest fire station to all portions of the city as measured by the Fire Chief, except for the following: residential neighborhoods having no special fire hazard or special populations having a medical related problem, i.e. convalescent homes and senior housing, which may install an approved fire sprinkler system to substitute for the fire station location in the area between four and seven minute response time.
12.H.2 Action Priorities - When multiple emergency requests for service occur, the Fire Department shall take action by the following ranked priorities.
a.	Control of the most life-threatening fire or hazardous materials incident.
b.	Rescue and treatment of victims facing life-threatening injury.
c.	Control over non-life threatening emergency incidents.
d.	Support for other city and county departments to perform their emergency responsibilities.
12.H.3 Future Mutual Benefit Fire Stations - The
City shall work toward agreements with the Freedom, Salsipuedes and Santa Cruz County Fire Districts to augment fire station
195
Watsonville 2005
locations as the Planning Area population increases.
12.H.4 Mutual Aid - The City shall continue to fulfill legal obligations and support mutual aid efforts to coordinate fire suppression within Santa Cruz County and the State of California to prevent and suppress major wildland and urban fire destruction.
12.H.5 Fire Apparatus - The City shall maintain apparatus and equipment necessary to accomplish an aggressive and effective initial attack, as well as to prevent a potential conflagration.
12.H.6 Financing - New development shall be
required to contribute a proportional share of the cost of constructing and equipping additional fire stations.
12.H.7 Personnel Preparedness - The City promotes clearly identified job standards and structured, well-planned training for all personnel involved with public fire protection. All suppression personnel shall be supplied with proper safety equipment to safely and effectively deal with fire and hazardous materials emergencies. The City promotes actions that develop a healthy and physically fit work force.
12.H.8 Fire Pre-planning - The Fire Department
shall continually evaluate taiget fire hazards and pre-plan for major emergencies.
12.H.9 Planning Area Fire Protection - The City
shall promote the concepts of fire prevention and suppression adopted in the City's General Plan in the Planning Area located outside the City limit boundaries.
Policy 12.1 Crime Prevention
The City shall provide sufficient funding, adequate personnel levels, and necessary equipment to maintain civil order and prevent crime.
Implementation Measures
12.1.1	Neighborhood Support - The Police Department shall promote neighborhood crime prevention efforts and encourage area residents to report unusual behavior or circumstances.
12.1.2	Project Security Review - The City shall refer new development projects to the Police Department for a security review. This review shall include, but not be limited to:
a.	The provision of adequate lighting for personal security.
b.	The provision of adequate locking devices for windows and doors.
c.	The location of walkways and access points.
12.13 Children, Youth, and Families - The City recognizes that the best way to ensure the safety of children, youth, and families is through prevention and early intervention programs. Therefore, the City will work to prevent and correct unsafe situations to the extent possible.
Policy 12.J Emergency Medical Care
The City shall strive to maintain field emergency medical services consistent with population growth in the Planning Area.
Implementation Measures
12.J.1 Service - The Fire Department shall continue to provide basic life support emergency medical services when not otherwise occupied with fire or hazardous materials problems.
12.J.2 Paramedic - The Fire Department shall support continuation of advanced life support services in the city, and shall attempt to provide this service should private service no longer be feasible or available.
196
Figure 12-5
PUBLIC SAFETY, Chapter 12
Policy 12.K Rescue Services
The City shall strive to maintain emergency rescue services consistent with population growth in the city.
Implementation Measures
12.K.1 Light Rescue - The Fine Department shall maintain adequate equipment and hand tools for the extraction of victims from vehicles, aircraft, buildings, and for other emergency rescue circumstances.
12.K.2 Heavy Rescue Management - The Fire
Department shall manage heavy duty rescue situations in which special equipment and methods are required. Special equipment in these circumstances may be obtained from other city departments or the private sector.
Policy 12.L Emergency Preparedness
The City shall be prepared to maintain critical public services during emergency situations. Implementation Measures
12.L.1 Training - All City departments shall conduct the appropriate level of training activities to ensure preparedness before an emergency situation, continuity of services during an emergency situation, and recovery operations after the event.
12.L.2 Critical Facilities - The City shall evaluate the ability of critical facilities to survive and continue to operate during emergency conditions, and identify alternate facilities and operating plans for post-emergency recovery.
12.L.3 Planning - The City shall annually update the Emergency Preparedness Plan and coordinate planning efforts with the local community and the Santa Cruz County Office of Emeigcncy Services.
12.L.4 Evacuation - The City shall designate evacuation routes for the Planning Area, according
to the planning format outlined in the Emergency Preparedness Plan.
12.L.5 Hazard Mitigation Plan - The City of
Watsonville shall actively pursue the implementation of the recommendations included in the Hazard Mitigation Plan for the City of Watsonville that was developed after the 1989 Loma Prieta Earthquake, including preparation of the Community-based Disaster Response Plan.
Policy 12.M Noise
The City shall utilize land use regulations and enforcement to ensure that noise levels in developed areas are kept at acceptable levels, and that future noise-sensitive land uses are protected from noise that is harmful.
Implementation Measures
12.M.1 Traffic Noise - The City shall enforce provisions of the California Vehicle Code and local ordinances to reduce vehicular noise intrusion in residential areas and near other noise sensitive land uses such as schools and hospitals.
12.M.2 Truck Routes - The City shall continue
efforts to designate truck routes that bypass residential areas and other noise sensitive areas.
12.M.3 Equipment Maintenance - The City shall
maintain all vehicles and mechanical equipment in peak operating condition and correctly fitted with noise control devices.
12.M.4 Soundproofing - The City shall use the
development review process and provisions of the Uniform Building Code to ensure adequate levels of soundproofing in all new construction.
12.M.5 Noise Ordinance - The City shall prepare, adopt and enforce a comprehensive noise control ordinance.
12.M.6 Site Planning - The City shall evaluate site orientation and building design to decrease
197
Watsonville 2005
the potential for noise intrusion, using the noise contour map and compatibility guidelines.
12.M.7 Aircraft Noise - The City shall periodically review and update noise contour measurements as aircraft operations increase or change in nature. Recommendations for noise attenuation contained in the Watsonville Airport Master Plan shall be implemented on a project-by-project basis.
The policies for environmental constraint management and public safety serve to implement long-term goals. The association between goals and policies is shown below in the form of a matrix.
Public Safety Goals and Policies
		Policies 12A	12B	12C	12D	12E	12F	12G	12H	121	12J	12K	12L	12M
Goals	12.1	• • • • • •
	12.2	• •
	12.3	•
	12.4	• • •
	12.5	•
	12.6	• • •
	12.7	•
	12.8	•
198
APPENDIX A
PLANNING AREA BOUNDARY
The boundary of the Watsonville Planning Area is defined by twelve segments forming a perimeter of 24.5 miles. Figure 1-1 shows these twelve segments. A description of each boundary segment and the characteristics of current land use adjacent to those segments follows. Segments defined by roads include the full width of the right-of-way.
1.	Casserly/Carlton Roads
The northeast boundary runs from the intersection of Green Valley Road and Casserly Road, east approximately 1.5 miles to the intersection with Mount Madonna Road then generally south and east for 4 miles along Casserly and Carlton Roads, to Coward Road. The rural setting has a wide variation in crop types. Greenhouses for flowers and ornamentals are spaced between strawberry fields, apple orchards and pasture. College, Kelly, Drew, and Tynan Lakes are located to the southwest but they are not visible from the roadways. The setting is agricultural but not isolated. Many homes on large suburban lots dot the landscape and the Salsipuedes School forms a prominent landmark on Casserly Road. The entrance to the Santa Cruz County Fairgrounds, a regionally significant recreational and cultural event facility, is located one-half mile southwest of the intersection of Casserly Road, Carlton Road, and East Lake Avenue (Highway 152).
2.	Coward Road
The boundary continues along Coward Road for 1.6 miles from Carlton Road to Riverside Road (Hwy 129).
Along this segment the character of agriculture changes. Relative to Segment 1, the fields are larger and fewer homes are visible. Production is a mixture of berries, orchards, strawberries, and greenhouse crops.
3.	Riverside Road
From the intersection of Coward Road and Riverside, the boundary traverses west for 1.1 miles
to a point directly opposite Lewis Road in Monterey County (Pajaro). The Salsipuedes Creek levee is visible to the right and the Pajaro River levee is visible to the left with row crops flanking both sides of Riverside Road.
4.	Lewis Road
From Riverside Road, the Planning Area boundary continues south along Lewis Road for a distance of 8,000 feet (1.52 miles). This area is dominated by large holdings of row crops. The small community of Pajaro sits astride San Juan and Salinas Roads with the Watsonville Junction (Southern Pacific) railroad switching yards to the south.
5.	Pajaro Crossing
The boundary runs from Lewis Road, west on a line for 2.18 miles to the Highway One/Pajaro River crossing (county boundary). This area is best viewed from Trafton Road. The land here is flat with a mixture of lettuce fields and strawberries. The Watsonville skyline is obscured by the Pajaro River levee and riparian woodlands.
6.	Pajaro River
From the center of the Pajaro River bridge on Highway 1, the boundary follows the river west for 1.4 miles to a point directly opposite the intersection of Beach Road and San Andreas Road. This segment includes the Watsonville wastewater treatment plant which is surrounded by fields of lettuce and other row crops. The intersection of Lee Road and Beach Road is surrounded by a mixture of durable goods and food-processing plants. Widely separated farm houses and agricultural equipment storage buildings dot the landscape. The Santa Cruz Mountains form a scenic backdrop to the east.
7.	San Andreas Road
From the Pajaro River, the boundary continues north for 3.7 miles along San Andreas Road to the intersection with Buena Vista Road. From
199
APPENDIX A
PLANNING AREA BOUNDARY
The boundary of the Watsonville Planning Area is defined by twelve segments forming a perimeter of 24.5 miles. Figure 1-1 shows these twelve segments. A description of each boundary segment and the characteristics of current land use adjacent to those segments follows. Segments defined by roads include the full width of the right-of-way.
1.	Casserly/Carlton Roads
The northeast boundary runs from the intersection of Green Valley Road and Casserly Road, east approximately 1.5 miles to the intersection with Mount Madonna Road then generally south and east for 4 miles along Casserly and Carlton Roads, to Coward Road. The rural setting has a wide variation in crop types. Greenhouses for flowers and ornamentals are spaced between strawberry fields, apple orchards and pasture. College, Kelly, Drew, and Tynan Lakes are located to the southwest but they are not visible from the roadways. The setting is agricultural but not isolated. Many homes on large suburban lots dot the landscape and the Salsipuedes School forms a prominent landmark on Casserly Road. The entrance to the Santa Cruz County Fairgrounds, a regionally significant recreational and cultural event facility, is located one-half mile southwest of the intersection of Casserly Road, Carlton Road, and East Lake Avenue (Highway 152).
2.	Coward Road
The boundary continues along Coward Road for 1.6 miles from Carlton Road to Riverside Road (Hwy 129).
Along this segment the character of agriculture changes. Relative to Segment 1, the fields are larger and fewer homes are visible. Production is a mixture of berries, orchards, strawberries, and greenhouse crops.
3.	Riverside Road
From the intersection of Coward Road and Riverside, the boundary traverses west for 1.1 miles
to a point directly opposite Lewis Road in Monterey County (Pajaro). The Salsipuedes Creek levee is visible to the right and the Pajaro River levee is visible to the left with row crops flanking both sides of Riverside Road.
4.	Lewis Road
From Riverside Road, the Planning Area boundary continues south along Lewis Road for a distance of 8,000 feet (1.52 miles). This area is dominated by large holdings of row crops. The small community of Pajaro sits astride San Juan and Salinas Roads with the Watsonville Junction (Southern Pacific) railroad switching yards to the south.
5.	Pajaro Crossing
The boundary runs from Lewis Road, west on a line for 2.18 miles to the Highway One/Pajaro River crossing (county boundary). This area is best viewed from Trafton Road. The land here is flat with a mixture of lettuce fields and strawberries. The Watsonville skyline is obscured by the Pajaro River levee and riparian woodlands.
6.	Pajaro River
From the center of the Pajaro River bridge on Highway 1, the boundary follows the river west for 1.4 miles to a point directly opposite the intersection of Beach Road and San Andreas Road. This segment includes the Watsonville wastewater treatment plant which is surrounded by fields of lettuce and other row crops. The intersection of Lee Road and Beach Road is surrounded by a mixture of durable goods and food-processing plants. Widely separated farm houses and agricultural equipment storage buildings dot the landscape. The Santa Cruz Mountains form a scenic backdrop to the east.
7.	San Andreas Road
From the Pajaro River, the boundary continues north for 3.7 miles along San Andreas Road to the intersection with Buena Vista Road. From
199
Watsonville 2005
Appendices
Beach Road to a point one-half mile north along San Andreas Road the terrain is very flat and cultivated with row crops. At this point the Watsonville Slough passes under San Andreas Road and the topography changes abruptly to gently sloping terraces. For the next mile cultivation is exclusively devoted to strawberries.
The increasing elevation toward the east blocks any view of Watsonville, about two miles away.
8.	Buena Vista Drive
From the intersection of San Andreas Road and Buena Vista Drive, the boundary follows Buena Vista Drive east and north for 2.3 miles to the southwest right-of-way line of Highway 1. The boundary then turns the to northwest and follows along the south right-of-way line of Highway 1 for a distance of 2,200 feet. At this point the boundary turns northeast, crosses Highway 1 perpendicular to the south right-of-way line and connects to the north right-of-way line of Highway 1. At Highway 1 the character of the land changes from agriculture to very steep tree-covered hills. Isolated home sites can be seen but the area is generally undeveloped.
9.	Freedom Boulevard
The boundary continues to the north from the north right-of-way line of Highway One for 2.1 miles to the Freedom Boulevard/Corralitos Road intersection. At this point the pine and oak covered hills of the Buena Vista area give way to intensely cultivated farmland. Topography becomes almost level. A mix of row crops gradually gives way to apple orchards.
10.	Corralitos Road
From the intersection of Freedom Boulevard and Corralitos Road, the boundary continues north along Corralitos Road for 1,800 feet (.34 miles) to Varni Road. Land along Corralitos Road is dominated by apple orchards. An occasional farm house is visible but the area is sparsely populated.
11.	Varni Road
From the Corralitos and Varni Road intersection, the boundary jogs east and north for 4,000 feet (.76 miles) to the Amesti/Pioneer Road intersection. Elevation increases steadily along Varni Road until at the intersection of Varni and Amesti Roads, the village of Amesti appears. This concentration of older homes on small lots supports an estimated population of 500. At Amesti Road, Varni Road becomes Pioneers Road.
12.	Pioneers Road
The final segment of the Planning Area boundary extends from the Amesti/Pioneer Road intersection, east for 1.7 miles, to the Green Valley/ Casserly intersection. The rolling hills along Pioneers Road are grass covered and used for cattle and horse grazing. At Green Valley Road the land use changes from agriculture to a mix of single-family homes and open fields. Homes along Green Valley Road are generally modest, located on lots ranging from 6,000 to 7,000 square feet. Along Paulson Road for about one-half mile the landscape once again becomes rural. Looking south toward College Lake/ Holohan Road the topographic depression that forms the College Lake basin is evident. Once across the Green Valley/ Holohan/Airport intersection the character of land use changes abruptly from a mix of suburban residential and agricultural uses to predominantly urban uses.
200
APPENDIX B
AGRICULTURAL LAND CLASSIFICATIONS1
Prime land typically produces the most abundant and successful crops, with a minimum of soil treatment and expense. Factors that affect productivity include physical and chemical properties of soils, water supply, climate, and local economic factors. Typically "prime" land has been defined as: land which qualifies for rating as Class I or Class II in the United States Soil Conservation Service (SCS) land use capability classifications; land which qualifies for rating 60-100 in the SCS Storie Index Rating; or agricultural preserves protected under Williamson Act contracts. In addition, Santa Cruz County LAFCO also considers prime lands to be lands which are mapped on the Agricultural Resources Map of the County of Santa Cruz as Commercial Agricultural Land. Further descriptions of these classification systems are provided below. Figure 9-1: Important Agricultural Lands within the Urban Limit Line, in the Environmental Resource Management chapter of Watsonville 2005 shows the locations of land designated under each of these three classification systems.
Soil Conservation Service Agricultural Classifica-
tions: The Soil Conservation Service (SCS) classifies the agricultural suitability of soils by both the land Capability Classification and Storie Index. The capability classification groups soils in a general way to show their suitability for most kinds of farming, based on soil and climatic characteristics, such as soil depth, texture, and permeability; drainage; water holding capacity; soil chemistry such as salinity and alkali levels; erosion and flood hazards; slope; and climatic indicators. This land capability classification ranges from soils with few limitations (I) to soils unsuitable for agriculture (VIII). Soils classified as I or II are the most suitable for agriculture, with soils III and higher having severe to very severe limitations. Soils rated as Class I and II by the Soil Conser-
vation Service generally are considered prime agricultural lands.
The Storie Index is another classification system of the Soil Conservation Service used to rank the agricultural capability of soils. The Index numerically expresses the relative degree of suitability of a soil for general intensive agriculture based on a variety of soil characteristics, including depth, surface layer texture, subsoil characteristics, drainages, and alkali/salt content. The Storie Index grades soils on profile, texture, slope, and other conditions and assigns a grade from 1 to 6. Soils of grades 1 (Storie Index 80-100) and 2 (Storie Index 60-79) are most suitable for agriculture. Grades 5 and 6 soils (Storie Index 0-19) are generally not suitable for cultivation. Storie Index ratings of 80 to 100 (Grade 1) indicate the highest quality soils for agricultural uses and are usually considered prime soils.
Seventeen SCS soil types are found in the study area.2 Three of these soil types are Class I and have high Storie Index ranking: Conjo, Elder, and Soquel soils. Conjo loam is a deep, well-drained soil with a Storie Index rating of 95. Elder sandy loam is an alluvial soil with a Storie Index ranking of 90. Soquel loam also is a deep alluvial soil with a Storie Index of 90. All soils are consistently highly productive for agriculture if properly managed. In areas with large parcels, these soils are intensively cultivated with chief crops being apples, lettuce, strawberries and bushberries. Within the study area, these soil types are found along Freedom Boulevard, within the East Lake and the Corralitos Creek areas, and along Riverside Drive.
Pinto loam and Watsonville loams are predominant soils found throughout the remainder of the study area and are formed on high terrace areas. Pinto soils are Class II and III with a Storie rating of 68,
1	This classification system description is excerpted from the Revised Administrative Draft, Sphere of Influence Feasibility Study, prepared for the City of Watsonville, January 1992, by Stephanie Strelow, Environmental Assessment and Planning, Santa Cruz, California.
2	The study area refers to the lands analyzed as part of the Revised Administrative Draft, Sphere of Influence Feasibility Study, January 1992, by Stephanie Strelow, Environmental Assessment and Planning, Santa Cruz, California and as shown in Figure 4-7 of the Land Use and Community Development chapter of Watsonville 2005.
201
Watsonville 2005
Appendices
while Watsonville soils are Class IV with Storie ratings of 36 and 50. These soils generally have subsurface impermeable layers which inhibit rooting depths and [result in] poor drainage and ponding conditions. Productivity for apples and row crops is generally lower on these soils than on other alluvial soils in the Pajaro Valley, but they are commonly used for orchards and row crops, as well as irrigated pasture (SCS1979).
Agricultural Preserves-Williamson Act Contracts:
Agricultural preserves are areas devoted to agriculture, recreation, or open space uses or a combination of these uses which are under contract with the County for special tax provisions in return for continued use as such, pursuant to provisions of the California Land Conservation Act (Williamson Act). Land under contract is classified as prime or nonprime/openspace. Prime land is defined as Class I or II in the Soil Conservation Service's Land Capability system, a Storie Index rating of 80-100, or any one of the three economic productivity requirements that generally equates with a gross production value of $200+ per acre. These "Williamson Act" contracts are established in Santa Cruz County for a minimum of ten years. Once a notice of non-renewal is made by the property owner, the contract terminates in ten years. There is one existing Williamson Act agricultural preserve in the study area, on Calabasas Road.
Santa Cruz County Policies: Of the study area lands that are in agricultural production, the majority are designated for Agriculture in the County's General Plan. However, there are about 115 acres, located north and south of Buena Vista Drive and off of Atkinson Lane, that are within the County's Urban Service Line and have an Urban Reserve Overlay designation. This designation indicates potential suitability for urban development at some point in the future if commercial agriculture is no longer viable.
The Santa Cruz County General Plan establishes agricultural policies and resource designations to preserve and protect for exclusive agricultural use those lands best suited to the commercial production of food, fibre, and ornamental crops and to prevent the conversion of commercial agricultural land to non-agricultural uses. Under County designations
commercial agricultural lands are classified as Type 1, Type 2, or Type 3 agricultural lands on County Resource Maps and are zoned "Commercial Agriculture" (CA). Any lands zoned "CA" would be considered prime agricultural lands under Santa Cruz LAFCO policies. Type 1 lands are prime agricultural lands with little or no constraints. Type 2 lands also are considered prime agricultural lands although certain limiting factors may affect continued productivity, such as parcel size, topography, or geographic location. Type 3 lands are prime agricultural lands located within the County's coastal zone. A table in the Stewlow report, op. cit., provides further definitions of these agricultural resource classifications. Non-commercial agricultural lands are zoned "A" in the County and are not ranked according to the system in the table.
County agricultural resource classifications are mixed throughout the study area. Type 1 lands are found along Freedom Boulevard and in the Corralitos Creek, East Lake, Beach Road and Riverside Drive areas. Two parcels in the Buena Vista Drive area are designated Type 2, but are also located within the County's Urban Service Line. Agricultural lands within the East Lake, Corralitos Creek and Riverside/Lee Road/Beach Road areas are zoned "CA". However, the majority of the agriculturally designated lands in the Buena Vista Drive area are zoned "A", a non-commercial agricultural zone district.
202
APPENDIX C
SPECIAL STATUS SPECIES DESCRIPTIONS*
PLANTS
Gairdners yampah. This plant species occurs on Watsonville loam soils in grasslands and coastal prairie communities, and blooms between June and August.
Santa Cruz Tarplant Santa Cruz tarplants are an annual herbaceous plant and a member of the composite family. The tarplant is native to the central coast of California including the counties of Contra Costa, Monterey, and Santa Cruz (Havlik 1986, California Department of Fish and Game 1987).
Santa Cruz tarplants grow in sandy clay soil and are usually found in fields, pastures, or grasslands on level ground or on gentle slopes (California Department of Fish and Game 1987). Fewer than 40 occurrences of this tarplant are known, about half of them being noted in Santa Cruz County. The tarplant has declined throughout its range (California Department of Fish and Game 1987). Several known populations occur in the Watsonville area (NDDB 1988). The Santa Cruz tarplant flowers from late June through October.
WILDLIFE
California Tiger Salamander. Adult tiger salamanders occur in grasslands and open woodlands of foothills and valleys. The salamander breeds in reservoirs, ponds, large temporary rain pools, lakes, and slow-moving streams (Stebbins 1972).
The California tiger salamander is expected to be listed as state threatened or endangered within the next two years (Brode personal communication).
Santa Cruz Long-Toed Salamander. The Santa Cruz long-toed salamander (SCLTS) is a relict form of subspecies which is now restricted to the Santa Cruz area. This Salamander has adapted to conditions very different from those which the species is adapted to in the rest of the range (Santa Cruz Longtoed Salamander Recovery Team 1976).
Adult long-toed Salamanders spend the nonbreeding phase of their life cycle in small animal burrows
or under fallen logs in woodland or chaparral habitats (Reed 1978, Santa Cruz Long-toed Salamander Recovery Team 1976). After the first fall rains (September and October), adult salamanders begin their annual migration to a suitable breeding pond. Salamanders migrate only on rainy, misty, or extremely foggy nights (Santa Cruz Long-toed Salamander Recovery Team 1976).
The Salamanders arrive at their breeding ponds from November through February, with most arriving in January and February. The peak breeding time is during January and February because the earlier rains usually do not fill ponds. Females lay and attach their eggs on submerged stalks of aquatic vegetation in ponds (Santa Cruz Long-toed Salamander Recovery Team 1976). After breeding, the adults leave the ponds and return to their upland habitat (Reed 1978, Santa Cruz Long-toed Salamander Recovery Team 1976).
As the ponds begin to dry in summer, the juvenile salamanders seek underground refuge near the pond. During the rainy season the juveniles disperse to an area farther from the pond (Santa Cruz Long toed Salamander Recovery Team 1976).
Suitable breeding habitat includes relatively shallow, ephemeral ponds with adequate submeiged and emergent vegetation as substrate for breeding, egg-laying, and nursery purposes. This vegetation provides food for larvae and young salamanders as well.
The salamander requires dense vegetative cover adjacent to or within easy migrating from the breeding pond. The SCLTS can migrate up to a mile (Santa Cruz Long-toed Salamander Recovery Team 1976) and possibly up to 2 miles from a breeding pond (Sorenson personal communication).
Western Pond Turtle. The only native turtle on the central coast, pond turtles are almost always found in or near ponds, rivers, marshes, streams and ditches. Western pond turtles can grow to 7.5 inches in length and are gray, brown or olive in color, usually with a network of dark spots or lines on each shell plate.
203
Watsonville 2005
Appendices
Red-Legged Frog. Red-legged frogs occur in ponds, reservoirs, marshes, and well-shaded streams (Stebbins 1959). These frogs breed from January through March (Stebbins 1959).
Black-Crowned Night Heron. An uncommon visitor in Santa Cruz County from August through May. Historically, Black-crowned night herons were residents and rookeries existed at Pinto Lake and Santa Cruz and possibly along Soquel Creek and the Pajaro River.
Black-Shouldered Kite. Black shouldered kite birds are common in grasslands, pastures, and marshes of coastal valleys. Kites nest in groves of oaks, willows, cottonwoods, sycamores, and in other trees and large shrubs.
Burrowing Owl. Widespread cultivation has reduced the amount of suitable habitat for the burrowing owl in the region (Roberson 1985). The burrowing owl occurs in a variety of habitats including grasslands and agricultural lands (Zam 1974). Burrowing owls nest in burrows excavated by rodents, particularly ground squirrels.
California Homed Lark. A uncommon transient and winter visitor that may also be a rare resident. Nest sites may exist in the southeast part of Santa Cruz County. Homed larks are ground dwelling birds, rarely found away from fields or dunes.
Ferruginous Hawk. Largest of the native buteos, Ferruginous hawks are rare transients and visitors from September to April. Not known to nest in Santa Cruz County.
Golden Eagle. A rare resident of Santa Cruz County, most commonly seen in the Watsonville-Corralitos area. The largest bird of prey in the county, Golden eagles were once more common, but there are now probably only one or two active nest sites. Nests are found in tall trees or along cliffs.
Loggerhead Shrike. A striking gray, white and black heavy bodied bird. Loggerhead shrikes are very rare
residents of Santa Cruz County. A few possible nesting sites are found in the southeast part of the county.
Merlin. Formerly known as the Pigeon hawk, this small falcon is a rare transient and visitor from September to April. It is not known to nest in Santa Cruz County.
Northern Harrier. Northern Harrier birds are widespread and abundant during winter and less common during summer in coastal valleys (McCaskie et al. 1979). Harriers require dense, wet meadows and tall grasslands for nesting on flat and gently sloping terrain. They use open fields and agricultural areas for foraging (Call 1978).
Peregrine Falcon. A medium-sized falcon, Peregrine falcons are rare migratory transients from September to April. In Santa Cruz County, Peregrine falcons stay near the coast, where they find abundant prey (birds) along the coast and in estuaries and lagoons. Although Peregrine falcon nest sites were recorded near Davenport and Wilder Ranch as late as 1947, there are no recent nesting records for the county.
Short-Eared Owl. Short-eared owls are not a regular breeding species in coastal valleys (McCaskie et al. 1979) and none is known to be breeding in Santa Cruz County (Suddjian personal communication). A few occasionally migrate through the county (Suddjian personal communication).
Tricolored Blackbird. Tricolored blackbirds nest in dense wetland vegetation and forage in grasslands and agricultural fields (Grinnell and Miller 1944).
Yellow Warbler. Summer resident and breeder from April to October, Yellow warblers are dependant on riparian vegetation.
Steelhead. An anadromous form of Rainbow trout, Steelhead are found in most large drainages throughout the county, albeit in much reduced numbers from pervious years.
*The following Special Status Species descriptions were excerpted from the Draft Subsequent Environmental Impact Report for the Franich Annexation, City of Watsonville, California, dated September 7, 1989, prepared by Jones and Stokes, Sacramento, California: Santa CruzTarplant, California Tiger Salamander, Santa Cruz long-toed salamander, Red legged frog, Black-Shouldered Kite, Burrowing Owl, Northern Hamer, Short-Eared Owl, and Tricolored Blackbird. Descriptions of the other species are from the Santa Cruz County Planning Department, 1994.
204﻿O GROWTH AND
J CONSERVATION STRATEGY
GROWTH AND CONSERVATION STRATEGY
The Watsonville General Plan, adopted in 1969, set a goal for the city to expand as a compact, unified city and maintain a clear definition between rural and urban uses. Watsonville 2005 continues the commitment to compact development, maintenance of a clear definition between rural and urban uses, and preservation of agriculture. It establishes a clear boundary between urban and rural uses.
In the 1980s, Watsonville became more compact as it continued to infill vacant land and as it increased the allowable density of development. For example, 1,372 multiple unit dwellings (apartments, condominiums, townhouses) were added to the city during the decade without expanding the city's boundary. The number of people per square mile in Watsonville increased from 4,204 in 1980 to 5,253 in 1990. Watsonville was able to accomplish compact development because it permitted building density much higher than permitted in other cities in Santa Cruz County. The City was able to efficiently deliver urban services because development was not permitted to sprawl over the countryside.
The City of Watsonville and the surrounding Pajaro Valley are in a period of growth and diversification. Population growth within the urban limit line is expected to average about 1.8 percent per year between 1992 and 2005. The growth projected for Watsonville is considerably slower than the population growth rate for the State of California during the 1980s - 2.3 percent per year - and the population growth rate of Watsonville during the 1980s - 2.8 percent per year. Projected growth is related to natural increase, in-migration, sustained agricultural activity, and a housing cost advantage relative to other portions of Santa Cruz County. Future diversification of the economic base is related to the increased variety of employment opportunities and businesses making up the city's local economy.
It is vital that the future expansion of the city be anticipated and planned for by managing the natural and built environment wisely. While compact growth is a positive trend relative to the preservation of agricultural land, there are limits to the ability of the city to increase its population density. For example, there is a limited capacity of the street network to absorb more traffic without necessitating major roadway improvements that have prohibitive costs, and there are limits to the availability of land for parks and schools. Another example of the limits to increases in population density is the desire to preserve the community character that distinguishes Watsonville from other areas.
The importance of achieving the General Plan goals within the urban limit line should be underscored. Watsonville should make the most of its opportunity to expand city boundaries to the urban limit line in order to satisfy the needs of its population because approval of unlimited expansion is unlikely.
The basis for the growth and conservation strategy follows:
•	Continue to serve the needs of the existing and future population. These needs include:
-	a balance of land uses to satisfy the need for affordable housing, employment, and recreation
-	a supply of jobs in Watsonville that is sufficient to provide a living wage and that reduce the need to commute elsewhere for employment
-	elimination of the housing affordability gap
-	a sound financial foundation for the city.
•	All urban development should take place under the City's jurisdiction. The City is best suited to provide urban services.
•	Infill development, where feasible, can only meet a portion of the needs of the population.
•	Expand the Sphere of Influence. Additional land outside the City limits will be needed to accommodate growth through 2005.
27
Watsonville 2005
•	Continue a compact development pattern in new annexed areas. The density and intensity of development within these new areas will equal or exceed that within the existing city. In that way, negative impacts on the environment and agricultural lands can be minimized while the housing, job, service, and recreation needs of the current and future population are accommodated.
•	Link urban development within the expansion areas to the City's Capital Improvement Program and Public Services Budget to ensure that new development is economically feasible. New development shall "pay its own way." Development shall follow a logical outward sequence.
•	Encourage the continuation of agriculture in the Pajaro Valley by providing for dense, compact, orderly development that minimizes impact on agricultural lands, while providing affordable housing and living wage employment for agricultural worker families and suitable areas for agricultural support businesses.
•	Establish an urban limit line to provide clear separation between urban and agricultural uses.
•	Intensify existing areas which are rezoned for a higher density to the maximum extent feasible.
PLANNING BOUNDARM
Several boundary lines and a buffer area define the framework for separating urban and rural land uses. The first is the Watsonville Planning Area boundary line, which defines the outermost boundary for planning and encompasses land intended to remain in rural use as well as land intended for urban use. The second is the urban limit line which lies within the Planning Area boundary, and defines the area intended for urban use. The third boundary is the Sphere of Influence boundary, which delineates land eligible for annexation to the City of Watsonville. Land within the Sphere of Influence is intended for urban use.
The buffer area is a band of open space which separates urban land uses within the urban limit line from rural land uses beyond the urban limit line.
The buffer area, called the grcenbelt, is intended to: ensure compatibility of urban and rural uses, protect natural resources, define urban form, provide for recreation, and enhance the beauty of the city.
The City has three goals and six policies for maintaining its compact pattern of development and separation of urban from rural uses (listed at the end of the chapter).
Photo: Courtesy of the Register-Pajaronian
Farmworkers at harvest.
28
GROWTH AND CONSERVATION STRATEGY, Chapter 3
WATSONVILLE PLANNING AREA
The Watsonville Planning Area boundary, shown in Figure 3-1, encompasses land related to Watsonville’s historical character and agricultural economy. Watsonville has served as the hub of agricultural support industries for the Pajaro Valley and plans to continue this role. The City of Watsonville is the center of commercial activity and provider of urban services not only for residents of the city, but also for the roughly 20,600 people outside of the city who live in the unincorporated part of the Planning Area. These people use Watsonville's roads, urban services, and commercial and industrial facilities. Watsonville and the surrounding area have become culturally linked over the years and will continue to be culturally linked as the city evolves into a center for its majority Hispanic population.
The City of Watsonville recognizes that the agricultural lands surrounding its urban limit line are important because these lands are the agricultural setting from which the city derives its identity and a vital part of its local economy. The lands of the Pajaro Valley which surround Watsonville define the city as a distinct place, separated from other urban areas by ample open space. The City is committed to the preservation of agriculture in the Pajaro Valley and thus supports the County's policies to promote agriculture on land beyond the city's urban limit line and outside of the cit/s special study area.
Part of the Planning Area is intended to remain rural and part is intended for urbanization. Land within the City limits is under City jurisdiction, while land outside of the City limits is under County jurisdiction. The boundary of the Planning Area was selected to encourage the County to consult the City relative to land use decisions being made in areas near the City's jurisdiction. The City supports the preservation of agricultural lands outside of city's special study areas, on land between the urban limit line and the Planning Area boundary, and beyond. Decisions about a variety of uses in this area (e.g. the County Landfill, the County Fairgrounds, Pinto lake, Kelly Lake, Drew lake, etc.) could have an impact on the city in the future. In addition, the County has already allowed urbanization beyond the city that impacts the city's planning. The City does not in any way support the expansion of these urban pockets.
The City desires to have the ability to comment on all proposed land use decisions affecting the Planning Area, including those uses mentioned previously.
The Watsonville Planning Area consists of all of the existing city area (3,789 acres), the 1990 Sphere of Influence area (1,000 acres), the unincorporated community of Pajaro in Monterey County (1,000 acres), and a rural portion of the Pajaro Valley (12,570 acres) which surrounds the city. The total land and water in the Planning Area is 18,359 acres or 28.7 square miles.
Approximately 60 percent of the people in the Planning Area lived in the City of Watsonville in 1990. Of the 51,681 people residing in the Planning Area, 31,099 people live in Watsonville and 20,582 live outside the city in the balance of the Planning Area. The 1990 population residing outside of the city in the balance of the Planning Area can be further divided between those residing in the City's Sphere of Influence (8,759) and those outside of the Sphere of Influence (11,823).
The goals and policies of Watsonville 2005 anticipate future city growth and annexation, and address many environmental and public service issues that extend beyond the existing City limits, and in the case of Pajaro, across the County boundary. Urbanization of land in the Planning Area should only occur through annexation to the City of Watsonville. Absent such annexation, Santa Cruz County and Monterey County should avoid urban or rural residential development (i.e. ranchettes). Such development removes land from agricultural use and also removes the potential of urban development from land. This type of development is an extremely inefficient use of land because it can not support the extension of urban services with its low density of development, and because it consumes agricultural land with its small lot size of one acre, which is well below the threshold for viable agricultural use. It consumes a great deal of land with little benefit in terms of housing, jobs, and parks. Rural residential development defeats both preservation of agriculture and urban development and thus should be discouraged in the Planning Area.
A description of the boundary and the character of the Watsonville Planning Area can be found in
29
Watsonville 2005
Appendix A, which is hereby incorporated by reference as an adopted part of Watsonville 2005.
URBAN LIMIT LINE AND
GREENBELT
Watsonville 2005 establishes an Urban Limit Line to contain urban development and discourage urban sprawl. The Urban Limit Line encloses both the City and an urban expansion area within which development will occur. The purpose of the Urban Limit Line is to provide a boundary that identifies the outermost limit for urban development. The line is intended to help define the City and preserve agricultural land by not permitting urban development to encroach on agricultural land.
The Urban Limit Line is shown on the land Use Diagram and Development Planning Areas and Urban Limit Line map. This Urban Limit Line was adopted by a vote of the people of Watsonville and, with certain exceptions described in Implementation Measure 3.C.3 of this Plan, cannot be amended except by a vote of the people until on or after November 1, 2027, for the 25-year Urban Limit Line and, should that Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) terminate, the westerly Urban Limit Line, and until on or after November 1, 2022, for the 20-year Urban Limit Line.
The Urban Limit Line generally follows parcel lines. On some large parcels, the Urban Limit Line travels through a parcel, following natural features or connecting parcel lines on adjacent parcels to form a logical boundary. Long-term commitment to the parcel-specific boundary coupled with a strong County policy for preservation of agriculture and open space beyond the Urban Limit Line adds certainty to the boundary and reduced pressures for
development beyond the Urban Limit Line.
Where feasible, the Urban Limit Line will
Conservation of the prime agricultural land that surrounds the City's Urban Limit Line is ofprimary concern when planning future growth in Watsonville.
be complemented by a greenbelt which is a band of land separating urban uses from those beyond the Urban Limit Line. This greenbelt lies within the Urban Limit Line and is schematically depicted on the Land Use Diagram. The exact width, location, and configuration is dependent upon the purpose(s) which it serves and the physical characteristics of the land. The greenbelt is a component of the City’s open space system which may be used in the following ways:
•	buffer farmland from urban land and vice versa
•	protect natural resources, such as the groundwater recharge area along the Corralitos Creek
•	serve as a recreation area
•	serve as a corridor for the movement of
30
G:\OOOOCity Web PagcsXGcncral PlanXGP Measure U Amend 7-23-02.wpd (rev. 1/27/03) lab

Figure 3-1
GROWTH AND CONSERVATION STRATEGY, Chapter 3
wildlifeserve as an area for community gardens, urban forests, agriculture which is compatible with adjacent urban development, drainage channels, overflow areas for flood control, and groundwater recharge ponds
•	define urban form
•	promote urban beautification
•	buffer airport operations
•	utilize land which is unsuitable for urban development due to the presence of a hazard (such as a floodway) or constraint to development (such as steep slopes or landslides).
The greenbelt prevents urban development from extending unchecked into surrounding open space, since private development cannot take place within the greenbelt. Its perimeter adjoins the Urban Limit Line and runs adjacent to the Urban Limit Line along parts of its length. Land owned by the California Department of Fish and Game, west of Highway 1, is an example of the greenbelt within the Urban Limit Line.
A key feature of the green belt is that density can be transferred from that portion of a property designated as greenbelt to the residentially-designated or industrially-designated portion of the same property. Where the City’s borders expand following adoption of this Plan, it is intended that this greenbelt be established as a more-or-less continuous chain of open space along the outer boundary of areas of expansion. Recognizing that it is difficult to retrofit a
z
G:\OOOOCity Web PagesXGeneral PlanXGP Measure U Amend 7-23-02.wpd (rev. 1/27/03) lab
31
Watsonville 2005
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
32
O:\OOOOCily Web PagesVGeneral Plan\GP Measure U Amend 7-23-02.\vpd (rev. 1/27Z03) lab
GROWTH AND CONSERVATION STRATEGY, Chapter 3
greenbelt in previously developed areas at the edge of a city, there may be no greenbelt along portions of the urban limit line. At the time of development of partially developed areas within the city, or at the time of redevelopment, setbacks from creeks or the Pajaro River may fulfill some of the purposes of the greenbelt and therefore be designated as greenbelt. The urban limit line and land use designations for lands within the urban expansion area are shown on the General Plan Land Use Diagram.
SPHERE OF INFLUENCE
A Sphere of Influence (SOI) defines land eligible for annexation to a city. Annexation occurs with the consent of the City and the Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO). Since 1983, when the Sphere of Influence was established, virtually all of the city's growth was accommodated within existing city boundaries by building on vacant land and replacing single-family houses with apartments and condominiums. Watsonville has not extended its SOI since it was established in 1983. In 1992, it is clear that the city is running out of land sufficient to meet the needs of its future population and therefore will apply to LAFCO for an amendment to its SOI so the new Sphere boundary will coincide with the city's urban limit line.
THE PHASING OF GROWTH
Within the urban limit line, development will proceed in a compact, logical manner. Prior to development of large areas annexed to the city, after June 1994; specific plans shall be adopted consistent with implementation measures 4.A.5,4.A.6, and 4.D.8. These plans shall include mechanisms for the phasing of development and provision of public services.
GOALS FOR GROWTH AND CONSERVATION
The following goals, policies, and implementation measures are intended to provide a framework for the management of growth within the existing city and the urban limit line. Guidelines are also set out
for the area within the Planning Area boundary beyond the city. The guidelines are intended to act as a framework for the City's comment to the County on various proposals.
Goal 3.1 Orderly Growth
Provide for orderly urban development that respects existing community character and provides for a clear separation between urban and agricultural land uses.
Goal 3.2 Containment of Urban Development
Discourage urban sprawl by maintaining a well-defined boundary to contain urban development.
Goal 3.3 Agricultural Land Use
Foster the continuation of agriculture in the Pajaro Valley.
POLICIES AND IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
Policy 3.A City-Centered Development
Urban development in the Watsonville Planning Area should take place under the City's jurisdiction. Implementation Measures
3.A.1 Governmental Cooperation - The City shall work with Santa Cruz and Monterey Counties to establish mutually reinforcing goals of city-centered development to prevent the intrusion of rural residential uses and urban development into agricultural lands which are historically important to Watsonville's local economy and character.
Since annexation of Pajaro to Watsonville is not currently allowed under state law, development of those lands should be limited to infill by Monterey County. Urban expansion into lands adjacent to the boundary of Pajaro should not be permitted.
33
Watsonville 2005
3.A.2 Governmental Regulation - The City shall strongly support regulatory measures to require city-centered development and to maintain the City’s distinct character, which includes the agricultural land surrounding the City’s Urban Limit Line in the Watsonville Planning Area.
3.A.3 Utility Extension and Annexation -The City shall fully utilize its powers of utility extension and annexation to support its policies of city-centered development and maintaining agriculture and open space surrounding the Urban Limit Line.
3.A.4 Urban Services - The City shall set priorities for providing urban services. New development in the City shall receive highest priority.
3.A.5 Adequate Supply of Land for Urban Needs - The City shall seek an expansion of its Sphere of Influence to coincide with the City’s designated Urban Limit Line.
Policy 3.B Annexation
The City shall pursue annexation of undeveloped and underdeveloped land between the City limit boundary and Urban Limit Line (ULL) in phases to allow efficient expansion of urban infrastructure and promote development of lands within existing urban areas before development of lands in outlying areas. The segments of the ULL are defined in Implementation Measure 3.C.1 and shown in the General Plan Land Use Diagram. The City shall not initiate annexation applications to LAFCO or adopt rezoning ordinances for urban development unless the annexation or rezoning would be
consistent with the phasing policies in Implementation Measure 3.G.2; provided that, to the extent then applicable State law allows for simultaneous LAFCO approval of annexation of multiple areas subject to phasing conditions, the City may pursue such multiple annexations provided that the phasing is consistent with this policy.
Except as provided in Implementation Measure 3.C.3, the City shall not initiate any annexation of land: (1) beyond the 25-year ULL until on or after November 1,2027; (2) beyond the 20-year ULL until on or after November 1,2022; or (3) beyond the westerly ULL as long as the Memorandum of Understanding between the City of Watsonville, Santa Cruz County, and the Coastal Commission (City of Watsonville Resolution 69-00 (CM), adopted March 14, 2000 (“MOU”)) remains in effect. Should that MOU terminate for any reason, the City shall not initiate annexations of land beyond the westerly ULL until on or after November 2027 except as required to accommodate public facilities described in the MOU.
Implementation Measures
3.B.1 Sphere Adjustment - The City shall petition the Santa Cruz Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO) to amend the Sphere of influence to coincide with the Urban Limit Line shown in the General Plan Land Use Diagram.
3.B.2 Annexation of Land in an Adjacent County - The City shall urge the State legislature to adopt legislation permitting cities to annex unincorporated, urbanized land contiguous with a City lying in an
34
G:\OOOOCity Web l’ages\General Plan\GP Measure U Amend 7-23-02.wpd (rev. 1/27/03) lab
GROWTH AND CONSERVATION STRATEGY, Chapter 3
adjoining county.
Policy 3.C Urban Limit Line
The City’s Urban Limit Line is shown on the Land Use Diagram of the General Plan.
Implementation Measures
3.C.1 Urban Limit Line Location - The Urban Limit Line has been delineated through the cooperative efforts of interested individuals and organizations and adopted by vote of the people of the City of Watsonville through the Watsonville Orderly Growth and Agricultural Protection Initiative. The specific location represents a shared vision, taking into account and balancing agricultural and open space lands preservation, economic development and stability, environmental integrity, and social equity. The location of the Urban Limit Line is based on practical considerations such as: the size of parcels, location of lot lines, existing development at urban densities, environmentally sensitive areas; and other natural features such as the Corralitos Creek, Salsipuedes Creek, Pajaro River, sloughs, and topography. The Urban Limit Line consists of three segments as follows:
Twenty Year ULL. Until on or after November 1, 2022, the 20 Year ULL may not be amended except by vote of the people or as provided in Implementation Measure 3.C.3. This segment of the ULL is in two parts and located as follows:
The first part commences near the most southwesterly comer of APN: 015-211-03, at the intersection of the north side of Highway 1 and City limits; then northwesterly along the north boundary of Highway 1 approximately 850 feet to a point where Larkin Valley Road leaves Highway 1 in a northerly direction; then northwesterly along Larkin Valley Road, to the intersection with Buena Vista Road; then northwesterly along Old Adobe Road to the most westerly comer of APN: 49-171-07; then leaving Old Adobe Road, northeasterly in a straight line to the northerly comer of APN: 49-171-21 (where the said line intersects with Calabasas Road); then
northwesterly along Calabasas Road to the most westerly boundary of APN: 49-511-03; then northeasterly along said boundary ±700' to the top of a ridge (identified as contour elevation 180 feet in the most recent applicable quadrant of the United States Geological Survey map); then southeasterly along the top of said ridge (said ridge runs parallel with Calabasas Road, more or less) to a point where said ridge line intersects the northwesterly boundary of APN: 49-181-19; then northeasterly along said northwesterly boundary to Freedom Boulevard at a point on Freedom Boulevard where said APN: 49-181-19 intersects the southerly right-of-way of Freedom Boulevard at which point the initial segment of the 20-year ULL ceases and the 25-year ULL commences.
G:\0000City Web PagesVGcneral Plan\GP Measure U Amend 7-23-02. wpd (rev. 1/27/03) lab
35
Watsonville 2005
The second part of the 20-year ULL commences at a point at the northerly intersection of the present City limits and East Lake Avenue, then southeasterly along existing City limits, to the northeasterly comer of Lot 578, Tract 719 Bay Village No. 6 (64 Maps at Page 47, Santa Cruz County Records); then easterly and southerly around the extension of the properly described in Santa Cruz County Local Agency Formation Commission Resolution 883 (Village Associates/Delta Way Reorganization) to the most easterly comer of Lot 143, Tract 721, Pajaro Village Sub. No. 2 (64 Map, Page 13); then southeasterly along existing City limits to Salsipuedes Creek; then generally southerly and westerly along the City limits to its intersection of West Beach Street and Lee Road, where it ends (hereafter referenced as “20 Year ULL”).
Twenty-five Year ULL. Until on or after November 1, 2027, the 25-year ULL may not be amended except by vote of the people or as provided in Implementation Measure 3.C.3. This segment of the ULL is located as follows:
Commencing at the most northerly corner of APN: 49-181-19; then southeasterly along Freedom Boulevard to its intersection with the City limits; then, northeasterly along said City limits to the intersection of
Corralitos Creek and Airport Boulevard; then along said Corralitos Creek to Green Valley Road; then northerly following the City limits, along Green Valley Road, to Holohan Road; then easterly, following the City limits, along Holohan Road to the most easterly comer of APN 19-861-23; then southerly along the easterly boundary of APN 19-861-23 and its extension along the City limits to its intersection with Corralitos Creek; then easterly along Corralitos Creek to the northeastern comer of APN: 19-241-23; then easterly along the northeastern boundary of APN: 48-231-01, the northern boundary of APN: 48-231-17 and approximately 446 feet along the northwestern boundary of APN: 48-231-18 to a point; then southerly, approximately 870 feet across APN: 48-231-18 to the northernmost point on APN: 48-251 -09; then easterly and southerly along the easterly boundary of APN: 48-251-09 to the City limits; then continuing easterly and northerly along the City limits to the intersection of East Lake Avenue and Coleman Avenue (hereafter referenced as “25-year ULL”).
Westerly ULL. This segment of the ULL constitutes the Eastern boundary of an area that currently remains undeveloped
36
G:\0000City Web Pages\Gcneral Plan\GP Measure U Amend 7-23-02.wpd (rev. 1/27/03) lab
GROWTH AND CONSERVATION STRATEGY, Chapter 3
as specified by a Memorandum Of Understanding between the City of Watsonville, Santa Cruz County, and the Coastal Commission (City of Watsonville Resolution 69-00 (CM), adopted March 14, 2000, hereafter referenced as “MOU”). As long at this MOU remains in effect, its provisions govern the City’s planning and development policies in the area west of the Westerly ULL (Development Phasing Area G). Should that MOU terminate for any reason, the Westerly ULL, nonetheless, may not be amended until on or after November 1, 2027 except by a vote of the people or as provided in Implementation Measure 3.C.3 or for public facilities described in the MOU. This segment of the ULL is located as follows:
Commencing at the point on the City limits at the intersection of West Beach Street and Lee Road; then, along said City limits southerly, westerly and northerly to a point on Highway 1; then crossing Highway 1 to a point on the northeastern side; then westerly along Highway 1 approximately ±1,000 feet to a point on the City limits and Highway 1; then generally northwesterly to the intersection of Highway 1 and the extension of Larkin Valley Road (hereafter referenced as “Westerly ULL”).
3.C.2 County Cooperation - The City shall participate in the revision of the Santa Cruz and Monterey
County General Plans and other planning efforts in the Watsonville Planning Area. The City shall encourage both counties to actively promote agricultural and open space land uses on lands beyond the Urban Limit Line and strictly prohibit further residential sprawl on lands beyond the Urban Limit Line within the Watsonville Planning Area.
3.C.3 Amendments to Urban Limit
Line and Development Phasing Policies. The Urban Limit Line shown on the Land Use Diagram of the General Plan, the figure entitled “Development Phasing Areas and Urban Limit Line” and Policies 3.B, 3.C, and 3.G and their respective implementation measures, 3.B.1 and 2, 3.C.1 through 3.C.3, and 3.G.1 through 3.G.3 (collectively “ULL Maps and Policies”), were adopted by the people of the City of Watsonville through the Watsonville Orderly Growth and Agricultural Protection Initiative and may only amended by a vote of the people of the City of Watsonville except as follows:
a) The City Council may
reorganize, renumber, or reorder the ULL Maps and Policies in the course of regular updates to the General Plan provided that these policies and
36.1
G:\OOOOCity Web Pagcs\Gcncral Plan\GP Measure U Amend 7-23-02.wpd (rev. 1/27/03) lab
Watsonville 2005
implementation measures remain in the General Plan.
d)	The City Council may amend the location of the ULL, provided that the amended boundary is inside the limits of the ULL as established by the Watsonville Orderly Growth and Agricultural Protection Initiative.
e)	On or after November 1, 2027, the City Council may amend the 25-year ULL shown on the Land Use Diagram of the General Plan and related ULL Maps and Policies. On or after November 1, 2022, the City Council may amend the 20-year ULL and related ULL Maps and Policies. Should the MOU terminate for any reason, the City Council on or after November 1, 2027, may amend the Westerly ULL and related ULL Maps and Policies, provided, however that earlier Council amendments of the Westerly ULL are permitted where necessary to accommodate public facilities as set forth in Policy 3.C.1 and the MOU. At the time of such amendments, the City may amend any other provision of the General Plan to conform to the amended ULL Maps and Policies.
f)	The Land Use Diagram in the General Plan and the other ULL Maps and Policies and related land use designations adopted pursuant to the Watsonville Orderly Growth and Agricultural Protection Initiative may be amended by the Watsonville City Council in their entirety if, within eighteen months of submittal by the City of a complete application (including
applicable environmental review documents), the Santa Cruz LAFCO does not amend the Watsonville Sphere of Influence to a configuration substantially corresponding to the ULL.
g)	The Land Use Diagram in the General Plan and the other ULL Maps and Policies and related land use designations adopted pursuant to the Watsonville Orderly Growth and Agricultural Protection Initiative may be amended by the Watsonville City Council in their entirety if, within one year of submittal by the City of a complete annexation application (including applicable environmental review documents) for land within the ULL that is consistent with the phasing of development and other provisions of Policy 3.G, the Santa Cruz LAFCO does not approve the annexation in a manner substantially corresponding to the application.
Policy 3.D Establishment of a Greenbelt
The City shall establish a greenbelt to serve one or more of the following purposes:
a.	Promote compatibility between urban and agricultural land uses by separating those uses with open space;
b.	Protect natural resources - groundwater recharge areas, riparian areas, rivers, creeks, sloughs, visual access to open space beyond the Urban Limit Line and wildlife habitat;
36.2
G:\0000City Web Pages\General Plan\GP Measure U Amend 7-23-02.wpd (rev. 1/27/03) lab
GROWTH AND CONSERVATION STRATEGY, Chapter 3
c.	Acquire land for active and passive recreation;
d.	Define urban form;
e.	Promote City beautification;
f.	Utilize land which is unsuitable for urban development due to the presence of a hazard (such as a floodway) or constraint to development (such as steep slopes or landslides) to act as the greenbelt, where appropriate;
g.	Buffer airport operations.
Implementation Measures
3.D.1 Establishment - Use all feasible measures to establish and protect the greenbelt.
3.D.2 Required Dedication - The City shall require new development to dedicate open space land for the greenbelt as a condition of development within City limits.
3.D.3 Density Transfer - The greenbelt
shall be an overlay for residentially and industrially designated properties in order to permit property owners to have the opportunity to transfer development potential of land designated as greenbelt to another portion of the same site. In implementing the density transfer policy, the City intends that the density or intensity resulting from the transfer will not exceed that of the land use designation applicable to the total property. The transferable density for any given site may be less than the maximum if the City determines that the land is incapable of
accommodating the maximum density for reasons such as but not limited to slope, geologic hazard, floodplain, other environmental factors, or transportation impacts.
3.D.4 Greenbelt Extension - The City shall continue to extend the greenbelt as the opportunity presents itself.
3.D.5 Greenbelt Purchase - The City shall consider establishing a fund to acquire land for portions of the greenbelt that cannot be (1) established through dedication, (2) protected with a conservation, scenic, or agriculture easement, or (3) otherwise acquired by the City.
It is intended that the greenbelt can be, for the most part, established through land dedication in conjunction with annexations and the land development process. Therefore, the need for purchase of land for the greenbelt will be minimized.
3.D.6 Cooperation with County - The City shall work with Santa Cruz and Monterey Counties to ensure that buffers between agricultural uses and urban development are established.
Policy 3.E Design of Greenbelt
The greenbelt should be designed to fulfill the purposes for which it is established such as adequately buffering agricultural lands from urban use, serving as corridors for the
G:\OOOOCity Web Pages\Gcncral Plan\GP Measure U Amend 7-23-02. wpd (rev. 1/27/03) lab
36.3
Watsonville 2005
movement of wildlife, and other purposes described in Policy 3.D.
Implementation Measures
3.E.1 Width - the width of the greenbelt shall be adequate to serve the purpose(s) for which it was established. Accordingly, the width, size, configuration, and allowable activities of the greenbelt may vary in order to serve the purposes that a particular part of the greenbelt was established to serve.
For example: If buffering urban land from agricultural land is the objective, the width of the buffer should satisfy the standard of providing for compatibility between the urban and agricultural uses. If the purpose is to serve as a corridor for the movement of wildlife, the type of wildlife and necessary travel corridor should be identified in order to designate an adequate width. If groundwater protection is the purpose, the City’s water manager, in consultation with the Pajaro Valley Water Management District, should identify the location and size of area to be protected.
3.E.2 Alternative Transportation Corridor - The public areas maintained in open space at the periphery of the Urban Limit Line may be identified for future development of bicycle and pedestrian paths where appropriate.
designed to ensure visual access to the vistas beyond the Urban Limit Line.
Policy 3.F Agricultural Land
Conservation
The City shall plan for the preservation and enhancement of important agricultural soils by encouraging the County and LAFCO to prohibit continued urbanization of lands beyond the Urban Limit Line and by encouraging the retention of land beyond the Urban Limit Line for long term agricultural purposes.
Implementation Measures
3.F.1 Urban Limit Line - In order to
preserve agricultural uses outside the urbanized area, the City shall not support annexation or increased urbanization by the City or County outside the Urban Limit Line as identified on the Watsonville 2005 Land Use Diagram.
3.F.2 Retention of Agriculture - the City shall encourage retention of agricultural use on those lands beyond the Urban Limit Line by restricting the extension of urban services to those areas.
3.F.3 Williamson Act - The City shall encourage landowners outside the Urban Limit Line to maintain agricultural production through the use of Williamson Act contracts.
3.E.3 Visual Access - For properties adjoining the Urban Limit Line, including those adjoining the greenbelt, it is the intent of the City that projects shall be clustered and
36.4
G:\0000City Web Pages\Gcneral Plan'GP Measure U Amend 7-23-02.wpd (rev. IZ27/O3) lab
GROWTH AND CONSERVATION STRATEGY, Chapter 3
3.F.4 Agricultural Support - The City
shall encourage the retention of the following: agricultural support industries in Watsonville, suitable housing for agricultural labor, the management of water resources, and the provision of transportation infrastructure to support the agricultural base of the Pajaro Valley.
The goals and policies for growth and conservation in the Planning Area are expressed below in the form of a matrix.
This matrix connects the broad community goals with the more specific policies for implementation.
		3A 3B	Policies 3C 3D 3E 3F
	3.1	• •	• • •
Goa	3.2	• •	• • •
	3.3		• • •
Policy 3.G Development Phasing.
In order to provide coordinated and comprehensive planning, actual development shall proceed according to the phasing schedule for the area or in the specific plan for the area.
Implementation Measures
3.G.1 Specific Plan Approval - The
following areas, shown in Figure 4-11, shall require a specific plan approval prior to, or concurrent with, subdivision or other development approvals. Areas include:
•	Buena Vista I, II, and III
•	Atkinson Lane
3.G.2 Phasing of Development and
Permitted Uses - The City shall include provisions in applicable development approvals to phase development of the lands shown on the map immediately following Section 3.G.2 (“Development Phasing Areas and Urban Limit Line”) in the manner described below.
Area A, Buena Vista, lies within the ULL and shall be processed for development in phases as follows:
Buena Vista I may be processed for development as soon as possible following completion of a specific plan calling for primarily residential uses, with some neighborhood commercial, light industrial, schools, open space and parks.
No final map for Buena Vista II may be recorded until after 2016, or after final maps have been recorded for fifty percent of the residential units in Buena Vista I, whichever is earlier, but in any event not before January 2010 and following completion of a specific plan.
No final map for Buena Vista III may be recorded until after 2016, or after final maps have been recorded for fifty percent of the residential units in Buena Vista II, whichever is earlier, but in any event not before January 2012 and following completion of a specific plan.
G:\OOOOCity Web PagcsXGeneral Plan\GP Measure U Amend 7-23-02. wpd (rev. 1/27/03) lab
36.5
Watsonville 2005
Area B, Atkinson Lane, lies within the ULL. No tentative map shall be approved until after January 1, 2010, and after completion of a specific plan. Uses in this area shall be restricted to residential with a requirement that at least fifty percent of the number of units be deed restricted affordable workforce housing with an emphasis on the housing of agricultural workers. “Affordable” shall mean a category of housing that may be purchased or rented by a household with very low (50% of annual Watsonville median household income (“mhi”)), low (80% mhi), median (100% mhi), moderate (120% mhi) or above moderate (150% mhi)	income.
Area C, the area South of Corralitos Creek, lies outside of the ULL, is subject to Annexation Policy 3.B and shall not be subject to planning or processing for development until on or after November 1, 2027.
Area D, the area East of East Lake Avenue, lies outside of the ULL, is subject to Annexation Policy 3.B and shall not be subject to planning or processing for development until on or after November 1, 2022.
Area E, the Villages, lies within the ULL and may be planned and processed for development as soon as possible pursuant to applicable State law and shall be used primarily for senior housing.
Area F, the Manabe/Burgstrom area, lies within the ULL and may be planned and processed for development as soon as possible pursuant to applicable State law. Uses in this area shall be restricted to industrial and other job-generating
uses.
Area G, the area west of the Westerly ULL, shall be subject to the MOU. Should that MOU terminate for any reason, the area shall, nonetheless, not be subject to planning or processing for development until on or after November 1, 2027, except for water service, waste water service, leachate lines or other public facilities, as provided in the MOU or as provided in Policy 3.C. and related Implementation Measures.
3.G.3 Unbuildable Land - Lands deemed
unsuitable for development by the City of Watsonville shall not be approved for development. If development is not permitted, lands may be used as greenbelt and/or designated environmental management
36.6
G:\0000Cily Web PagCs\Gcncral PlanXGP Measure U Amend 7-23-02.wpd (rev. 1/27Z03) lab﻿4 LAND USE AND COMMUNITY 4 DEVELOPMENT

INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND


public of providing services and facilities, while still addressing the social and economic objectives of the city.
The Land Use and Community Development chapter is the backbone of the General Plan - it sets forth the city's intentions for development, redevelopment, conservation, and growth. It includes the land use classification system, the Land Use Diagram, goals, policies, and implementation measures. The land use classification system identifies the land use categories and standards of population density and building intensity. The Land Use Diagram designates the proposed location and pattern of land use.
The focus of this chapter is on the use of land within the existing City limits and the urban limit line.
Land use and population issues affecting the urban and rural portions of the remainder of the Watsonville Planning Area are also addressed from the standpoint of cooperating with, and advising the County on land use under the County's jurisdiction.
The Land Use chapter covers overall land use goals, policies, and implementation measures which pertain broadly to the city. Included are policies on land use regulation and suitability; general residential, commercial and industrial land; public and quasipublic land; employment opportunities; and specific plan areas. Policies included in other chapters of Watsonville 2005 are integrally related to the policies set forth in this chapter.
Land use designations are shown on the Land Use Diagram, which is hereby incorporated by reference and can be found in the map pocket at the back of this document. The Land Use Diagram depicts the planned location, density, and intensity of residential, commercial, industrial, public, agricultural, and environmental resource land uses. The most appropriate mix of land uses for developable land takes into account both the needs of the residents of the city and the land's physical characteristics including environmental constraints. This approach minimizes adverse environmental impacts and the cost to the
COMMUNITY CONCERNS
The residents of Watsonville have placed high value on quality of life issues such as:
•	the preservation of existing neighborhood character and community value
•	the provision of suitable housing for all residents
•	preservation of the agricultural economy that currently supports the city
•	the diversification of the economic base to provide employment for all Watsonville residents
•	adequate public infrastructure
•	the conservation of natural resources and open space including rivers, creeks, sloughs, lakes, hillsides and stands of vegetation.
Questions raised by the residents as they attempt to align community concerns with land use issues are:
1.	Can the City provide for a reasonable amount of growth, protect the agricultural economy, and avoid environmental and public safety hazards?
2.	Can new growth be provided with efficient and effective urban support services?
3.	Can the central business district be maintained and improved as a regional commercial center for the Pajaro Valley?
4.	Can urban development avoid conflicts with agricultural land uses?
5.	Can adequate housing be provided for natural growth and local economic development without the city becoming a "bedroom community" for adjacent areas?
6.	Can the local economy be diversified and still retain the food processing economic base?
7.	Can the community provide sufficient neighborhood parks to serve new and existing residential development?
37
Watsonville 2005
8.	Can new development be accommodated without creating severe traffic congestion problems?
9.	Can the City achieve a balance between local economic development and the fiscal demands created by population increase and new residential development?
AGRICULTURE AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
The land suited for agriculture is often also the land suited for urban development. The resulting conflict can only be resolved with a balanced land use approach. Watsonville 2005 recognizes the need for such a balance and attempts to accomplish that as sensitively as possible. The Plan also recognizes the interplay of various elements to support agriculture. The preservation of agricultural land alone will not ensure preservation of the agricultural economy. Adequate housing and social support for agricultural labor, facilities for support industries, availability of agricultural water, and transportation infrastructure are also important factors in preserving agriculture.
To preserve agriculture in the Pajaro Valley, the City encourages the County to support city-centered development in the Pajaro Valley. More specifically, the City encourages the County to impose limitations on the amount of urbanization permitted within the Watsonville Planning Area (outside of the city's urban limit line) by limiting the annual population growth rate in the Planning Area to a range of 0.0 to 1.0 percent.
EXISTING LAND USE IN THE PLANNING AREA
The 18,359-acre Planning Area considered in Watsonville 2005 consists of the City of Watsonville, the urbanized areas of Freedom and Pajaro, scattered residential pockets such as Interlaken (Kelly and Drew Lakes) and Pinto Lake (Mesa Village), commercial agricultural lands, and open space.
The predominant land use within the Watsonville Planning Area is agriculture, accounting for about
12,500 acres (69 percent of the total Planning Area). Agricultural uses consist of row crops, orchards, greenhouses and animal husbandry. The large commercial agricultural tracts extend from Freedom Boulevard and Holohan Road northward beyond Pinto and College Lakes to the Pioneers Road/Casserly Road/Carl ton Road boundary, and from Highway 1 southward to San Andreas Road. Urban pockets of residential subdivisions and ranchettes have been permitted to develop under County jurisdiction along Green Valley Road, Amesti Road, Lakeview Road and College Road between Kelly and Drew Lakes.
CITY OF WATSONVILLE
The population of Watsonville in the 1990 Census was 31,099 compared with a population of 23,543 in 1980. This represents a 2.8 percent average annual population growth rate for the city between 1980 and
1990.	The City and several oiganizations anticipate that the 1990 Census has under-counted the population by 1,000 to 2,500 people. Watsonville 2005 uses official 1990 Census figures as noted throughout.
There were 9,909 housing units within the city in 1990 compared with 8,651 in 1980, representing a 1.4 percent average annual housing unit growth rate during the decade. The majority of the housing units are located in residentially zoned areas with a few units located on industrial and commercial land in the older areas of the city.
The City of Watsonville occupied 3,789 acres as of April 1990 (1990 Census), comprising 21 percent of the Planning Area. Figure 4-1 shows the relationship between developed land, undeveloped land, and land unavailable for development in Watsonville in
1991.	Figure 4-2 shows the utilization of land in Watsonville by land use category. The composition of vacant and underutilized land within the City limits, by land use designation, is illustrated in Figure 4-3, and a diagram showing the distribution of all vacant and underutilized land is shown in Figure 4-4. As of August 1991, there remained 253 acres of vacant or underutilized residentially designated land in the city which could accommodate approximately 1,481 total dwelling units if developed at maximum probable densities. In addition, there were 61 acres of
38
Figure 4-1 Utilization of Land within Watsonville City Limits: 1991
Not Available for Development'
* Land not available for development includes the City's environmental land and the City's public land that is designated PL for public land, such as parks and schools. In this figure, the vacant and underutilized acreage includes the 130 acres of Watsonville's Coastal Zone because it has some development potential, although constrained by coastal zone limitations.
Source: City of Watsonville Zoning Code Statistics, August 1991
= 3,789 Acres
Figure 4-2 Existing Land Use: 1991
Figure 4-3	Vacant and Underutilized
Land within the Watsonville City Limits: 1991
Source: Zoning Code Statistics, City of Watsonville Geofile, May 1992
Source: City of Watsonville Zoning Code Statistics, August 1991
Note: Acreages in each category arc approximate and generally do not include street or utility rights-of-way. Therefore, acreages will not equal total land in the city.
39
Watsonville 2005
vacant or underutilized commercial land, 79 acres of vacant or underutilized industrial land and 130 acres of vacant or underutilized coastal zone land.
FREEDOM AREA
The Freedom area is located immediately adjacent to the Watsonville Airport and consists of 1,037 acres with a population of 8,361 residing in 2,374 housing units, according to the 1990 Census. It is an urbanized, uni neo rpo rated community with public services such as schools, a fire station, a post office, and a sanitation district. Freedom Boulevard, a “commercial strip,” bisects the community. Future development in Freedom will be planned to be consistent with land use policies associated with the neighboring Watsonville Airport. Freedom has immediate contiguity with Watsonville and is within the Watsonville Sphere of Influence. As a result, Freedom is eligible for annexation to Watsonville at a future date in accordance with State annexation requirements.
South of Freedom Boulevard and west of the Aii-port, the development potential is constrained to some extent by the rolling topography. Agricultural uses are found along both sides of Freedom Boulevard north of the Airport. Urban services exist in the area. Recent analysis of this area by Santa Cruz County indicates deteriorating and blighted housing stock and inadequate or deteriorated infrastructure (Preliminary Report for the Pajaro Valley Redevelopment Project Area, June 1991).
PINTO LAKE
The Pinto Lake area, also known as Mesa Village, is comprised of approximately 345 acres located north of Watsonville, east of, and adjacent to, Pinto Lake, and covers ands
on both sides of Green Valley Road. It is an unincorporated pocket of residential development separated from the City by prime agricultural lands. The 1990 Census identified approximately 885 housing units in this area with a resident population of 3,484. Pinto Lake is an area of leapfrog development that is not in the City’s Sphere of Influence and is not proposed to be included. Considerable portions of Pinto Lake are built on prime agricultural lands, and prime agricultural lands surround (and are immediately adjacent to) much of the existing development. The Zayante Fault and associated Alquist-Priolo Zone crosses through a portion of Pinto Lake.
INTERLAKEN AREA (KELLY AND DREW LAKES)
The Interlaken area is located north of the eastern part of Watsonville, generally across the Salsipuedes Creek. It is an unincorporated area separated from the City by farmland and the creek. In 1990, 1,035 people resided in 316 dwelling units, which are primarily moderate and market-rate housing. Commercial uses exist where College and Holohan Roads intersect East Lake Ave. The Zayante Fault system crosses through a portion of Kelly and Drew Lakes.
PAJARO AREA
Pajaro, located in Monterey County, is an unincorporated industrial community of approximately 672 acres where 3,332 people live in 746 housing units, according to the 1990 Census. The area serves as a major transportation center for Watsonville food products. It is socially and economically
40
G:\00O0City Web Pages\Gcneral Plan\GP Measure U Amend 7-23-02.wpd (rev. 1/27Z03) lab
KEY
Vacant/Underutilized
Land
■ i mbs i ■ Watsonville City Limits as of 1992

0 1,000 2.000 Scolo in Foot
CITY OF WATSONVILLE
PLANNING DEPARTMENT
Vacant and Underutilized Land
Sourco:	g\ Waisonvillo Planning Department.
Thu fyaphtc n not inmntM IO be	tot wotpoafic Oeanon
Cont-Jit Eho Ctfy Of Couny lot daivtoO information
Figure 4-4
KEY
Vacant/Underutilized
Land
■ i ■■■■ i ■ Watsonville City Limits as ot 1992
o 1,000 2.000
ScaJo in Foot
CITY OF WATSONVILLE

PLANNING DEPARTMENT
Vacant and Underutilized Land
Sourco:	of Watsonville Planning Dopartmont.
Ihi graphic n no I mtrxM to tm tor siti-tpoafic doauon mtknQ Canton ffta City or County lor dota/irxi information.
Figure 4-4
LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT, Chapter 4
tied to the City of Watsonville, separated only by the Pajaro River. State legislation currently prohibits Watsonville from including this area in its Sphere of Influence and from future annexation, as long as it is in Monterey County.
POPULATION PROJECTIONS
The City Council directed that the draft Watsonville 2005 be prepared to provide for a future population for the City and Sphere of Influence of 51,600 by 2005 (this number increased from 50,500 due to the retention of Interlaken within the City’s Sphere of Influence). This represents an average annual growth of 1.8 percent per year between 1990 and 2005. A growth rate of 1.8 percent is less than the 2.8 percent growth rate the City experienced over the
G:\0000City Web PagcsXGcncral Plan\GP Measure IJ Amend 7-23-02.wpd (rev. 1/27/03) lab
41
Watsonville 2005
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
42
G:\0000City Web PagesXGeneral Plan\GP Measure U Amend 7-23-02.wpd (rev. 1/27/03) lab
LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT, Chapter 4
percent growth rate the city experienced over the decade 1980-1990. If the 2.8 percent growth rate were to continue into the future, the resulting land area needed for housing and jobs exceeds what is considered feasible when attempting to balance agricultural, environmental, infrastructure, social, and fiscal constraints. Alternative growth rates of 1.4 percent and 1.0 percent were also evaluated. These would necessitate the adoption of severe growth management measures that could limit the City's ability to serve its present population and possibly exacerbate overcrowding of housing and other facilities.
The planned population and attendant land need strikes a balance among the goals of providing for the city's expected future population, including suitable housing, living-wage employment, adequate recreation and open space, preservation of the agricultural base of the Pajaro Valley, and protection of critical environmental resources.
A1.8 percent growth rate represents the lowest possible growth rate capable of addressing the needs of all of Watsonville's residents based on the following:
1.	Demographic trends. The city has grown at 2.8 percent over the past decade despite a housing growth rate of 1.4 percent. The assumptions in the growth scenario will make it the most dense city in the County with a population that will remain the youngest in the County. A growth rate of less than 1.8 percent would not adequately recognize recent demographic trends and could unrealistically restrict the City’s flexibility to respond to the human needs resulting from recent demographic trends. An unrealistically low growth rate assumption puts the City at risk of underplanning for its population.
2.	Flexibility. The 1.8% growth rate allows for lower growth, if appropriate. Not all of the parcels within the proposed Sphere of Influence may ever be developed. Adopting a Sphere line does not require annexation per se. Rather it establishes the range of choices available to the city over time.
3.	Physical Capacity. The growth scenario calls for the absorption of 2,100 new units within the existing City limits and/or the adjacent developed urban area. In evaluating the ability of the
existing city to absorb additional units, a variety of community concerns must be considered: the character of the community, the ability of various densities to meet the needs of large families and young children, the economics of mid- and high-rise construction, transportation network capacity, and the physical and environmental land capability. A growth rate of 1.8 percent was determined to best balance all of these considerations.
4.	Public land needs. There are a significant number of large public uses which are competing for land both within the City limits as well as adjacent to it. These include the new hospital site, high school and elementary schools, and a Cabrillo College branch center. Most of these uses, if they occurred within the existing City limits or the proposed Sphere, may partially displace residential units or jobs, resulting in a need for them to be compensated for elsewhere.
5.	Household size. The demographics of the community are such that it is likely that Watsonville will continue to have a large household size. The assumption proposed in this General Plan is that the household size will drop from 3.2 to 3.0 as a result of allowing for some relief from overcrowding. (Refer to the technical report, Land Projections: Watsonville 2005, for explanation.) The goal of alleviating overcrowding is only achievable with a growth assumption that allows for an adequate supply of land.
6.	Social needs. The city has the highest concentration of ethnic minorities, lower-income households, and youth in the county. There is significant demand for additional parkland in the city. Sufficient land for housing, parks and other needs must be made available to provide an acceptable quality of life for city residents and to address pressing social needs. Without sufficient land for expansion, housing at even higher densities would need to be built, which could exacerbate existing urban problems.
43
Watsonville 2005
PROJECTED LAND SUPPLY

The City Council considered how the land needed to provide for the housing, employment, and recreational needs of the projected population might be distributed. After examining alternative geographic distributions, and after review of density patterns, environmental constraints, and potential impacts on agricultural lands, a scenario which accommodates 5,300 new housing units, 7,500 new jobs, and 186 acres of new parks was selected. The distributions of new housing units and jobs required to meet the needs of the population are shown in Figures 4-5 and 4-6. The land areas required for the housing and jobs are proposed to be included within an amended Watsonville Sphere of Influence which will be pursued by the City following adoption of Watsonville 2005. Figure 4-7 depicts sites under consideration for amendment to the Sphere of Influence.
Figure 4-8 represents the estimated number of acres of land beyond the existing City limits required to accommodate the population anticipated in this Plan. The number of housing units per acre (density) is shown and the mix of densities on land to be annexed is shown. The vacant land within the city has been subtracted from the total acreage needed to accommodate jobs and housing to show the acreage outside of the 1991 City limits required to meet the city's needs. The acreage needed beyond the Sphere of Influence is also presented (Figure 4-8, column 8). (This assumes growth in Interlaken is accommodated in the County's General Plan and not the City's General Plan.) Figure 4-9 summarizes the acreage needed outside of the 1991 City limits.
To convert residential units to population, 3.0 persons per household are assumed. In 1990, there were 3.2 persons per household due to the presence of large families with many children and to "doubling up" of households because of economic necessity. The assumption of 3.0 persons per household allows for sufficient land to correct the severe overcrowding that exists in the city. To convert commercial and industrial intensities to numbers of jobs, the following standard conversions are applied: Retail/Scrvice (non-office), 15 jobs/acre; Public/Office, 30 jobs per acre; and Industrial, 25 jobs per acre. The total num-
ber of laborers was determined by assuming 1.6 laborers per occupied household. Both the State of California Economic Development Division and the 1990 Census indicate 1.6 laborers per household. A five percent unemployment factor was included. Additional explanation of the growth projection methodology can be found in the technical paper. Land Projections: Watsonville 2005.
The location of industry (foreground), housing (middle-ground), and open space (background) are planned by careful analysis of the opportunities and constraints of the land.
44
A/ City Limit as of 1997
/\ Roads
/\/ Railroad /\y Rivers
	C77Y OF WATSONVILLE
N s	&
’000	0	!000	2000 Fem	
Distribution of New Housing
I Notes. (1) There are 2.100 units in the City and 1 Freedom, and 3.200 units outside the City and ' Freedom.
, (2) With the annexation of the lands of Franich in 1994, the distribution of new housing units changes. To calculate the redistribution, add 475 units to the City and Freedom, and subtract 475 units from the category, outside of City and Freedom.
Thia graphic la net intended to bo mod for site-specific decision making Consuft tho Crty or County for dotaitod information

Legend
A/ City Limit as of 1997
/\/ Roads /\/ Railroad /\/ Rivers
CITY OF WATSONVILLE
Distribution of New Jobs
3,690 Jobs in City 3,815 Jobs Outside City
Pw* QripNc is nol intended to be used for sde-specHic decision making Consult the City of County for detahed information
Thh document is a grapnical representation only of best availatlo sources. The Ctfy of Watsonville assumes no fesponsitxWy for any errors
Prepared by Watsonvifle GI5 Center 4-20-98
Figure 4 -6
Legend
♦ ♦
Land in the existing sphere of Influence proposed to be retained in the Sphere of Influence
Proposed additions to the Sphere of Influence
Urban Reserve Overlay
City of Watsonville July 2000 * Planning Area Boundry
Existing Sphere of Influence <	Boundry
CITY OF WATSONVILLE
2000	0	2000 Feet


Areas Under Consideration for Amendment to Sphere of Influence
Source: City of Watsonville Community Development Department
Tba gmprjc is not intended to be used lor srto-spoafic dooson nuking. Consul the City or County for detai ed informabon
This document Is a graphical representation only ot best available sources. The City of Watsonville assumes no responsibility for any errors.
Prepared by Watsonville GIS Center 8/24/2000
Figure 4 -7
LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT, Chapter 4
Figure 4-8 Estimated Vacant or Underutilized Land Outside of the City (as It existed In 1990) Needed to Provide for Population Growth to the Year 2005
Population Growth	Zoning	Units/Acre	Density Mix	Number of Units/Jobs	Total Acreage Needed to Accommodate Jobs and Housing	Existing Vacant and Underutilized Acreage In City (August 1991)	Acreage Needed outside 1991 City Llmlts(Acres)	Acreage Needed	Outside of Existing Sphere of Influence1
1.8%	R-1	7	50%	2,795	799	16	783		
	R-2	13	30%	1,677	258	201	57		
per year									
	R-3	36	20%	1,118	62	36	26		
Population of 50,500 in	Subtotal of Residential	n/a	100%	5,5902	1,119	253	866		±500
	Parkland	n/a	n/a		186	0	186		±73
2005									
				7,506 (Job)					
	Comm./lnd.	n/a	n/a		402	140	262		262
TOTAL	n/a				1,707	393	1,314		±835
1.	Sites in Sphere include Manfre Road, Franich, 14 acres east of Vivienne Street, 22 acres adjacent to Atkinson Lane. Interlaken (Kelly and Drew Lakes) is not included in any scenario because growth in this area is addressed in the County General Plan. Therefore, any additional population growth generated in Interlaken is not accommodated in Watsonville 2005.
2.	5,300 units are needed. A 300-unit contingency is included to account for residential lands that may ultimately be developed for special, non-residential uses such as the hospital and Cabrillo College.
Figure 4-9	Additional Acreage Needed Beyond the Existing City Limits by 2005
Source: Statistics prepared by Alexander & Associates using the City of Watsonville's data, September 1991
51
Watsonville 2005
LAND USE DESIGNATIONS AND STANDARDS OF DENSITY AND INTENSITY
The General Plan Land Use Diagram designates desirable land use in the city, within the urban limit line, and the remainder of the Planning Area according to categories. The maximum permitted density and intensity of development in each category is defined below. These standards represent maximums not to be exceeded unless density bonuses are granted for low-income, moderate-income, or senior housing projects. The actual potential for accomplishing these densities and intensities will vary depending on site-specific parameters.
Density and intensity standards apply to net developable land. Descriptions of allowed uses are provided herein to offer a general understanding of each land use category.
RESIDENTIAL
Residential development density is described in units per net acre. Nef acre is defined in the glossary. The categories are the following:
R-LD (Low Density Residential, 7.99 units/acre or less) This land use category provides a family living environment through single-family housing at densities equal to or less than 7.99 dwelling units per net acre.
R-MD (Medium Density, 8-13.99 units/acre)
This land use category provides family living environments through cluster developments, mini-lot subdivisions, condominiums, townhomes, apartments, and mobile homes at densities equal to 8, up to and including 13.99, dwelling units per net acre. Many of the community's affordable family housing goals can be accomplished at these densities.
R-HD (High Density, 14-36.99 units/acre. Up to 42.99 units/acre are allowable for studio or single room occupancy development)
This land use category provides living environments through multi-story apartment and condominium type housing at densities equal to 14, up to and
including 36.99, dwelling units per net acre. Densities of up to, and including, 42.99 units to the net acre are allowable for studio or single room occupancy development. Many of the community's affordable housing goals can be accomplished at these densities, particularly for smaller households.
COMMERCIAL
Commercial and industrial development is described as a floor area ratio (FAR). Floor area ratio is defined in the glossary.
General Commercial
General categories of allowed uses include: retail sales; personal, professional, financial, business and medical offices and services; entertainment; lodging; restaurants and automobile sales intended to serve the needs of the community and the surrounding region. Intensities in these areas shall not exceed a Floor Area Ratio of 0.45, except where building heights are permitted to exceed three stories, i.e., 35 feet. In areas where heights are permitted to exceed three stories, intensities shall not exceed a Floor Area Ratio of 1.0.
Central Commercial
General categories of allowed uses include: retail sales; personal, professional, financial and medical services; lodging; entertainment; and restaurants serving the needs of the community. Intensities in this area may not exceed a Floor Area Ratio of 2.75 inside of the Central Downtown Parking District and a Floor Area Ratio of 0.45 outside of the Parking District.
INDUSTRIAL
General categories of allowed uses include: wholesale sales, storage, heavy commercial, transportation services, warehousing; construction, fabrication and trade shops; general manufacturing; food processing; and related services, businesses and uses. The intent of the district is to serve the industrial needs of the community. The building intensity in these areas shall not exceed a Floor Area Ratio 1.50.
52
LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT, Chapter 4
PUBLIC / QUASI-PUBLIC
General categories of allowed uses include: government or quasi-public buildings or facilities, public utility facilities, active and passive recreational facilities, schools, and hospitals. Other public and/or non-profit institutions primarily serving the needs of the general public may also be permitted. Because of the diversity of uses permitted in this district, maximum intensity shall be determined based on the appropriateness of the location, accessibility, traffic impacts, existing site conditions, design compatibility with adjacent land uses, natural and built constraints and community impacts.
COASTAL ZONE
This category includes lands within the City limits designated as Coastal Zone under the California Coastal Act. Allowed uses are designated in the Local Coastal Plan. Development intensity will be determined based on the provisions of the approved Local Coastal Plan, the appropriateness of the location, accessibility, traffic impacts, existing site conditions, design compatibility with adjacent uses, natural and built constraints, and community impacts.
TRANSPORTATION, COMMUNICATION, AND UTILITIES
General categories of allowed uses include: streets and roads; rail transportation; and other fixed guideway types of transportation corridors; and airports primarily intended for the transport of people, goods and materials, livestock, and agricultural products by public, quasi-public and/or private entities. Utilities, whether above or below ground, utility service facilities, corporation yards, wastewater treatment plants and solid waste transfer, recycling and disposal facilities, are also permitted in these areas. Because of the diversity of uses allowed in these areas, and the lack of structural floor areas normally associated with most of these uses, allowed intensities will be determined based on the appropriateness of the location, accessibility, traffic impacts, existing site conditions, design compatibility with adjacent land uses, natural and built constraints, and community impacts.
AGRICULTURAL
These areas include land intended to be preserved for the production of food, fibre, flowers and other agricultural products, including the growing of crops and/or animal or poultry husbandry and grazing. Development in these areas shall be limited to that which is necessary to support the primary agricultural use. Allowed densities will be determined based on the appropriateness of the location, accessibility, traffic impacts, existing site conditions, design compatibility with adjacent land uses, natural and built constraints, and community impacts. Land outside of the urban limit line, which is not in Interlaken (Kelly and Drew Lakes), Pinto Lake (Mesa Village), Pajaro, a public land or facility, a wetland or a special study area is designated as agriculture, regardless of its size or actual use.
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT
These areas are set aside for the protection and preservation of natural resources such as wetlands, sloughs, wildlife habitat, and mineral and archaeological resources. Development shall be limited to that necessary to support the protection and preservation of these areas and resources. Allowed development will be determined based on the appropriateness of the location, accessibility, traffic impacts, existing site conditions, design compatibility with adjacent land uses, natural and built constraints, and community impacts.
REDEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
The City of Watsonville took action on May 12,1992 to merge, expand, and extend the life of two Redevelopment Districts in existence since 1973. The expiration time periods for the districts, originally scheduled for 1998, have been extended for 45 years from the date of adoption. These modifications were made under the authority of Senate Bill 39X. Figure 4-10 shows the boundary of the newly combined and expanded Redevelopment District.
The original districts were created in response to specific findings within the Redevelopment Plans that the land in these areas was underutilized, uses were stagnant, and that the supporting public
53
Watsonville 2005
Infrastructure was inadequate. These characteristics, still present in many areas, were exacerbated y the 1989 Loma Prieta Earthquake. The intent of the Westside and Central Downtown Redevelopment Districts and the revised district is to “provide for the planning, development, replanning, redesign, clearance, reconstruction or rehabilitation of the area and proper utilization of the land potentially useful and valuable for contributing to the public health, safety and welfare.”
The basis goal of the district is to arrest decline and decay throughout the area through the restoration of stable residential areas, revitalization of the downtown commercial and government center, and revitalization of the Westside Industrial Area. The intent is “to make the area a source of pride to the persons residing and working in Watsonville or visiting the City, guide development towards an urban environment preserving the aesthetic and cultural qualities of the City and stimulate and attract private investment, thereby improving the City’s economic health, employment opportunities and the tax base.”
Substantive housing opportunities exist in the downtown. State law requires that at least 20 percent of a district’s incremental tax proceeds be dedicated to the provision or improvement of affordable housing. The fund, comprised of these dollars set aside for housing, is estimated to amount to $21 million over the life of the district. The amount of tax increment funds set aside each year will increase as the assessed valuation of the district properties increase. It is the intention of the City of Watsonville to utilize a portion of these funds to support the provision of housing in the downtown and housing programs outlined in the Housing Element of the General Plan.
SPECIFIC PLAN AREAS
The specific plan is a powerful tool to control land use in particular areas of a city. Specific plans implement conceptual general plan guidance by making site-specific plans for land uses, infrastructure, and financing of public improvements and services, and by establishing standards for development. Specific plans tailor policy and regulation to an area and must conform to the major policies and strategies of the general plan.
All properties lying within the boundaries of a specific plan area are subject to the land uses, densities, intensities, public improvements, and other requirements specified in the specific plan prepared for that area. The land uses and densities shown on the Watsonville 2005 Land Use Diagram within these areas are conceptual only and may change subject to the outcome of the specific plan.
Areas for specific plans, shown in Figure 4-11, include:
•	Buena Vista I, II, and III
•	Atkinson Lane
URBAN LIMIT LINE
The Urban Limit Line (ULL) is a boundary enclosing both the City and an urban expansion area within which development will occur. The purpose of the Urban Limit Line is to contain urban development, prevent urban sprawl, and clearly separate urban from non-urban land. The ULL and related policies and implementation measures were established by voters through adoption of the Watsonville Orderly Growth
54
G:\0000City Web l’ages\Gencral Plan\GP Measure U Amend 7-23-02. wpd (rev. 1/27/03) lab
LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT, Chapter 4
and Agricultural Protection Initiative. The ULL is parcel specific, except for several large parcels where the ULL may traverse a parcel.
G:\0000City Web Pagcs\Gcncral PlanXGP Measure U Amend 7-23-02. wpd (rev. 1/27/03) lab
55
Watsonville 2005
This page is reserved for future use.
56
Redevelopment District

CITY OF WATSONVILLE

(Not to Scale)
PLANNING DEPARTMENT
Redevelopment District
Source: City ol Watsonville Planning Department,
This Q/aphic is nol nftnded to ustd kx trtt-spoofic Qoavon
Legend
/\/ City Limit as of 1997 /\Z Planning Area Boundry Specific Plan Area /\/ Railroad Rivers
Roads
Cl TV OF WA rSO XV ll If.
. cjL
1000 0	100C 2000 3000 Fool
Specific Plan Areas
In the Northwest area (Buena Vista/Calabasas), an area plan may be substituted for a specific plan if the City Community Development Director finds that the goals, policies and implementation measures of the City's General Plan will be achieved with an area plan.
Source City of Watsonville Community Development Department
Thu graphic h not intandad to ba uiad for aita-tpacific daemon making. Coniult tha CKy or County for datailad informatwn
Tha documant it a graphical rapasantation only of bait avaitabta tourcot Tho City of Walionvida attumat no ratponjibtMy for any arron
Praparod by WattonviHa GIS Cantar 4.20-98
Figure 4 -11
LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT, Chapter 4
GOALS FOR LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
Goals for land use and community development, in concert with those for the growth and conservation strategy, are a reflection of local issues and long-range vision for the future. These goals form an umbrella for the goals of the other elements.
Goal 4.1 Population and Land Use
Plan intensification of existing development and expansion of the City limits appropriate to address the quality of life needs of a population of 51,600 within the City limit and Sphere of Influence by 2005.
Goal 4.2 Neighborhoods
Conserve and improve the living environment of existing Watsonville neighborhoods.
Goal 4.3 Commercial Land Use
Revitalize the central business district and provide adequate neighborhood commercial services.
Goal 4.4 industrial Land Use
Achieve economic diversification, living wage employment, the preservation of the agricultural economic base of the Pajaro Valley, and maintain a balance among jobs, housing, and other urban land uses.
Goal 4.5 Public Land Uses
Provide public and institutional land uses and services in proportion to population growth.
Goal 4.6 Local Employment
Promote a variety of employment opportunities within the city providing living wage jobs to Watsonville residents. Stimulate creation of 7,500 additional jobs by 2005. Pursue opportunities for job skill training.
Goal 4.7 Land Use Suitability
Ensure that the orderly development of land for the needs of the existing and projected population within the City limit and Sphere of Influence is based on the land's overall suitability, including: the accessibility of existing and proposed public facilities,
services, and utilities; physical and financial constraints; and/or growth inducing impacts.
Goal 4.8 General Plan Implementation
Ensure that future development is consistent with the General Plan through the city's zoning ordinance, Development Standards, Capital Improvement Program, and environmental review process.
POLICIES AND IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
The following land use policies serve to guide the implementation of long-term goals. Some land use policy subjects are further detailed in other General Plan chapters.
Policy 4.A Residential Land Use
The City shall plan for housing production on a five-year cycle consistent with the policies of the adopted Housing Element (See chapter 6, Housing: Goals, Policies, and Programs). The overall housing objectives for the General Plan time frame shall also be considered in long-range planning for housing. Implementation Measures
4.A.1 Land Availability - The City shall monitor the availability of land zoned for residential use to ensure an adequate supply of sites for a five-year period.
4.A.2 Land Use Compatibility - The City shall
monitor housing production to ensure compatibility with surrounding land uses.
4.A.3 Downtown Intensification - The City shall permit an increase in residential density for R-HD lands (up to 36.99 dwelling units per net acre, or 42.99 if development is SRO housing) within the central business district if adequate off-street parking can be provided and a Level of Service D (see the Transportation and Circulation chapter (10) for description) can be maintained on adjacent collector streets.
61
Watsonville 2005
4.A.4 Housing Development Pacing -The City shall monitor the creation of housing and jobs and review opportunities for pacing the development of housing with the creation of new jobs in the City.
The monitoring program is intended to ensure a balance of jobs and housing units in the City so the City avoids becoming a bedroom community for other areas.
4.A.5 Specific Plan at Atkinson Lane - The City shall prepare a specific plan for the Atkinson Lane Area to identify and provide for the financing of neighborhood facility needs and location, the location of various residential densities, the greenbelt, community park, circulation, parking, streetscape, and building design. Target 660 housing units.
Policy 4.B Neighborhood Preservation
The City shall plan for the protection of existing neighborhood qualities and the provision of adequate neighborhood facilities in developing areas.
Implementation Measures
4.B.1 Existing Neighborhood Quality - The City shall evaluate existing neighborhood land use patterns prior to the approval of new development that might prove disruptive to local circulation and the use of community facilities such as
parks and schools.
4.B.2 New Neighborhood Facilities -The City shall utilize land use controls, such as, specific plan, LOS standards, and zoning development controls, to ensure balanced neighborhood development in a compact patter, and to avoid premature extension of public facilities and services.
4.B.3 Historic Preservation - The City shall encourage continued identification, designation, and maintenance of significant buildings, homes, and landmark features.
Policy 4.C Commercial Land Use
The City shall plan for revitalization of the central business district along with the distribution of convenient neighborhood commercial centers.
Implementation Measures
4.C.1 Downtown Redevelopment -The City shall use the redevelopment process to encourage the location of retail, professional, and residential uses as well as personal services within the central business district to serve the entire Pajaro Valley.
4.C.2 Neighborhood Commercial Land Use - The City shall designate an appropriate amount
62
G:\0000City Web Pages\Gcneral Plan\GP Measure U Amend 7-23-02.\vpd (rev. I/27Z03) lab
LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT, Chapter 4
of land for neighborhood commercial services to meet the daily shopping needs of surrounding residential populations of 5,000 to 7,000 persons.
4.C.3 Priority Central Business District Processing - The City shall provide priority development review processing for mixed
(residential/commercial) land use projects in the central business district that combine features of off-street and/or underground parking, retail space, and professional office space.
4.C.4 Visitor Commercial - The City shall plan for additional visitor-serving facilities within the central business district and in suitable locations in proximity to Highway 1.
4.C.5 Commercial Signs - The City shall enforce diligent control over the placement of commercial signs to avoid unsightly, dangerous, or misleading advertising.
62.1
G:\OOOOCity Web Pagcs\General Plan\GP Measure U Amend 7-23-02. wpd (rev. 1/27/03) lab
Watsonville 2005
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
62.2
G:\0000Cily Web Pages\Gcneral Plan\GP Measure U Amend 7-23-02.wpd (rev. 1/27/03) lab
LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT, Chapter 4
4.C.6 Downtown Design Plan - The City shall prepare, consider, and implement a downtown design plan for the central business district. This plan shall contain elements for building appearance, street landscaping, circulation, sign control, and parking.
4.C.7 Civic Center - The retention of civic uses in the downtown shall be encouraged to support the revitalization of that area.
4.C.8 Housing Support - A variety of moderate-and high-density housing shall be developed to support the downtown commercial area and provide housing for the employment base of the V\festside Industrial Area.
4.C.9 Linear Park - Land areas in the downtown, adjacent to the Pajaro River, shall be dedicated to open space types of uses. Pedestrian and bicycle trails shall be included in this area and linked to the citywide and regional bicycle trails.
4.C.10 Mix-Use Development of Commercial
Corridors - The City shall encourage the inclusion of residential development in projects proposed along commercial corridors, such as Freedom Boulevard and East Lake Avenue.
Policy 4.D Industrial Land Use
The City shall promote modernization of existing industrial plants and the location of new industrial facilities on lands planned for industry in Watsonville 2005.
Implementation Measures
4.D.1 Modernization - The City shall encourage existing industrial plants to maintain high standards for public safety and environmental quality consistent with economic feasibility. These standards include emission reduction, noise reduction, built-in fire protection, water conservation, and the safe use, storage, and disposal of hazardous materials.
4.D.2 Design and Open Space - The City shall
require that new industrial development be designed to blend with the natural environment and incorporate adequate open space and landscaping to provide an aesthetically pleasing buffer from residential land use. Additionally, on-site recreational space for employees and resource protection for environmentally sensitive habitats shall be required, where appropriate.
4.D.3 On-Site Services - The City shall encourage incorporation of on-site services such as child care, food service, and recreation, to discourage traffic associated with these trip purposes, where appropriate.
4.D.4 Industrial Reserve - The City shall maintain a reserve of industrial land sufficient to meet the long-term job creation goals and to enable the City to maximize economic opportunities consistent with the city's Comprehensive Economic Development Action Plan.
4.D.5 Redevelopment District - The City shall use the redevelopment process to encourage the location of companies in growth industries within the industrial areas, to retain agriculture support business, and to encourage employment opportunities suitable for the city's current and future labor force.
4.D.6 Street and Roadside Improvements - The City will develop a plan for the improvement of streets and roadsides within the Redevelopment District to better facilitate movement within the district and to decrease negative commercial and industrial traffic impacts and associated health and safety impacts.
4.D.7 Public Transportation and Utilities - Accommodations for public transportation and utilities shall be provided to facilitate access to the housing, commercial areas, government facilities, and jobs in and adjacent to the Redevelopment District.
63
Watsonville 2005
Policy 4.E Public and Quasi-Public Land Use
The City shall plan for and designate an adequate amount of land to accommodate the institutional land uses needed to serve residential neighborhoods and the entire City.
Implementation Measures
4.E.1 Coordination - The City shall actively participate with the Pajaro Valley Unified School District to coordinate planning for school site development in conjunction with neighborhood park and recreation development.
4.E.2 Needs Assessment - As City
population grows, the City shall conduct a needs assessment to investigate suitable sites and financing methods for a recreation and/or gymnasium facility, a ball field complex, additional fire station, and other new community facilities.
4.E.3 Cooperation - The City shall cooperate in planning for the relocation of the Watsonville Community Hospital in Watsonville.
Policy 4.F Economic Development
The City shall plan for economic development.
Implementation Measures
4.F.1 Planning - The City shall prepare a comprehensive Economic Development
Strategy and Action Plan. This plan will provide the focus and overall coordination to maximize the use of scarce resources, to maximize the probability of attaining objectives, and to minimize duplication of efforts.
4.F.2 Job Creation - The City shall, through its Economic Development Department, pursue the establishment of additional jobs within the existing City limits and on annexed lands in an effort to provide “full employment” (defined as 5 percent unemployment) and a balanced jobs to laborer ratio for Watsonville. The City shall target the addition of 7,500 jobs by 2005.
4.F.3 Balanced Land Uses - The City shall encourage local employment opportunities by maintaining a balance among major land uses.
4.F.4 Capital Formation Program -
The City shall prepare a Capital Formation Program.
4.F.5 Revolving Loan Fund - The
City shall establish a Revolving Loan Fund.
4.F.6 Communications - The City
shall maintain communications with the business community to promote local business
64
G:\0000Cily Web PagesXGcneral l’lan\GP Measure U Amend 7-23-02. wpd (rev. 1/27/03) lab
LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT, Chapter 4
expansion and year-round employment for area residents.
4.F.7 Skill Training - The City shall promote and encourage the expansion of public and private job training programs to better match job skills with local employment opportunities.
4.F.8 Leadership Training - The City shall cooperate with the school district and business community to establish a program of youth leadership training.
4.F.9 City Internships - The City shall operate a summer internship training program for students living in the Watsonville area.
4.F.10 Child Care - The City shall
encourage new commercial and industrial projects to provide employer assistance for child care services.
4.F.11 Special Events - The City shall share in the sponsorship of community-based special events that help to promote Watsonville as a good place to live and do business.
G:\OOOOCity Web l>agcs\Gcncral l’lan\GI> Measure U Amend 7-23-O2.wpd (rev. 1/27/03) lab
64.1
Watsonville 2005
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
64.2
G:\0000City Web PagcsVGcncral Plan\GP Measure U Amend 7-23-02.xvpd (rev. 1/27/03) lab
LAND USE AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT, Chapter 4
4.F.12 Advanced Educational Opportunities - The City shall lobby and support efforts to establish a branch campus of the California State University system in the region, particularly as it relates to reuse opportunities for Fort Ord in Monterey County. The City shall actively seek expansion of the Cabrillo College facilities in Watsonville.
Policy 4.G Land Use Suitability
The City shall encourage the development of urban uses on those lands best suited for urban uses and discourage it on lands unsuited for urban uses. Implementation Measures
4.G.1 Provision for Higher Densities - The City, through the development review process, shall consider higher densities on those lands found to be least affected by physical, policy, or economic constraints.
4.G.2 Multiple Use - Wherever feasible and appropriate, and where the potential impacts and mitigation measures associated with mixed use can be identified and fully considered through the CEQA process, the City shall support intensification of use by combining uses on one site, e.g. residential and commercial, institutional and recreational.
4.G.3 Multiple Purpose Open Space - The City shall designate as open space those areas with multiple constraints sufficient to make urban development unsuitable. These areas shall be used for active or passive recreation, environmental protection, alternative transportation corridors, and/or city beautification, depending on the nature of the constraint.
4.G.4 Environmental Management - The City shall not permit new development to encroach upon lands zoned for Environmental Management-Open Space (EM-OS).
Policy 4.H Special Needs Population
Encourage and assist programs designed to address special needs populations including children, elderly, single head of household, and the illiterate.
Cross Reference: Policy 7. A addresses the needs of children.
4.H.1 Promoting and Expanding Special Needs
Population Care Facilities - The City of Watsonville will, by 1994, prepare an analysis of opportunities within the development process to encourage the establishment of quality child care, elder care, and care facilities to meet the needs of other significant special needs populations in the city.
Policy 4.1 Land Use Regulation
The City shall regulate future urban development to be consistent with the goals of this General Plan. Implementation Measures
4.1.1	Development Review - The City shall conduct an annual review of urban development and capital improvements to ensure that long-term land use objectives are being achieved by evaluating the cumulative effect of individual project approvals.
4.1.2	Zoning Code Review - The City shall annually review and update the Zoning Code for consistency with the General Plan and Land Use Diagram. In addition, the review shall evaluate whether the Zoning Code can be improved to better address the long-term land use objectives.
4.13 Zoning Code Enforcement - The City shall respond to public complaints and conduct periodic inspections to ensure that projects are being constructed, maintained, and operated in a manner consistent with project approval.
4.1.4	Environmental Review - The City shall use the environmental review process to ensure that project mitigations sustain and implement the policies of this General Plan,
65
Watsonville 2005
reduce environmental impacts to acceptable levels, and make adequate provisions for public safety.
4.1.5	Extension of Services - The City shall strictly limit provision of urban services in areas designated for environmental management or otherwise viewed as unsuitable for urban development; however, extension of urban services shall be permitted to travel through areas designated for environmental management.
4.1.6	Traffic Mitigations - The City shall place traffic impact mitigations on new development consistent with the policies of the Transportation and Circulation chapter (10) and City standards for access, parking, and roadway improvements.
Land Use and Community Development Coals and Policies
		Policies 4A 4B 4C 4D 4E 4F 4G 4H 4I
Goals	4.1	
	4.2	• •
	4.3	• •
	4.4	• •
	4.5	•
	4.6	•
	4.7	! • •
	4.8	•
Policies which implement each goal are shown above.
66﻿- URBAN DESIGN AND SCENIC RESOURCES
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
The preservation of the City of Watsonville's rich historical and cultural resources, combined with the preservation of the natural beauty and rural backdrop of the Pajaro Valley, are the central issues and purposes of this chapter. Archeological resources are discussed in the Environmental Resource Management chapter (9).
The character of the city can be traced back to its incorporation in 1868. Many structures of architectural significance are credited to William Henry Weeks (1864-1936), the most prolific architect ever to reside in Watsonville. Watsonville's Historic Property Inventory, conducted by Professor Cardwell of University of California at Berkeley, contains a listing of 41 structures designed or remodeled by this famous architect. He designed St. Patrick's Catholic Church, the Tuttle Mansion, Watsonville High School, the Hotel Resetar, the Park Plaza bandstand, and many other impressive private residences and public buildings in Watsonville and Santa Cruz County.
The city grew slowly during its first 100 years, and the overall appearance changed little. In 1975, the pace of urban growth accelerated with the expansion of jobs and construction of new homes. The City Council became concerned about the visual impacts of the new growth and created the Design Review Commission. The Design Review Commission's charge has been the preservation of the city's architectural heritage and the design review of new development proposals. The Design Review Guidelines were adopted by the Commission as a tool to evaluate development proposals. In 1993 the duties of the Design Review Commission were delegated to the Planning Commission and Zoning Administrator.
COMMUNITY CONCERNS
Many residents of Watsonville expressed their concerns about community character and visual appearance at the General Plan Public Workshops. At times these issues were expressed as intangible concerns about the overall quality of urban life, but in other cases specific visual amenities were mentioned. The General Plan Questionnaire contained two specific statements on urban beautification: (1) "The City's beautification efforts should be intensified;" and, (2) "More landscaping and tree planting along city streets is needed." The public expressed strong support for both these issues, with 77 percent in favor of intensified city beautification efforts and 63 percent in favor of more trees along city streets.
Watsonville has an excellent stock of historical housing, such as the Rogers Mansion on East Lake Avenue.
Other public concerns about urban design and scenic resource issues include:
1.	Can Watsonville retain and enhance the visual theme established by the presence of many Victorian style structures?
2.	Can new development be made visually compatible with existing structures?
67
Watsonville 2005
3.	Can the rural and open space vistas around Watsonville be preserved while accommodating orderly urban development?
4.	Can the visual appearance of the central business district be improved?
DESIGN REVIEW GUIDELINES
In reviewing new projects, the City considers the following:
Site Planning. Guidelines emphasize suitability of the site for its proposed use and proposed building, efficiency of circulation and parking design, and building placement and orientation, particularly with regard to environmentally sensitive areas.
Building Design. Guidelines emphasize harmony with surrounding neighborhood, including materials, texture, color, height, and architectural detail.
Landscaping. Planting materials, lighting, fencing, and signs are considered by the City in order to ensure a safe and visually pleasing project.
As the city develops through time, the challenge is to ensure that the "new" does not destroy the integrity of the "old." Good urban design is not simply a matter of historic preservation, the whole urban fabric must be taken into consideration, including: the design of the street pattern, areas used for vehicle parking, architectural design, street landscaping, urban open spaces, street furniture such as lighting fixtures, commercial signs, and many other physical elements.
To maintain and improve overall urban appearance, it is neither necessary nor desirable to adopt formal design regulations for any particular architectural style, be it traditional or contemporary. Room for creativity in building design and site orientation should be maintained. General guidelines for appropriate design and adaptation to specific site conditions are important to achieve the goals and policies of this chapter.
The Tuttle Mansion on East Lake Avenue contributes to Watsonville’s rich architectural heritage and scenic resources.
SCENIC ROUTES
In addition to considerations related to the built environment, the scenic quality of Watsonville is also enhanced through the preservation of significant natural features, which include wetlands, sloughs, rivers, lakes, hillside, and stands of vegetation. These resources are important not only for their visual contribution to the city, but also for their passive recreational and educational opportunities. The quality of life in Watsonville is, in part, a reflection of a balance between the built environment and conservation and enhancement of the natural environment.
68
URBAN DESIGN AND SCENIC RESOURCES, Chapter 5
There are many scenic routes serving the transportation needs of the City of Watsonville. These routes provide access to scenic resources which include the broad sweep of the Pajaro Valley, the hills and mountains which frame the valley floor, coastal lands, and the urban skyline. Segments of state highways and local streets within the city and the Planning Area which satisfy certain criteria have been designated as scenic. Each designated scenic route must satisfy a minimum of four of the following criteria:
•	presence of views and vistas
•	absence of clutter
•	presence of interesting features
•	presence of significant vegetation
•	visual variety and
•	service as a gateway.
Watsonville's scenic routes, summarized in Figure 5-1 and described below, will benefit from the enhancement opportunities available through land use controls and implementation of General Plan policies.
The state highways included in this designation are Highway 1, Highway 152 and Highway 129. Highway 1 and Highway 152 are currently also included in the California Master Plan of State Highways Eligible for Official Scenic Highway Designation. The City will work with Caltrans to establish the boundaries of the scenic corridor, the land area which can be seen from
Figure 5-1 Criteria for Scenic Streets and Highway Designations
Scenic Route	Criteria	Background Views	Absence of Clutter	Interesting Features	Significant Vegetation	Variety	Gateway
East Lake Ave. (Hwy. 152) - Main St. to Carlton Rd.		•		•	•	•	•
East Beach St. - Main St. to Beck St.		• • • •					
Main St. - Hwy. 1 to Pajaro River		•	•	•	•	•	•
Harkins Slough Rd.		•	•	•	•	•	•
Airport Blvd.		•		•	•	•	•
Brewington Ave. - Montecito Ave. to East Lake Ave.		• • • •					
Holohan Rd.		•	•	•	•		
Riverside Dr. (Hwy 129) - Hwy. 1 to Salsipuedes Creek		•		•	•	•	•
Highway 1		•	•	•	•	•	
Source: Watsonville Planning Department, 1989
69
Watsonville 2005
the road, for segments of state highway within the City limits and the Planning Area. The City, while not financially responsible for corridor protection, has developed an implementation program for the protection of these scenic routes.
Scenic corridors for the streets not included in the state highway system are also defined as those land areas which can be seen from the road. Design criteria within these corridors are proposed to be developed by the City.
The following routes are proposed for scenic street and highway designations and are shown in Figure 5-2:
East Lake Avenue - Highway 152 from Main Street to Carlton Road. A gateway to the Planning Area from Hecker Pass, East Lake Avenue provides views of the surrounding hills and mountains, and passes by several notable historic structures. Corridor enhancements will benefit this route.
East Beach Street - Main Street to Beck Street East Beach Street affords views of historic structures and areas of town, including the plaza and central commercial center, Watsonville High School, and three of the city's designated historic houses.
Main Street - Highway 1 to the Pajaro River. A four-lane landscaped gateway, Main Street provides a variety of views of developed commercial shopping centers, Ramsay Park, historic downtown Watsonville, the plaza, and the Pajaro River.
Harkins Slough Road. More than any other route in the city or Planning Area, Harkins Slough Road provides a close-up view of the unique beauty of the area's sloughs and marshes. It also passes Ramsay Park and, crossing the freeway, affords broad views of the entire valley. As urbanization occurs, major roadway improvements will be required. Road improvements will include landscaping to maintain the "country road" feeling.
Airport Boulevard. Serving the airport and light industrial area of Watsonville, Airport Boulevard, a northern gateway to the city, has unlimited views to the north and west of areas which will remain in predominantly natural open space uses. New develop-
ment occurring along the road contributes to the scenic qualities of the corridor with attractive building design and landscaping. Airport Boulevard provides a dramatic entry into Watsonville's rural character as it crosses Corralitos Creek eastward and shifts from an urban commercial area to a rural agricultural area.
Brewington Avenue - Montecito Avenue to East Lake Avenue. Brewington Avenue, a segment of Watsonville's residential area, serves as a showcase of home design, reflecting not only a variety of styles and time periods, but an abundance of beautiful, well-maintained yards. The location of two of Watsonville's older schools, which are fine examples of public architecture, add to the scenic qualities which characterize this street.
Holohan Road - Paralleling Corralitos Creek, between Green Valley Road and East Lake Avenue. Holohan Road provides the traveler with uninterrupted views of the orchards and agricultural uses outside the city and the hills which form the backdrop and boundary of the Pajaro Valley.
Riverside Drive - Highway 129 from Highway 1 to Salsipuedes Creek. Riverside Drive from the Highway 1 interchange eastward (Highway 129), provides the traveler with a cross-sectional view of Watsonville, past and present. Emerging from the fields adjacent to Highway 1 and the Pajaro River, the highway passes the food processing warehouses which have historically been the backbone of the city. The landscaped portion of this entry to the city continues across the railroad tracks to Main Street, passing through the older residential area and ending (or beginning) at the other southeastern gateway to the city, Salsipuedes Creek. In addition to the creek views, a landscaped island identifies the transition to or from the urban area.
Highway 1. Famous throughout the world for its scenic vistas, Highway 1 in the Watsonville area is well landscaped and situated so as to provide views of the entire valley from the Monterey Bay to the hills. Particularly attractive views to the west reveal sloughs and rolling hills used for grazing.
70
Figure 5-2
URBAN DESIGN AND SCENIC RESOURCES, Chapter 5
GOALS FOR URBAN DESIGN AND SCENIC RESOURCES
The City has set the following goals to preserve and enhance the visual resources of Watsonville:
Goal 5.1 Visual Resources
Preserve and enhance the built and natural visual resources within Watsonville.
Goal 5.2 Community Appearance
Blend new development with recognized values of community appearance and scenic qualities, and ensure that new development enhances, rather than detracts from, its surroundings.
Goal 5.3 Signs
Ensure that commercial signs do not detract from street appearance or create hazardous visual distractions.
Goal 5.4 Downtown
Preserve and enhance the visual appearance of Main Street from the Pajaro River Bridge to Freedom Boulevard.
Goal 5.5 Viewscape
Preserve scenic rural qualities surrounding the urbanized portions of the Planning Area.
Goal 5.6 Urban Design
Achieve high standards of street, site and building design that are both efficient, and aesthetically pleasing.
Goal 5.7 Heritage Preservation
Enhance and protect structures, sites, and other landmarks that give residents of the Planning Area a link with their cultural heritage.
Goal 5.8 Urban Beautification
Support public and private urban beautification activities and promote pride in community appearance.
Goal 5.9 Scenic Corridors
Protect and enhance the views of and from the scenic streets and highways in Watsonville and the Planning Area.
Goal 5.10 Natural Scenic Resources
Conserve and enhance natural resources that contribute to the visual, recreational, and educational aesthetics of Watsonville. Such resources include: wetlands, sloughs, rivers, lakes, hillsides and stands of vegetation.
POLICIES AND IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
Policy 5.A Project Design Review
The preservation of visual resources shall be accomplished through the design review process. Implementation Measures
5.A.1 Design Review Applica tions - The City shall use and periodically update the Design Review Guidelines for project evaluation.
5.A.2 Design Information Requirements - Application requirements for projects to meet the design review criteria shall include a preliminary site plan, exterior elevations, vehicular and pedestrian circulation, grading, parking plans, colors, sign locations and elevations, fence height and design, and a landscape plan.
5.A.3 Design Review - The City shall require that all new construction projects and remodeling or renovation projects (except singlefamily homes) over a specified value, as designated from time to time by the City Council, undergo design review according to chapter 14-11 of the Watsonville Municipal Code.
5.A.4 Development Standards - In addition to the Design Review Guidelines, the City shall use the adopted standards for multiple family
73
Watsonville 2005
residential developments to ensure that medium- and high-density development is designed so as to enhance rather than detract from the urban environment.
5. A.5 Scenic Resources - The City shall, through its design review process, consider the impact of the development on both the visual quality of the built environment and the scenic quality of natural features including sloughs, wetland, rivers, lakes, hillsides and stands of vegetation.
Policy 5.B Design Consistency
The City shall review new development proposals to encourage high standards of urban design and to ensure that elements of architectural design and site orientation do not degrade or conflict with the appearance of existing structures.
Implementation Measures
5.B.1 Visual Compatibility - Whenever new development is proposed next to historic landmarks or buildings considered to be visually significant, the design review process shall be used to maintain or create visual harmony between the new and old structures.
5.B.2 Neighborhood Identity - New development in established neighborhoods shall be encouraged to utilize the surrounding architectural themes and/or materials to promote neighborhood harmony and identity.
5.B.3 Enhancement - The City shall utilize the development standards, zoning ordinance regulations for each district, and the design review guidelines to ensure that new development is an asset to the existing neighborhood and community with regard to parking, landscaping, open space, and project design.
Policy 5.C Sign Control
The design review process shall be used to ensure that signs (materials, size, color, lettering and location) are aesthetically pleasing and compatible with surroundings.
Implementation Measures
5.C.1 Conditions on Development - Conditions
shall be placed on proposed development to ensure that Design Review Guidelines for signs and advertising devices are followed, and that criteria for specific zoning districts are implemented.
5.C.2 Uniform Sign Program - In order to discourage visual clutter, the City shall require integrated sign programs for projects with multiple business tenants.
Policy 5.D Downtown Design Plan
The City shall prepare, adopt, and implement a design plan for the urban design, circulation, parking, and commercial sign location within the central business district.
Implementation Measures
5.D.1 Project Requirements - Projects within the central business district (CBD) shall be required to follow the guidelines of the design plan as a condition of approval.
Policy 5.E Viewscape Protection
The City shall use the General Plan Land Use chapter and the design review process to ensure that major new development projects do not impact scenic vistas now enjoyed throughout the city.
Implementation Measures
5.E.1 Scenic Vistas - Site orientation and building bulk conditions shall be used to protect scenic vistas.
5.E.2 Peripheral Open Space - Provision of a green belt shall be used to preserve and enhance the urban viewscape as well as to define the limits for urban use.
Policy 5.F Design Factors
The design review process shall combine elements of aesthetics with considerations for project efficiency.
74
URBAN DESIGN AND SCENIC RESOURCES, Chapter 5
Implementation Measures
5.F.1 Project Appearance Factors - Considerations for project appearance shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
a.	Compatibility with adjacent architectural styles
b.	Respect for design features of the original architectural style for building renovation projects
c.	Avoidance of monotonous expanses of blank walls, including fire walls
d.	Orientation of the project with respect to natural topography, the retention of trees, and significant natural habitat
e.	Placement and screening of trash containers from view and adequacy of the type and number of trash containers provided on site
f.	Undergrounding of utility lines and meter boxes and screening of transformers
g.	Visual interest of exterior finishes and colors
h.	Discrete placement of microwave dish and satellite antennas
i.	Placement and design of external lighting fixtures to blend with the architectural style, provide safe areas, and avoid off-site glare.
5.F.2 Project Efficiency Factors - Consideration for project efficiency shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
a.	Project site orientation with respect to privacy, views, and solar access of neighboring structures
b.	Design of project access and parking
c.	Provision for safe and convenient pedestrian movement
d.	Location and efficiency of loading and service docks
e.	Location and accessibility of utility meters inspection points
f.	Ease of maintenance of exterior finishes
g.	Placement of structures for solar considerations
h.	The selection of landscape planting materials for summer shade, privacy, screening, erosion control, and water conservation
i.	Adequate irrigation for landscaped areas.
Policy 5.G Historic Preservation
The City shall evaluate and make recommendations for the preservation of historic structures, landmarks, and buildings of particular architectural interest. Implementation Measures
5.G.1 Building Conditions - The City shall place conditions on building renovation and construction near architecturally significant structures to protect their architectural integrity and ensure that Watsonville's charm and heritage are not destroyed.
5.G.2 Historic Inventory - The City shall maintain and periodically update an inventory of historic and architecturally significant buildings.
5.G.3 Historic Designation - The City shall continue to designate and/or take action to protect structures of special character, architectural value, and aesthetic value. Structures include significant buildings, homes, and landmark features.
5.G.4 Preservation Zoning - The City shall enact historic preservation zoning to protect significant examples of the city's cultural and architectural heritage.
5.G.5 Private Participation - The City shall encourage and provide incentives for the private preservation and restoration of historic and architecturally interesting buildings.
75
Watsonville 2005
Policy 5.H Streetscape Beautification
The City shall promote streetscape beautification activities and civic pride in community appearance. Implementation Measures
5.H.1	Street Tree Planting - The City shall pursue a
citywide program of tree planting and maintenance. The use of appropriate trees shall take into consideration the need to maintain visual clearance at intersections and other public safety concerns.
5.H.2 Beautification Awards - The City shall recognize and award private efforts to enhance city appearance.
5.H.3 Gateways - The City shall identify areas
which serve as gateways or entry points to the city and develop landscaping and signing to highlight those points.
5.H.4 Property Maintenance - Maintenance of
building exteriors and landscaping shall be addressed through the design review process. Visual clutter in yards shall be prevented through enforcement of zoning ordinance restrictions on parking and storage in front and side yards.
Policy 5.1 Scenic Streets And Highways
The City shall identify scenic streets and highways in the Planning Area according to adopted criteria. Implementation Measures
5.1.1 Criteria for Designation - The following criteria may be considered as a basis for adopting a route as scenic.
a.	Presence of background views and natural vistas.
b.	Absence of clutter along the street or road.
d.	Significant vegetation, either natural or landscaped.
e.	Presence of a variety of views.
f.	Presence of a "gateway" or entry to the city along the route.
5.1.2 City and County Cooperation - The City
shall work with Santa Cruz County to establish appropriate sign control and land uses for those routes designated as scenic in the General Plan but outside the City's jurisdiction.
5.13 Guidelines and Standards - The City shall adopt standards or guidelines for development along designated scenic corridors and future corridors considered for designation.
Policy 5.J Scenic Natural Resources
The City shall conserve and enhance natural resources that contribute to the visual, recreational, and educational aesthetics of Watsonville. Such resources include: wetlands, sloughs, rivers, lakes, hillsides, and stands of vegetation.
Implementation Measures
5.J.1 Natural Heritage Preservation - The City should conserve and enhance the natural resource areas of the community that give residents passive recreational and educational opportunities connected with the natural heritage of Watsonville.
5.J.2 Compatibility - Whenever a new development is proposed next to a natural scenic resource, the design review process will be used to maintain or create visual harmony between new and old structures and their natural setting.
c.	Location of interesting features such as historic or architecturally significant structures.
76
URBAN DESIGN AND SCENIC RESOURCES, Chapter 5
The goals and policies for urban design and preservation of Planning Area scenic resources are expressed below in the form of a matrix. This matrix connects the broad community goals with the more specific policies for implementation.
Urban Design and Scenic Routes Goals and Policies
		Policies			
		5A	5B 5C 5D 5E 5F 5G 5H	51	5J
	5.1				
	5.2	•			
	5.3	•			
	5.4	•			
tn n	5.5	•			
o O	5.6	•			
	5.7	•			
	5.8	•			
	5.9	•			
	5.10		•		•
77
Watsonville 2005
Photo: Courtesy of the Register-Pajaronian
Honors were given for preserving history at the Jalisco Restaurant on Main Street.
78﻿A HOUSING: GOALS, POLICIES, b AND PROGRAMS
INTRODUCTION AND	
BACKGROUND	
The Watsonville Housing Element is published as a separate document and included as an adopted part of Watsonville 2005 by reference. The Goals, Policies and Programs chapter of that document is included here for convenience.
The Watsonville Housing Element contains the action plan for meeting the housing needs described in the previous sections. The five-year program builds upon the previous and ongoing activities the
City employed in the 1987 Housing Element to protect and improve housing, and adds additional programs to meet newly identified needs. Additional programs are added to address areas where previous goals were not met, and quantified objectives were increased where possible to better reflect previous accomplishments and encourage those continued good efforts.
The overall goal for housing is supported and defined by a set of housing policies. Policies are the adopted legislative position of the Watsonville City Council. These policies will be implemented by the
Photo: Courtesy ol the Register-Pajaronian
A family attended the groundbreaking for their new home, which will be built under a program of the local Habi-itat for Humanity. The affordable housing will be built by all-volunteer labor.
79
Watsonville 2005
administrative actions of the City Staff, the conditions of project approval established by the Planning Commission and the programs described in this chapter.
The City will continue to use its land use and housing development authority to facilitate housing production for persons at all economic levels. At the same time, it is recognized that affordable housing must be provided within a suitable living environment. The creation of this suitable living environment required that the overall character of the community be preserved and enhanced.
Programs aimed at housing affordability and overcrowding have been strengthened. New policies and programs now require that developers of new housing units also produce affordable units. The number of large families in Watsonville and the worsening problem of overcrowding have made it necessary to include programs to address those issues. Watsonville’s commitment to housing is strong. In 1991, the City established a new Department of Housing and Economic Development and hired a new director for that department.
Watsonville recognizes its responsibility to provide for the housing needs of its residents beyond 1996. Therefore, programs to achieve an adequate land inventory for housing through 2005 are included. Watsonville further recognizes that housing does not occur in a vacuum. The most critical element in accomplishing housing that meets the needs of the residents is a strong economy with adequate living wage employment to support the needs of its labor force. Closing the gap between wages and housing costs is critical. Therefore, programs oriented to strengthen the Watsonville economy are also included within the Housing Element.
HOUSING GOALS
Chapter 7 of the Housing Element characterizes and quantifies the City’s current and projected housing needs. The City’s housing program sets forth
appropriate responses to those identified needs. The initial step in this process is the establishment of goals and policies which reflect the community’s commitment to creating an attractive, balanced and equitable housing environment.
Goal 1.1 Provision of Housing
Develop, improve, conserve, and preserve safe, affordable housing to meet the needs of all residents.
Goal 1.2 Well-Balanced Economy
Create a strong, well-balanced economy in Watsonville that includes living-wage employment for the labor force and promotes the development of a balance of homeownership and rental housing by the private, public, and non-profit sectors within a satisfactory urban environment.
Goal 1.3 Special Needs Housing
Provide housing to meet the special needs of large families, single head-of-household families, farmworkers, the homeless, and the handicapped and disabled.
HOUSING POLICIES
Achievement of the foregoing housing goals requires the formulation of, and commitment to, specific housing policies and programs. The following are specific policies and programs designed to meet the needs described in Chapter 7 and attain the goals noted above. As required by State law, each program includes a quantified objective, agency responsible for implementation, financing, and time frame. The policies address the six basic housing needs identified by State law.
1.	Identify adequate sites to meet housing needs;
2.	Assist development of low- and moderateincoming housing;
3.	Address governmental and non-governmental constraints;
80
P:\ADVPLAN\GP2005\Housing Element Amend GPA-2-99.rev (Revised 8/28/2000) lab
HOUSING: GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS, Chapter 6
4.	Conserve and improve the existing housing stock;
5.	Promote equal housing opportunities; and
80.1
P:\ADVPLAN\GP2005\Housing Element Amend GPA-2-99.rev (Revised 8/28/2000) lab
HOUSING: GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS, Chapter 6
6.	Provide programs to meet other identified housing needs.
It is important to recognize that all of the policies work together to address to total housing need in Watsonville. Policies may further efforts in more than one area, but are not repeated. For instance, programs for ensuring adequate land for housing not only address physical land needs, but also work to offset constraints that impact affordability.
ADEQUATE SITES TO MEET IDENTIFIED HOUSING NEEDS
Policy A: The City shall continue to annually evaluate the adequacy of its supply of land suitable for residential development and strive to maintain a supply of land sufficient to meet the city's fair share need as identified by the Association of Monterey Bay Area Governments and the City of Watsonville through 1996.
Program A.1: As outlined in Housing Opportunities chapter and Appendix B of the Housing Element, adequate sites exist in the city to meet the housing need through 1996. The City will strive to provide sufficient land in each land use category to allow the market to freely create all types of housing needed through 1996. Vacant sites or property suitable for residential development should be made available to enable the development at least 249 very low-income housing units, 102 low-income units, 411 moderate-income units, and 742 above moderate-income units. Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Planning Department, lead department
Watsonville City Council
Watsonville Planning Commission
Watsonville Housing and Economic Development
Department
Quantified Objective:
Zoned sites for at least 249 additional very low-income units,102 low-income units, 411 moderate-income units, and 742 above moderate-income units, through July 1, 1996.
Financing:
Staff time
Program A.2: The city staff will prepare a report, for Council consideration, evaluating opportunities to provide additional housing units within the existing City limits through rezoning, deeper density bonuses than those required by state law, opportunities for clustering, mixed use development along commercial corridors, improved utilization of second and third stories in the downtown and incentives for lot consolidation. Opportunities for 400-600 additional units shall be identified. Watsonville 2005 includes proposals to redesignate three areas in the city for high-density residential from low-density residential. Affordable housing units displaced by new construction shall be replaced. The City shall accommodate both housing clustered around natural topography, and the provision of open space between residential, industrial, and agricultural land uses, in order to promote the preservation of environmental resources without significantly compromising development densities that support housing affordability.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Planning Department, lead department
Watsonville City Council
Watsonville Redevelopment Agency
Watsonville Planning Commission
Watsonville Housing and Economic Development
Department
Quantified Objective:
Consideration of these redesignations by September 1992 Report to Council on other opportunities by 1993.
Financing:
Staff time
Program A.3: The City will pursue, through the Local Area Formation Commission (LAFCO), the expansion of its Sphere of Influence and annexation of lands suitable for the production of living-wage employment and the development of housing to meet the needs of Watsonville through the year 2005. In the production of housing on newly annexed residential land, production of housing in the following categories shall be emphasized - housing for lower income households in Watsonville, housing for people displaced due to code enforcement in Watsonville, and housing to alleviate overcrowded households in Watsonville. If the City annexes prime
81
Watsonville 2005
agricultural land, it shall attempt to maximize the production of affordable housing where feasible. Priority will be given to residential development not involving prime agricultural lands.
Discussion: The Watsonville Housing Task Force, in 1990, estimated that an additional 2,600 new, affordable units are needed to relieve overcrowding. In order to alleviate overcrowded housing conditions, a sufficient supply of land for housing has been planned to provide space for families who are currently doubled-up, as well as space for new families formed when the City's youth and other residents create their own households.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Planning Department, lead department Watsonville City Council Watsonville Planning Commission Quantified Objective:
Expansion of the Sphere of Influence to accommodate 3,500 additional housing units through the year 2005.
Financing:
Staff time
Program A.4: The City has determined that the 1990 Census resulted in an undercount of its population. Therefore, the City shall pursue a revision to the 1990 Census. In addition, the City staff will prepare a report, for Council consideration, evaluating
Figure 6-1	Fair Share Housing Need Program Summary
	Very Low	Low	Moderate	Above Moderate
Total need 1989-1996	249	102	411	742
Constructed as of December 1991	7	66	181	
Estimated production through affordable housing ordinance and density bonus	74-148	148	76	
Remainder to be accomplished or (surplus)	94-168	(82)	896	
Programs to address need	A.	1, A.2, B.	1.B.2, B.4, B.5, B.6, B.7	A.	1, A.2, B.	1.B.2, B.4, B.5, B.6, B.7	A.1, A.2, B.1	
Source: Total need - Association of Monterey Bay Area Governments; the remaining data is a summary of data from Watsonville Housing Element, 1992
This table specifically addresses AMBAG-designated fair share need. The Housing Element includes a broad range of additional programs to further support affordable housing and other housing needs in the city.
82
HOUSING: GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS Chapter 6
the pursuit of a supplemental Census of Housing Units in an effort to improve the accuracy of the 1990 Census Housing Count.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Community Development Department, lead department Watsonville City Council
Quantified Objective:
Action by the City to revise the 1990 Census and a report evaluating whether or not the City should pursue a supplemental census of housing units for cosideration by Council by January 1993.
Financing:
Staff time
Program A.5: The City shall participate in the regional fair share allocation process in 1995, 2000, and 2005 and at other times when modifications of existing allocations are proposed or when new allocations are prepared.
Discussion: The City has an opportunity to participate in the review of the Regional Housing Needs Plan prepared by AMBAG during a liited review period. It is vital that the City work iwth AMBAG to ensure that housing needs, as defined by the City, are incorporated in the Regional Housing Needs Plan.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Community Development Department, lead department Watsonville City Council Watsonville Housing and Economic Development Department
Quantified Objective:
Not quantifiable.
Financing:
Staff time
ASSISTANCE FOR THE
DEVELOPMENT OF HOUSING AFFORDABLE TO LOW- AND MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLDS
Policy B: The City will provide housing oppotunities for Watsonville’s share of the regionwide housing need for all income groups, with priority given to very low- and low-income households.
Program B.l: The city will encourage the development of an appropriate number of new housing units annually. The planning staff will monitor new housing developments to ensure that a wide variety of housing types are being provided. In accordance with the City’s Affordable Housing Ordinance and the City’s higher than average low-income population, the City will continue to vigorously pursue the development of housing, meeting the needs of its moderate-, low-, and very low-income residents. To ensure quality of life in Watsonville, these projects will be required to be consistent with General Plan objectives for land use, open space, and the provision of public services. The City will continue priority processing of all projects with 50 percent or more of the units geared to moderate-, low-, and very low-income residents.
Discussion: The proposed rate of housing construction exceeds the average annual rate of construction of 159 units per year since 1980; however, it should be noted that the proposed rate of 280 units a year has been exceeded two
P:\ADVPLAN\Gp2005\GP Housing Element Amend GPA-3-00.wpd (Revised 10/9/01) lab
83
HOUSING: GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS Chapter 6
the pursuit of a supplemental Census of Housing Units in an effort to improve the accuracy of the 1990 Census Housing Count.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Community Development Department, lead department Watsonville City Council
Quantified Objective:
Action by the City to revise the 1990 Census and a report evaluating whether or not the City should pursue a supplemental census of housing units for consideration by Council by January 1993.
Financing:
Staff time
Program A.5: The City shall participate in the regional fair share allocation process in 1995, 2000, and 2005 and at other times when modifications of existing allocations are proposed or when new allocations are prepared.
Discussion: The City has an opportunity to participate in the review of the Regional Housing Needs Plan prepared by AMB AG during a limited review period. It is vital that the City work with AMBAG to ensure that housing needs, as defined by the City, are incorporated in the Regional Housing Needs Plan.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Community Development Department, lead department Watsonville City Council Watsonville Housing and Economic Development Department
Quantified Objective:
Not quantifiable.
Financing:
Staff time
ASSISTANCE FOR THE
DEVELOPMENT OF HOUSING AFFORDABLE TO LOW- AND MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLDS
Policy B: The City will provide housing opportunities for Watsonville’s share of the regionwide housing need for all income groups, with priority given to very low- and low-income households.
Program B.l: The city will encourage the development of an appropriate number of new housing units annually. The planning staff will monitor new housing developments to ensure that a wide variety of housing types are being provided. In accordance with the City’s Affordable Housing Ordinance and the City’s higher than average low-income population, the City will continue to vigorously pursue the development of housing, meeting the needs of its moderate-, low-, and very low-income residents. To ensure quality of life in Watsonville, these projects will be required to be consistent with General Plan objectives for land use, open space, and the provision of public services. The City will continue priority processing of all projects with 50 percent or more of the units geared to moderate-, low-, and very low-income residents.
Discussion: The proposed rate of housing construction exceeds the average annual rate of construction of 159 units per year since 1980; however, it should be noted that the proposed rate of 280 units a year has been exceeded two
P:\ADVPLAN\GP2005\GP Housing Element Amend GPA-3-00.wpd (Revised 10/9/01) lab
83
Watsonville 2005
times during the past ten years.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Community Development Department, lead department Watsonville City Council Watsonville Planning Commission Watsonville Housing and Economic Development Department Watsonville Public Works Department Watsonville Building Department
Quantified Objective:
The private development of housing, including at least 249 very low-, J 02 low-, 411 moderate-, and 742 above moderate-income units between July 1, 1989 and July 1, 1996 (See Figure 8-1)
Financing:
Staff time
Program B.2: The Council adopted Ordinance No. 866-91 (CM), and substantially amended in 2001, an Affordable Housing Ordinance to ensure that developers build and adequate proportion of units affordable to very low-, low-, median-, moderate- or above moderate-income households. Developers of seven units or more are required to provide at least fifteen (15) to twenty (20) percent of those units affordable to very low-, low-, median-, moderate-, or above moderate-income households.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Community Development Department, lead department Watsonville City Council Watsonville Planning Commission Watsonville Housing and Economic Development Department
83.1
P:\ADVPLAN\GP2005\GP Housing Element Amend GPA-3-O0.wpd (Revised 10/9/01) lab
HOUSING: GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS Chapter 6
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
P:\ADVPLAN\GP2005\GP Housing Element Amend GPA-3-00.wpd (Revised 10/9/01) lab
83.2
Watsonville 2005
Quantified Objective:
Provide an opportunity for development of at least 350 units for low- and very low-income households and 411 units for moderate-income households, as defined by AMBAG, through the affordable housing ordinance and other mechanisms.
Financing:
Staff time
Program B3: The City will consider creating a permanent Housing Advisory Committee to advise the City Council on housing issues.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Housing and Economic Development Department, lead department Watsonville City Council Watsonville Planning Department
Quantified Objective:
Report to Council by 1993.
Financing:
Staff time
Program B.4: To the degree consistent with general plan policies, the City will favorably consider applications for rezoning and requests for special consideration under the affordable housing ordinance for the development of medium- to high-density (7 to 36 units per net acre) residential development within the city. In addition, mixed-use projects combining commercial and residential uses will be encouraged as will housing suitable for senior citizens, single heads of household families and single room occupancy housing. Furthermore, the City shall evaluate amending the zoning ordinance to permit cooperative housing for low and moderate income households. The evaluation shall include identifying the demand and financing mechanisms for such housing.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Planning Department, lead department
Watsonville City Council
Watsonville Redevelopment Agency
Watsonville Planning Commission
Watsonville Housing and Economic Development
Department
Quantified Objective:
In combination with Programs A-2, and B-5, it is anticipated that an additional 400-600 units can be built within the existing City limits.
Financing:
Staff time
Program B.5: As required by state law, the City will prepare and propose to the City Council an ordinance allowing a density bonus of at least 25 percent, and an additional incentive, or financially equivalent incentive(s), to a developer of a housing development who agrees to construct at least:
a.	20 percent of the units for lower-income households; or
b.	10 percent of the units for very low-income households; or
c.	50 percent of the units for senior citizens Responsible Bodies:
City Attorney's Office, lead department
Watsonville City Council
Watsonville Planning Commission
Watsonville Planning Department
Quantified Objective:
Preparation and consideration of an implementing ordinance, including a procedure for evaluating preliminary applications, by January 1993.
Financing:
Staff time
Program B.6: The City will provide administrative assistance, development incentives and financial incentives to nonprofit housing development corporations, when acquiring sites and developing affordable housing for persons with low and moderate incomes. Assistance to provide very low-income units shall take precedence in the provision of direct
84
HOUSING: GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS, Chapter 6
financial assistance by the City until those AMBAG designated needs have been met.
Discussion: The City has previously provided "bridge" financing to two projects and will continue to pursue such opportunities.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Housing and Economic Development Department, lead department Watsonville City Council Watsonville Redevelopment Agency Watsonville Planning Commission Watsonville Planning Department Quantified Objective:
Development of at least 249 very low, 102 low and 411 moderate-income units by July 1,1996.
Financing:
Staff time
Redevelopment Agency in-lieu fund
Program B.7: The City will use in-lieu fees from the affordable ordinance and the Redevelopment District 20 percent set aside to assist the development of housing affordable to very low-, low-, and moderate-income households. Assistance to provide very low-income units shall take precedence in the provision of direct financial assistance by the City until those AMBAG designated needs have been met. In addition, use of these funds to preserve or replace units at risk of conversion shall be analyzed. A "Use of Funds Plan" for these monies shall be prepared by city staff, for consideration by Council. The purpose of this plan is to outline possible use of funds and identify the most effective uses of funds, but not to preclude the use of funds for any project deemed to further the objectives of this Housing Element. Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Housing and Economic Development Department, lead department Watsonville City Council Watsonville Redevelopment Agency Watsonville Planning Commission Watsonville Planning Department Quantified Objective:
Assist in the accomplishment of at least 94 very low-
income units over and above those resulting from the affordable housing and density bonus ordinances by July 1,1996.
Financing:
Staff time
In-Lieu Fee Fund
City/Redevelopment District Housing Set-Aside Funds
Program BA In the event that the current (June 1992) Santa Cruz Housing Authority refund/refi-nance proposal for the Meadow View Apartments is unsuccessful, the City shall meet with the entities involved to identify problem areas and methods to resolve the problems. It is recognized that the Santa Cruz Housing Authority is the controlling entity on this project; however, the City will consider providing technical assistance and/or financial assistance to support the success of future refund/refinance proposals for Meadow View. If all efforts at refund/ refinance are unsuccessful, the City shall pursue, in cooperation with Santa Cruz Housing Authority, other efforts to preserve these units.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Housing and Economic Development Department, lead City department Santa Cruz County Housing Authority Quantified Objective:
Preserve the equivalent of 38 affordable units at Meadow View prior to the expiration of the affordability controls in June of 1996.
Financing
Staff Time
Redevelopment Housing Set-Aside Funds
Community Development Block Grant Funds
Program B.9: The City will assist and participate in the purchase of mobilehome parks by low-income residents, as determined to be appropriate by the City Council, in order to preserve housing affordability.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Department of Housing and Economic Development, lead department Watsonville City Council Watsonville Redevelopment Agency
85
Watsonville 2005
Watsonville Planning Commission
Watsonville Planning Department
Quantified Objective:
The City staff will evaluate andforward to the Council all request for assistance in the preservation of mobile home parks.
Financing:
Staff time
Program B.10: The City staff will prepare a report for Council consideration concerning the establishment of a new zoning designation for family mobile home parks.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Planning Department, lead department Watsonville City Council Watsonville Planning Commission
Quantified Objective
Report for Council consideration by 1993.
Financing:
Staff time
Program B.ll: Watsonville City staff will monitor the creation of jobs through issuance of business licenses and production of housing and evaluate the implementation of a “linkage” policy to ensure that new housing is developed to meet the needs of the existing and developed to meet the needs of the existing and developing labor force within the Watsonville Planning Area. This policy is intended to encourage the creation and maintenance of a one-to-one jobs to resident labor force balance and to discourage the development of housing in Watsonville to meet the exported housing needs of adjoining communities.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Housing and Economic Development Department, lead department Watsonville City Council Watsonville Planning Commission Watsonville Planning Department
Watsonville Finance Department
Quantified Objective:
Report for consideration by the City Council by 1994.
Financing:
Staff time
Program B.12: The City shall continue to periodically place Article 34 referenda on the ballot to maintain advance capacity to participate in the development, construction, and acquisition of low rent housing.
Discussion: Article 34 of the California State constitution requires State public entities to obtain voter approval before they “develop, construct, or acquire” a low-rent housing project. The voters have approved Article 34 authority each time it has been requested by the City.
Responsible Bodies:
City Attorney’s Office, lead department Watsonville City Council Watsonville Planning Department Watsonville Housing and Economic Development Department
Quantified Objective:
As needed to retain advanced capacity.
Financing:
Staff time
Program B.13: In order to foster homeownership opportunities, the City has established the First Time Homebuyers Program (FTHP) to assist low-and moderate-income households to become homeowners.
To maximize the effectiveness of the FTHP Program as a vehicle for enhancing affordability, borrowers pay no principal or interest on the deferred second loan until the maturity date. The maturity date will occur when the assisted dwelling is sold or transferred, at such time as the borrower no longer occupies the assisted dwelling as their
86
P:\ADVPLAN\GP2005\Housing Element Amend GPA-2-99.rev (Revised 8/28/2000) lab
HOUSING: GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS, Chapter 6
principal dwelling place, or when the first mortgage is paid off. When any of the above three events occurs, the entire principal and interest is due and payable. Interest is based on shared appreciation as defined in the Program guidelines. The Program has been funded using a combination of HOME Grant funds, Community Development Block Grants funds, and Redevelopment low- and moderate-income housing funds.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Housing and Economic Development Department, lead department Watsonville City Council Watsonville Planning Commission Watsonville Redevelopment Agency
Quantified Objective:
Non quantifiable
Financing:
Staff time
Program B.14: Since the City has a need for all types of low- and moderate-income housing, the City shall pursue all Federal, State, and private funding and tax-incentive programs which may be used to fund the following low- and moderate-income housing opportunities:
•	new construction of ownership and rental housing;
•	acquisition of existing housing for low- and moderate-income ownership (First Time Homebuyer Program) and affordable rental housing;
•	rehabilitation of existing housing for low- and
moderate-income ownership and rental housing. This would include the addition of bedrooms to existing housing in order to better house the largely under served large families prevalent in Watsonville.
Housing and Urban Development-administered CDBG and federally-administered Farmworker Housing Grants. The City will continue to compete for State-administered HOME and Farmworker Housing Grants and evaluate and potentially compete for all other available funding for use on the activities listed above.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Housing and Economic Development Department, lead department Watsonville City Council Watsonville Planning Commission
Quantified Objective:
Not quantifiable
Financing:
Staff time
In the past, this funding has included State-administered Small Cities CDBG Program, Rental Rehabilitation Program, Farmworker Housing Program, and HOME Program Grants; State Tax Credit Allocations, and United States Department of
86.1
P:\ADVPLAN\GP2005\Housing Element Amend GPA-2-99.rcv (Revised 8/28/2000) lab
HOUSING: GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS, Chapter 6
Program B.15: The City will monitor the "risk of conversion" status of the two Federally Subsidized projects in the City (i.e.: Clifford Manor and Independence Square). If the risk status changes to "at risk," the City will prepare programs to pursue the preservation of these affordable units.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Housing and Economic Development Department, lead department
Quantified Objective:
Not applicable
Financing:
Staff Time
Program B.16: The City will contact the owners of multifamily units that received CDBG rehabilitation loans with affordability restrictions that expire during the analysis period to determine if the units can be preserved as affordable in one of the following ways:
a.	The issuance of additional rehabilitation loans with requirements for continued affordability; or:
b.	The receipt of Section 8 certificates or vouchers to ensure continued affordability.
If the private property owners do not wish to participate, the units will be considered lost.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Housing and Economic Development Department, lead department Santa Cruz County Housing Authority
Quantified Objective:
Preservation of 10 affordable units previously assisted with CDBG rehabilitation loans.
Financing:
Staff Time
Redevelopment Housing Set-Aside Funds
Community Development Block Grant Funds
SPECIAL NEEDS GROUPS
Policy C: The City will provide opportunity for, and encourage, the development of adequate housing for the city's special needs groups, including large families, female-headed families, farmworkers, the elderly, the disabled, and those in need of emergency shelter and transitional housing.
Program C.l: The city staff will evaluate and report to the City Council various incentive programs and requirements for affordable residential rental developments to provide two-, three-, four-, and five-bedroom units to meet the needs of the residents of Watsonville. This report shall evaluate opportunities to allow increased building height limits as an incentive to build larger units in addition to other requirements and incentives.
Discussion: For example, suppose a developer proposed 16 two-bedroom units on an acre of land where the allowable density was 16 units per acre and the maximum allowable square footage had also been reached. However, the City's housing need was for three- and four-bedroom units. The City would develop a mechanism to permit 16 units consisting of three- and four-bedroom units (and allow for flexibility in the maximum allowable square footage). Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Planning Department, lead department Watsonville City Council Watsonville Planning Commission Quantified Objective:
Strive to provide 28 percent of all rental units with four or more bedrooms and an additional 11 percent of all rental units with two or three bedrooms. Report to the City Council for consideration by January 1994.
87
Watsonville 2005
Financing:
Staff time
Program C.2: The City shall continue to support the Watsonville Housing Improvement Program which provides housing rehabilitation funds to low-and very low-income owners of housing for the purposes of allowing or promoting bedroom additions to relieve overcrowding.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Housing and Economic Development Department, lead department Watsonville City Council Watsonville Planning Department Quantified Objective:
Continue operation of this successful program
Financing:
Staff time
CDBG funds
Redevelopment set-aside funds
Program C3: The City of Watsonville will work with developers, architects, and representatives of the single-parent population to develop suitable plans for shared-living developments that meet the needs of these populations. An inventory of methods to promote the actual construction of these types of units shall also be developed. Methods may include, but not be limited to, incentives, alternative financing, and cooperative ventures. An outline of support programs for living and job skill training shall also be provided. Financing through the State Family Housing Demonstration Program (FHDP) will be specifically evaluated.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Housing and Economic Development Department, lead department Watsonville City Council Watsonville Planning Commission Watsonville Planning Department Quantified Objective:
Provide alternative conceptual layout plans and report outlining methods to promote the development of such units by 1994. The City will strive to assist a private and/ or non-profit organization in the implementation of a com-
munity or congregate housing project geared to assisting 2-10 or more single parent families in achieving independence.
Financing:
Staff time
Program C.4: The city staff will prepare a report for consideration by the City Council analyzing opportunities within the development process to encourage the establishment of quality, affordable child care, elder care, and other types of care facilities to meet the needs of the single head of household, dual working parent, homeless, and elderly special needs populations. In addition, the City shall consider adopting an ordinance requiring a child care facility in residential developments of 100 units or more.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Planning Department, lead department Watsonville City Council Watsonville Planning Commission
Quantified Objective:
Report to Council by January 1994.
Financing:
Staff time
Program C.5: City staff should work with nonprofit housing developers to determine the special needs of resident farmworker households and the availability of funding mechanisms to initiate a cooperative housing program. The needs of resident farmworkers are to be accounted for in programs directed at the construction of affordable housing in Watsonville. In addition, the City shall consider adopting an ordinance permitting single room occupancy structures (SROs) by January 1993.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Planning Department, lead department for SRO
Watsonville City Council
Watsonville Planning Commission
Watsonville Housing and Economic Development Department, lead department for identifying funding mechanisms
88
HOUSING: GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS, Chapter 6
Quantified Objective:
Program to be developed for consideration by Council by January 1993
Financing:
Staff time
Program C.6: The City will provide technical assistance to market and non-profit developers who sponsor subsidized housing and farmworker housing for very low-, low-, and moderate-income farmworkers.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Housing and Economic Development Department, lead department Watsonville City Council Watsonville Planning Commission Watsonville Planning Department
Quantified Objective:
Provide technical assistance as needed
Financing:
Staff time
Program C.7: The City shall assist the Santa Cruz County Housing Authority and Santa Cruz County and Monterey County Planning Departments in identifying land for migrant farmworker housing. Location criteria should include provision of housing opportunities near job sites.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Planning Department, lead department
Watsonville City Council
Watsonville Planning Commission
Santa Cruz County Housing Authority
Santa Cruz and Monterey County Planning Departments
Quantified Objective:
Meeting with city staff and the County staff by 1993 to outline a plan of action.
Financing:
Staff time
Program C.8: The City shall continue to develop and maintain an inventory of vacant and under-utilized sites adjacent to the City limits, which are suit-
able for housing for both seasonal and permanent farmworker households.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Planning Department, lead department
Watsonville City Council
Watsonville Planning Commission
Santa Cruz and Monterey County Planning Departments
Quantified Objective:
Inventory to be reviewed and updated on an annual basis
Financing:
Staff time
Program C.9: The City will continue to support the use by non-profit groups of HUD 202 (low interest) and other housing assistance programs financing for construction of housing for the elderly and disabled.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Housing and Economic Development Department, lead department Watsonville City Council Watsonville Planning Commission Quantified Objective:
Addition of approximately, but not limited to, 80 units specifically designed for elderly or handicapped individuals between July 1,1991 and July 1,1996.
Financing:
Staff time
Program C.10: To expand the supply of small housing units intended for the occupancy of one or two persons, aged 62 or older, the City has amended the zoning ordinance to provide for secondary housing units on all conforming lots in the R-l Singlefamily residential zone. The total supply of secondary housing units shall be controlled by conditional use permit with no more than one secondary unit per lot.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Planning Department, lead department Watsonville City Council Watsonville Planning Commission
89
Watsonville 2005
Quantified Objective:
Addition of approximately, but not limited to, five secondary housing units per year through July 1,1996
Financing:
Staff time
Program C.ll: The City will identify, in cooperation with other agencies, two to four possible sites in the city suitable for additional emergency shelters, transitional housing, and single room occupancy housing for 25 percent of the identified unmet homeless and transitional housing need. The expansion capability at existing sites shall also be evaluated. Use of these sites for other purposes shall not be precluded by their inclusion on this list.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Planning Department, lead department
Watsonville City Council
Watsonville Planning Commission
Watsonville Housing and Economic Development
Department
Quantified Objective:
Two to four sites to address the needs of 160 persons (inclusive of families) identified by 1996.
Financing:
Staff time
Program C.12:
The City will cooperate with private and public programs to provide emergency housing services for the homeless.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville City Manager's Office, lead department
Watsonville City Council
Watsonville Planning Commission
Watsonville Planning Department
Watsonville Housing and Economic Development
Department
Quantified Objective:
Not quantifiable
Financing:
Staff time
Program C.13: The City shall continue to provide operating funds for social services.
Discussion: The City provides money for the operation of social service providers such as Defensa Mujeres, who provide services for battered women, and the Community Action Board, who provide emergency shelter services.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Housing and Economic Development Department, lead department Watsonville City Council Watsonville Planning Department
Quantified Objective:
Not quantifiable
Financing:
Staff time
General Fund
REMOVAL OF GOVERNMENTAL AND NONGOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS ON THE DEVELOPMENT, CONSERVATION, AND REHABILITATION OF HOUSING.
Policy D: The City of Watsonville will evaluate whether the city's site improvement standards, development review procedures, and development fees form a constraint to the development, conservation, and rehabilitation of housing.
Program D.l: The city staff will review site improvement standards for parking and infrastructure requirements for streets to ensure that the standards do not unnecessarily constrain the development, conservation, and rehabilitation of housing. A report for Council consideration will be prepared.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Planning Department, lead department Watsonville City Council Watsonville Planning Commission Watsonville Public Works Department Quantified Objective:
Completion of report for Council consideration by July 1, 1993
90
HOUSING: GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS, Chapter 6
Financing:
Staff time
Program D.2: The Redevelopment Agency will evaluate requests to lend housing Set-Aside Funds for fees related to the development of affordable housing.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Housing and Economic Development Department, lead department Watsonville City Council Watsonville Redevelopment Agency Watsonville Planning Commission Watsonville Planning Department Quantified Objective:
Completion of report for Council consideration by 1993
Financing:
Staff time
Policy E: The City shall ensure the availability of adequate public facilities for the expected housing in the city.
Program E.1: The City shall continue to plan for the adequate provision of water, wastewater treatment, and solid waste disposal capacity to meet the needs of expected population growth through 2005. These proposals are outlined in the Public Facilities Element of Watsonville 2005.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Utilities Department, lead department Watsonville Planning Department
Quantified Objective:
Not quantifiable
Financing:
Staff time
Program E.2: The City shall require water conservation measures such as low-flow plumbing and low-water use/drought tolerant landscaping in all new developments. Emphasis will be not only on conserving water in new developments, but also reducing the demand for water in existing developments, with the goal of two new retro-fits for every new unit with low-flow plumbing.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Utilities Department, lead department Watsonville City Council Watsonville Planning Commission Watsonville Planning Department Watsonville Public Works Department Watsonville Building Department Quantified Objective:
Reduction in per household water demand for all new units constructed
Financing:
Staff time
Program E.3: The City of Watsonville shall carefully review all plans and proposed policies of the Monterey Bay Air Quality Management Board, Regional Transportation Commission, Pajaro Valley Water Management Agency, Santa Cruz County, and LAFCO, and will work with those agencies to negotiate standards that do not unnecessarily constrain Watsonville's ability to meet its existing and future housing need.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Planning Department, lead department
Watsonville City Council
Watsonville Planning Commission
Watsonville Housing and Economic Development
Department
Watsonville Public Works Department
Watsonville Utilities Department
Quantified Objective:
Not quantifiable
Financing:
Staff time
Program E.4: The City shall take a position on the increasing amount of State legislation which constrains the production of affordable housing.
Responsible Body:
Watsonville City Manager’s Office
Quantified Objective:
Not quantifiable
91
Watsonville 2005
Financing:
Staff time
CONSERVATION AND IMPROVEMENT OF THE HOUSING STOCK
Policy F: The City will continue rehabilitation programs to upgrade housing units throughout the City.
Program F.l: The City will continue to promote preservation and rehabilitation of historical and architecturally significant buildings. This policy will include design review for the conversion of large, single-family structures to multi-family use. Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Planning Department, lead department Design Review Commission
Quantified Objective:
Ongoing program
Financing:
Staff time
Program F.2: The City will continue to use rehabilitation loan payments to maintain a revolving fund for future rehabilitation projects.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Housing and Economic Development Department, lead department Watsonville Planning Department
Quantified Objective:
Not quantifiable
Financing:
Revolving Loan Fund
Program F.3: The Housing and Economic Development Department will continue to confer with Federal, State, and local housing officials to monitor the availability of housing assistance programs, tax credits, participation in tax-exempt mortgage re-venue financing, and other opportunities for the development of moderate-cost housing and the preservation of historic structures.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Housing and Economic Development Department, lead department Watsonville Planning Department
Quantified Objective:
Ongoing program
Financing:
Staff time
Program F.4: To maintain the quality and affordability of older neighborhoods, the City shall continue to assist low-income homeowners and owners of affordable rental units to rehabilitate their units. The city shall continue to fund this program with Community Development Block Grant funds and by applying for funds under the State-administered HOME Program, and other funding sources as they become available.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Housing and Economic Development Department, lead department Watsonville City Council Watsonville Planning Commission Watsonville Community Development Department Quantified Objective:
125-150 units rehabilitated between July 1, 1991 and July 1, 1996
Financing:
Community Development Block Grant Funds and other available programs
Program F.5: The policy of preventing the conversion of rental housing to owner-occupied housing will remain in effect unless the vacancy rate for the City is greater than 3 percent. Exception to this policy shall be granted when the applicant for ap-proval of conversion agrees to provide four out of every ten dwelling units (40 percent) to households of moderate or lower in-come. The Planning Department will conduct semi-annual vacancy surveys to determine the vacancy rate.
92
P:\ADVPLAN\GP2005\Housing Element Amend GPA-2-99.rev (Revised 8/28/20C0) lab
HOUSING: GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS, Chapter 6
Responsible Body:
Watsonville Planning Department
Quantified Objective:
Vacancy survey to be conducted twice a year through July 1,1996.
Financing:
Staff time
Program F.6:	The City of Watsonville will work
with the Santa Cruz County Housing Authority to preserve and improve existing affordable housing in Watsonville. This policy also includes continued cooperation with the Housing Authority of Santa Cruz County and other non-profit developers in the development of new or substantially rehabilitated Section 8 housing units. Further, the City shall leverage federal and state financial aid programs for the rehabilitation of substandard housing.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Planning Department, co-leading department Watsonville Housing and Economic Development Department, co-leading department Quantified Objective:
75 units rehabilitated between July 1,1991 and July 1, 1996
Financing:
Community Development Block Grant Funds and other available programs
Program F.7:	The City will continue to pursue
improvement of its code enforcement program to ensure that the housing stock of Watsonville provides a safe and healthy living environment without undue cost burdens that can adversely impact affordability. Establish a city staff Code Enforcement Committee to monitor code enforcement and inspections, and arrange for financing mechanisms to provide housing for families displaced by code enforcement. The City will work with community organizations in considering code enforcement and will consider a relocation assistance ordinance and a right of refusal policy.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville City Attorney, lead department
Watsonville Planning Department
Watsonville Building Department
Watsonville Fire Department
Quantified Objective:
Not quantifiable
Financing:
Community Development Block Grant Funds and other available programs
PROMOTION OF EQUAL HOUSING OPPORTUNITY
Policy G: The City will support efforts to prevent housing discrimination on the basis of race, ancestry, sex, sexual orientation, religion, age, marital status, children, or disability.
Program G.l: The City will continue to support the Office of Fair Employment and Housing for the State of California and refer all alleged cases of discrimination to them. The City will continue to support equal opportunity lending programs and to certify that non-discriminatory practices will be followed in the selection of residents for participation in the Watsonville Housing Improvement Program.
Discussion: The California Office of Fair Share Employment and Housing in San Jose has both a full-time Spanish speaking consultant and a Spanish speaking clerk to register complaints about housing discrimination.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville City Attorney, lead department Watsonville City Council Watsonville Planning Commission Watsonville Planning Department Watsonville Housing and Economic Development Department
Quantified Objective:
Not quantifiable
Financing:
Staff time
Program G.2: The City will provide information on housing discrimination and the resources
93
Watsonville 2005
available to victims of discrimination, in both English and Spanish, as requested.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville City Clerk, lead department
Watsonville City Council
Watsonville Planning Commission
Watsonville Planning Department
Watsonville Housing and Economic Development
Department
Quantified Objective:
Printed material, in both English and Spanish, to be available at city hall and the public library by 1992
Financing:
Staff time
Program GJ: It will continue to be the policy of the City of Watsonville to distribute low- and moderate-income housing throughout the city. A map showing the location of existing and new affordable developments of eight units or more shall be included in the report referred to in Program 1.1. Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Planning Department, lead department
Watsonville City Council
Watsonville Planning Commission
Watsonville Housing and Economic Development
Department
Quantised Objective:
Lower- and moderate-income assisted housing should account for no more than 50 percent of the maximum potential number of housing units in any one census tract at build-out. Mapping of all affordable projects of eight units or more.
Financing:
Staff time
ENERGY CONSERVATION
Policy H: The City will promote energy efficiency in existing and new housing in Watsonville.
Program H.l: Energy efficiency in new housing will be required as a design feature in all housing development proposals of five or more units. The
use of high efficiency appliances will be encouraged as will energy efficient site orientation and the use of solar heating systems, and the location of housing near job centers.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Building Department, lead department Watsonville City Council Watsonville Planning Commission Watsonville Planning Department Watsonville Public Works Department
Quantified Objective:
Not quantifiable
Financing:
Staff time
Program H.2: The Building Department will continue to require Title 24 Energy compliance.
Responsible Body:
Watsonville Building Department
Quantified Objective:
Not quantifiable.
Financing:
Staff time
MONITORING PROGRAMS
Policy I: The City of Watsonville will monitor its progress in the achievement of the objectives of this Housing Element
Program 1.1: The City will annually review and evaluate progress towards achievement of the Housing Element objectives (Figure 6-2). Staff will prepare a report for review by Council. That report will be forwarded to the State Department of Housing and Community Development within 30 days of Council review as required by state law.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Planning Department, lead department Watsonville City Council Watsonville Planning Commission Watsonville Housing and Economic Development Department
94
HOUSING: GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS, Chapter 6
Quantified Objective:
Annual report for Council review and forwarding to the State HCD describing the progress made on Housing Element programs.
Financing:
Staff time
Program 1.2:	The City will assess the affordabil-
ity of all new housing units developed within the city, in order to monitor progress towards meeting the regional housing needs goals and housing needs of the community.
Responsible Bodies:
Watsonville Planning Department, lead department
Watsonville City Council
Watsonville Planning Commission
Watsonville Housing and Economic Development
Department
Quantified Objective:
The City will evaluate affordability of all housing units developed after January 1,1991. Progress toward meeting these goals shall be included in the progress report described in Program 1-1.
Financing:
Staff time
Figure 6-2 Summary: Quantified Objectives by Income Category
Income Category	New Construction	Rehabilitation	Conservation
Very Low-income	249	146	
Low-income	102	54	56“
Moderate-income	411	25	
Above Moderate-income	742	0*	0*
TOTAL	1,504	225	56“
Notes:
* The City will continue to encourage the maintenance, rehabilitation and conservation of above moderate-income housing, but is not establishing a specific objective because this is not a significant housing issue in Watsonville.
** In addition to the conservation of "at risk" units, this number includes affordable units conserved in 1991 that were not part of the required “at risk" inventory. The City also proposes to require one for one replacement of any affordable housing unit demolished or destroyed as a result of new housing construction. Conserved units are not distributed into specific categories within the affordable range because current affordability restrictions do not specify a particular required affordability level.
Source: Alexander & Associates, 1992
95
Watsonville 2005
Photo: Courtesy of the Register-Pajaronian
A 42-unit subsidized apartment complex was completed in 1994 by Community Housing Improvement Systems and Planning Associates, known as CHISPA.
96﻿7 CHILDREN AND YOUTH
	■	
GOAL		.J#®
		
In recognition of the right of children and youth of the City of Watsonville to live in a community which ensures a secure, healthy, and safe environment, the City is committed to establishing programs, services, and facilities which support and address the needs of children, youth, and families.
Goal 7.1 Children and Youth
Ensure a secure, healthy, and safe environment for the children and youth of the City of Watsonville and provide opportunities for them to develop to their fullest potential.
POLICY STATEMENTS
Policy 7.A Planning tor Children, Youth, and Families.
The City of Watsonville is committed to providing and promoting a safe, secure, protective, healthy, and stimulating community environment for its children, youth, and families.
With regard to both existing and future conditions, the City of Watsonville shall bear this commitment in mind as it considers the direct and indirect impact of its actions on children, youth, and families as it makes decisions and during the planning processes in all areas of land use, development, zoning, transportation, human services, social services, health services, and mental health services.
Policy 7.B Affordable Housing and Adequate Shelters.
The City of Watsonville shall be an active participant in community efforts to facilitate transitional and affordable housing resources and services. Additionally, the City shall promote and expand existing services such as temporary shelters and shelters for
runaways. The goal is to assure each child, youth, and family a permanent home, reducing and preventing the trauma of chronic homelessness.
Policy 7.C Food for All Children, Youth, and
Families in Time of Emergency and Daily Survival.
The City of Watsonville shall cooperate with appropriate agencies to establish nutritional standards for food and daily meals for children, youth, and families and shall cooperate with non-profit and governmental agencies in Watsonville toward the goal of adequate and appropriate nutrition for children, youth, and families in time of emergency as well as for daily survival.
Photo: Courtesy of the Register-Pajaronian
Children enjoy the Plaza fountain in downtown Watsonville.
97
Watsonville 2005
Policy 7.D Expansion of Transportation Systems for Children, Youth, and Families.
The City of Watsonville shall participate in the coordination of transportation access, education, and safety of current transportation systems, and shall create guidelines for future development of public transportation for children, youth, and families.
The City of Watsonville shall work cooperatively with the County of Santa Cruz, school districts, the County Office of Education, and other organizations and agencies that serve children to coordinate viable transportation systems for children, youth, and families.
Policy 7.E Educational and Training Systems.
The City of Watsonville shall collaborate with the Pajaro Valley School District, area community college districts, private schools, and the University of California in order to maximize educational, developmental, and learning opportunities for all children, youth, and parents. Through joint use of facilities, cooperative agreements for staffing, sharing of expertise, and provision of programs and services, the City of Watsonville shall participate in the development of innovative methods by which develop-mentally appropriate activities, educational opportunities, and training can be provided.
The City of Watsonville is committed to working with educational, health care, social service, and recreational organizations to provide training opportunities for those professionals who work with children, youth, and families.
Policy 7.F Truancy/Drop-out Prevention.
The City of Watsonville shall work with school districts, juvenile justice agencies, recreation departments, law enforcement, and community-based nonprofit agencies to provide intervention and guidance to children, youth, and families in an effort to reduce truancy, drop-out rates, teen pregnancies, alcohol and drug abuse, preventable injuries to children, abuse, neglect, violence in the home, hunger, homelessness, and other factors that contribute to educational failure.
Policy 7.G Quality Child Care.
The City of Watsonville is committed to expediting and facilitating the development of accessible, affordable, and quality child care spaces to meet the demand for services.
The City of Watsonville shall encourage private and non-profit development of child care spaces through the development of partnerships and shared resources.
Policy 7.H Families in the Workplace.
The City of Watsonville shall assume leadership in providing a workplace supportive of families by implementing family-oriented employment policies that enable all families to meet their responsibilities at home and at work. These may include health insurance, child care, elder care, employee assistance, family leave, flexible work hours, and prorated benefits for less than full-time work.
The City of Watsonville shall encourage the private sector to implement similar family-oriented personnel policies.
Policy 7.1 Awareness of Watsonville’s Rich Cultural Diversity.
The City of Watsonville shall provide an atmosphere for children, youth, and families that encourages understanding, awareness, and respect of the community's cultural diversity.
The City of Watsonville shall serve as a model, as well as encourage the public, private, and non-profit sectors in the development of programs for children, youth, and families that promote understanding, appreciation, and respect for cultural diversity.
Policy 7.J Youth Participation and Opportunities for Leadership Development.
The City of Watsonville shall take a proactive role in the development of youth issues and programs by supporting existing programs and services as well as promoting expansion of such services as the need demands. The City shall promote youth leadership programs through youth-serving agencies. The City shall concentrate on the development of youth
98
CHILDREN AND YOUTH, Chapter 7
empowerment and on developing self-esteem-building programs for children and youth.
Policy 7.K Enrichment Opportunities through Recreation and Cultural Arts Programs.
The City of Watsonville shall provide a full range of recreation and cultural programs and activities for all children, youth, and families in Watsonville. The City shall promote and encourage these programs and activities in cooperation with cities, agencies, and organizations.
Policy 7.L Safe, Protective Environments.
The City of Watsonville is committed to promoting safe and secure environments wherever children, youth, and families gather.
The City of Watsonville, recognizing that its responsibility for protecting children, youth, and families can best be met by preventing the potential causes of harm, commits itself to aggressive prevention and early intervention efforts to reduce the likelihood of youth violence, violence against youth, gangs, childhood injury, prenatal exposure to drugs and alcohol, abuse, neglect and exploitation, drug and alcohol abuse, suicide, youth homicide, and unsafe sexual practices.
Policy 7.M Access to Physical and Mental Health Services for All Children, Youth, and Families.
The City of Watsonville shall assume a leadership role in promoting community awareness of chil-drcn/youth's physical and mental health issues and in developing appropriate resources for children, youth, and families.
Policy 7.N Advocacy for Children, Youth, and Family Concerns.
The City of Watsonville recognizes the need for increased resources and services for children, youth, and families. The City also recognizes that legislative action may be necessary to establish funding priorities and enact health and safety measures for children and youth. The City of Watsonville shall advocate for legislation supporting better child,
youth-, and family-centered policies and increased funding for programs and services at the local, state, and national levels.
The City of Watsonville recognizes its responsibility to raise the awareness of the general population regarding the plight of children, youth, and families in Watsonville. The City Council shall therefore consider preparation of an annual "State of Children, Youth, and Families in the City of Watsonville" report to be prepared and made public.
Policy 7.0 Financial Support.
The City of Watsonville recognizes its responsibility in identifying and establishing broad-based funding sources and priorities in order to meet the goals of this policy. The City shall:
•	Establish children, youth, and families as a priority throughout the annual budget process
•	Annually review the city budget to determine where funds can be re-directed to children, youth, and families
•	Enlist the business community to support the policies in tangible ways
•	Identify public and private sources of funding for children, youth, and families.
SUMMARY

The purpose of this chapter on Children, Youth, and Families is to assure that as Watsonville grows and develops, the safety, health, education, and care of children, youth, and families is considered in every phase of growth.
The City of Watsonville will continually seek to maximize existing resources and services as well as seek new broad-based resources to support services for children, youth, and families. Coordination of the delivery system for services to children, youth, and families is a high priority. It is hoped that the county, state, and federal governments will join the City of Watsonville in its commitment to plan for our collective future by caring for our children, youth, and families.
99
Watsonville 2005
Photos: Courtesy ot the Register-Pajaronian
A.	Students at Watsonville High School have taken the popular Broadway play 'Wesf Side Story" and presented it to a packed house at the Henry J. Mellow Peforming Arts Center at the school.
B.	Strong pitching and a good-hitting lineup were the keys for the 1993 SCCAL champion Watsonville High School softball team.
C.	Watsonville High graduate hugs mom after the ceremonies.
C.
100﻿8 RECREATION AND PARKS
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Recreation has been defined as a basic human need that is essential for the physical and mental wellbeing of the individual and society; parks and recreation are an important part of community life in Watsonville. The City takes an active role in providing park and recreation services with three primary objectives:
1.	The provision of parks and recreation facilities in proportion to the population of Watsonville.
2.	The provision of a wide variety of recreation services to meet the needs of a diverse population.
3.	The promotion and coordination of recreation programs sponsored by community organizations that utilize city facilities.
This chapter in part satisfies requirements of the Open Space Element mandated by state planning law. Policies and implementation measures are set forth to meet state requirements, address community concern, and to accomplishing the above listed objectives. The Environmental Resource Management chapter (9) addresses protection of open space and conservation of other natural resources.
COMMUNITY CONCERNS
In 1992, the City of Watsonville completed the Parks and Open Space Master Plan, a comprehensive study of the community's parks and recreation needs and the opportunities for acquisition and development available to the city. The Master Plan addresses concerns identified during studies conducted by the City in 1983 and 1991, and during public input processes conducted as a part of the community outreach program in 1989. The following issues were identified:
• Can the City continue to provide, develop and maintain an area wide network of neighborhood and community parks?
•	Can land for parks be identified, reserved, and acquired for future park use?
•	Can adequate funding sources be provided for park and recreation facilities?
•	Can new private development projects be made to contribute toward the provision of public recreational facilities?
•	Can joint agreements between the City and the Pajaro Valley Unified School District and other
Photo: Courtesy ol the Register-Pajaronian
Anglers waited patiently at the annual fishing derby at Pinto Lake City Park. The All-American Kids Fish Free Derby is sponsored by the Watsonville Recreation and Parks Department.
101
Watsonville 2005
agencies be established to maximize the provision of neighborhood park and recreation facilities in conjunction with the development of new school sites?
•	Are current park in-lieu fees adequate for maintaining existing park facilities and also acquiring new park sites?
•	Are current recreation programs responsive to the diverse needs of the Watsonville population with regard to:
a.	Safe access to park and playground facilities for the very young?
b.	Suitable activities for the large elderly population?
c.	Ethnic preferences of the large Hispanic population?
d.	Convenient and affordable recreation programs for low-income, single-parent households?
•	Is the Recreation and Parks Commission responsive to public participation in the design and delivery of recreation programs?
In preparing the Parks and Open Space Master Plan of 1992, the City conducted three public workshops and distributed a questionnaire to interested residents, staff, and related public agencies to assess current community needs. The public input helped identify the following additional concerns:
Active Recreation Facilities
1.	Facilities are over-used and some conflicts occur between users. The city needs more sports fields.
2.	The City should consider a "swim-gym" facility and a golf course.
3.	Play areas for children are popular and heavily used.
4.	Basketball courts are heavily used, while existing tennis courts seem to meet current demand and are not a high priority.
Trails
1.	Residents expressed the desire for a bicycle/ pedestrian trail connecting recreational facilities throughout the city.
2.	Improved bicycle access to downtown is desired.
3.	The Salsipuedes Creek and Pajaro River levee is currently used as a trail, although it is not officially authorized by Santa Cruz County. Portions of the levee are perceived as unsafe due to broken glass, lack of visibility, and presence of homeless people.
Recreation Programs
Residents are generally satisfied with the existing recreation programs provided by the City. The desire for programs to continue to focus on the needs of youth, with modifications to after school and day care programs if schools adopt a year-round schedule, was also expressed.
Passive Recreation/Environmental Education
Watsonville's natural wetlands provide an opportunity for limited wetland access and educational facilities such as interpretive signage, observation decks, and kiosks.
EXISTING PARK FACILITIES
Watsonville's park system consists of ten small vest pocket parks, four neighborhood parks, and two community parks. These 16 facilities occupy a total of 137 acres, and consist of 67 acres of land area and 70 acres of surface water at Pinto Lake. In addition to developed park areas, the city also has preserved as passive open space two small urban open spaces, and much of the natural drainage network provided by the Watsonville, Struve, and West Branch Struve Sloughs. The 1992 Park Inventory is shown in Figure 8-1.
City residents are fortunate in having a number of easily accessible state and county park facilities within a 20-minute drive. These recreational areas include: Nisene Marks State Park, New Brighton and Sunset State Beach and Campground, Manresa, Seacliff, Zmudowski, Moss Landing, and Salinas River State Beaches, Pinto Lake County Park, the special event facilities of the Santa Cruz County Fairgrounds, the magnificent scenery of Mt. Madonna County Park in Santa Clara County, as well as trail and bike access along the Pajaro River.
102
RECREATION AND PARKS, Chapter 8
NEED FOR FUTURE PARK FACILITIES
The park classification standards shown in Figure 8-2 and the following criteria were used by the City of Watsonville in developing its plans for park and recreation needs on an area wide basis.
1.	Neighborhood park facilities should be within one-half mile of all residential areas.
2.	Park and recreation facility design shall include provisions for functional design and considerations for visual impact on the surrounding neighborhood.
3.	Equipment and facility design shall include design considerations for all age groups and the disabled, with emphasis on facilities for children and youth.
4.	Passive open space elements such as trails, wetlands and riparian corridors shall be protected from active recreation use.
5.	Trails shall be provided connecting recreation facilities in the community.
In addition, Watsonville considers the following criteria when planning park facilities:
1.	A sufficient amount of land for the needs of the population.
2.	An appropriate geographic distribution of park and recreation facilities.
3.	A variety of facilities and programs to meet the needs of all age groups, with emphasis on the needs of children and youth.
4.	A preference for new neighborhood parks over vest pocket parks.
The City can assess the need for future parks and prepare guidelines for the provision of park facilities by applying the above criteria and the classification system shown in Figure 8-2 to the projected population within the city and urban limit line for the year 2005. The needed park area takes into account the provision of neighborhood facilities combined with school site development. Figure 8-3 summarizes the city's 1990 inventory of parkland and the acreages of parkland needed by 2005 to meet the city's standards. Figure 8-4 depicts the distribution of parks in 1992 and future park locations.
Figure 8-1	1992 Watsonville Park Inventory
Vest Pocket Parks	Size (Acres)
1. Atri	0.3
2. Brentwood	0.4
3. Bronte	0.3
4. City Plaza	1.4
5. Crestview	1.5
6. Flodberg	1.0
7. Marinovich	1.0
8. Peace Drive	1.4
9. River	1.4
10. River “mini"	0.3
TOTAL	9.0
Neighborhood Parks	Size (Acres)
11. Callaghan	2.7
12. EA Hall School Site	10.0
13. Joyce/McKenzie	2.0
14. Starlight School Site	3.0
TOTAL	17.7
Community Parks	Size (Acres)
15. Pinto Lake	78.5*
16. Ramsay	32.1
TOTAL	110.6
Urban Open Space	Size (Acres)
17. Memorial	0.2
18. Melwood “Walk-Through”	0.2
TOTAL	0.4
TOTAL PARK ACREAGE	137.7
* 70 acres of water surface plus 8.5 acres of land area.
Source: Parks and Open Space Master Plan, 1992
103
Watsonville 2005
RECREATION SERVICES
The Recreation and Parks Department provides a variety of recreation services, including athletic, cultural, and educational opportunities at City-owned parks and recreation facilities.
The Watsonville Youth Center, located in the central business district, provides indoor facilities for youth aged 6-17 years. The Watsonville Community Center, located at Marinovich Park, is utilized for youth and adult activities and is available to the community for rental use. The Watsonville Senior Center is
leased to the Association of Watsonville Area Seniors, Inc., an organization providing comprehensive services for senior citizens, including a congregate meal program. The City also encourages the use of City-owned facilities by youth-serving non-profit baseball, softball, and soccer groups.
In addition to City-owned facilities, the Recreation and Parks Department utilizes facilities of the Pajaro Valley Unified School District, including jointly developed school-parks such as EA Hall Middle School and Starlight Elementary School, the
Figure 8-2 Watsonville Parks Definitions
Park Type	Size (Acres)	Service Area	City Standard of Park Acres per 1,000 Population
Vest Pocket	1/2-2	1/4-mile radius	o
Neighborhood	2-10	1/2-mile radius	
Community	20+	Citywide	31
1 Includes Community Parks and Special Use Facilities
Source: Parks and Open Space Master Plan, 1992
Figure 8-3 Population Projections and Park Acreage Requirements
	Population	Current City Standard of Park Acres per 1000 Population	Total Park Acreage Required to Meet Standard	Current City Park Acreage1	Additional Required to Meet Standard
1990	31.0992	5	155	67	88
2005	50.5003	5	2534	67	186
1	Includes Starlight and EA Hall Schools. Does not include surface water at Pinto Lake.
2	Based on 1990 City limit.
3	Based on 1990 City limit plus land within the urban limit line.
4	101 acres of vest pocket and neighborhood parks and 152 acres of community parks
Source: Parks and Open Space Plan, City of Watsonville, 1992
104
KEY
•	Existing Park
® Proposed Expansion to Park O Proposed Park on City Property Q Potential Future Park
*	Existing School
Q	Existing School with Park
©	Existing School with Proposed
Park Addition or Expansion
■ Urban Open Space
o Sloughs
Existing and Proposed Parks and
Sloughs
Sources: Parks and Open Spaco Master Plan.
Callander Associates. 1992; and.
City of Watsonvillo Planning
Department
Thit Qftp/uc a not mendod io to usod lot Siio-spocthc dooston makrtg Consult ihe City or County lot dttailod tntormauon
Figure 8-4
RECREATION AND PARKS, Chapter 8
Watsonville High School swimming pool, and various school gymnasiums.
The Watsonville area contains a large proportion of very young children, youth, and senior citizens. Their leisure time and recreational activities are a priority concern to the City.
GOALS FOR RECREATION AND PARKS
The community's strong interest in parks and recreation is supported by the following goals:
Goal 8.1 Community Needs
Enhance the quality of life by assuring the provision of services, programs, and facilities that reflect the leisure needs and desires of the community.
Goal 8.2 Facilities
Provide a full range of park and recreation facilities including active recreation areas, passive natural open spaces, and a bicycle/pedestrian trail system.
Goal 8.3 Park Distribution
Provide an areawide distribution of neighborhood parks consistent with the 1992 Parks and Open Space Master Plan.
Goal 8.4 Recreation Programs
Provide a comprehensive program of recreational services for all ages, with emphasis on programs for children and youth.
POLICIES AND IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
The policies for parks and recreation serve to implement city standards for these services which are used on an areawide basis.
Policy 8.A Recreation and Parks Planning
The City shall plan for park and recreation needs in coordination with the Pajaro Valley Unified School District, Santa Cruz County, and other groups to meet the demands of the growing population. Implementation Measures
Measure 4.E.1 (page 64) also addresses this policy.
8.A.1 Parks and Open Space Master Plan - The City shall consult the 1992 Parks and Open Space Master Plan. The City shall consider the adoption of the 1992 Parks and Open Space Master Plan accepted by the Council in 1992.
8.A.2 Support Groups - The City shall cooperate with and encourage the formation of resident support groups for the purpose of fund-raising, special events, resident participation, and program design.
8.A.3 County Coordination - The City shall consult with and advise Santa Cruz County and Monterey County on the development of parks, recreation facilities, and a trail network to serve the Watsonville area.
8.A.4 Passive Open Space - The Recreation and Parks Commission shall use the adopted policies for Environmental Resource Management to protect the passive open space provided by the riparian corridors along Corralitos Creek, Salsipuedes Creek, the Pajaro River, and the wetland areas of Watsonville, Struve, and West Branch Struve Sloughs.
Policy 8.B Park Acquisition and Development
The City shall designate sites for future parks and recreation facilities and shall continue to finance, acquire, and develop park facilities consistent with the Watsonville park standards and in proportion to population growth in Watsonville.
Implementation Measures
8.B.1 Park Development Priorities - The City shall consult the 2992 Parks and Open Space Master
107
Watsonville 2005
Plan phasing recommendations and prepare an annual parks and recreation development priority list for implementation.
8.B.2 Financing - The City shall investigate the use of park and recreation impact fees, federal and state grants, assessment districts, property transfer tax, private donations, general fund, redevelopment agency, joint projects, general obligation bonds, user fees, concessions, corporate sponsorship, nonprofit foundations, public private partnerships, transfer of development rights, alternative acquisition techniques to finance park site acquisition and facilities development.
8.B.3 Land Dedication - The City shall require that residential subdivisions dedicate land area to the City for open space and park and recreational use or pay proportional park in-lieu fees. The land area for parks shall serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the subdivision. The amount of land shall be determined pursuant to the standards and formula specified in the municipal code.
8.B.4 Park In-Lieu Fees - All residential, commercial, and industrial projects shall be subject to park in-lieu fees established by City Council resolution.
8.B.5 Gift Fund - The City shall establish a tax-
deductible gift fund for solicitation of donations of land, monies and equipment for park and recreation purposes. Solicitation methods may include specific facility or equipment requests, gift catalog development or merchandise sales.
8.B.6 Park Development - The City shall, in consultation with the Pajaro Valley Unified School District, plan for the acquisition and development of additional school sites and new park facilities suitable for multi-purpose recreational use.
8.B.7 On-Site Private Recreation Facilities - The City shall use the development review process to ensure that new residential, commer-
cial, and industrial development projects provide on-site recreational facilities for the use of residents and employees.
8.B.8 Private Development - The City shall
encourage and facilitate the development of outdoor sports and recreational facilities by private organizations.
Policy 8.C Park Development Criteria
While recognizing the need for all types of park facilities, the City shall focus park development at the neighborhood- and community-serving level. Implementation Measures
8.C.1 Park Criteria - The City shall plan for and implement a network of parks and recreation facilities at the rate of 5.0 acres per 1000 persons distributed as follows: 2.0 acres per 1,000 persons of neighborhood and vest pocket parks, and 3.0 acres per 1,000 persons of community parks and special use facilities.
8.C.2 Neighborhood Park Size - The City shall
plan for neighborhood park facilities with a planned size of two to ten acres.
8.C3 Service Area Criteria - The City shall plan for and implement a network of neighborhood and vest pocket park facilities. Neighborhood parks have a 1/2-mile service area and vest pocket parks have a 1/4-mile service area.
8.C.4 Vest Pocket Parks - The City shall undertake the development of new vest pocket parks (one-half to two acres) only when land is not available to develop larger parks.
8.C.5 Community Parks - The City shall plan for the development of at least two or more Community Park facilities with a minimum of 20 acres. The eventual location of these facilities shall take into consideration land use policies, projected population growth, the need to relieve overuse at Ramsay Park, provision for active night use, and the location of additional high school sites.
108
RECREATION AND PARKS, Chapter 8
8.C.6 Trails and Paths - The City shall plan for, and coordinate, the development of a network of pedestrian and bicycle trails to connect city and county park and recreation sites.
8.C.7 Tot Lots - The City shall use the development review process to ensure that new residential subdivisions of five or more units provide safe play areas for children of preschool age (one to five).
8.C.8 Park Design - The City shall consider ease of maintenance and water use efficiency in park design. Installation of dual water systems shall also be considered.
Policy 8.D Recreation Programming
The City shall direct the Recreation and Parks Commission to plan for and facilitate community needs for recreation programs and leisure services. Implementation Measures
8.D.1 Annual Review - The City shall annually review recreational services, including after school care, to determine the levels of accessibility, public information/participation, and specialized needs of its residents during the annual budget review process. The special needs of children, youth, families, the elderly, and other special needs populations shall be considered as part of this evaluation.
8.D.2 Facility Use Fees - Where appropriate, the City shall use a park facilities fee system to help fund the operations, maintenance, and programming budget for park facilities.
8.D.3 Scholarship Fund - The non-profit corporation, Watsonville Park & Recreation Advocates, shall govern a "scholarship program" to provide funds for low-income families enrolling in recreation activities.
8.D.4 Alternative Recreation Programs - The City shall consider alternative recreation programs in neighborhoods with park deficiencies, such as providing basketball equipment to private groups, using church and
commercial center facilities, and closing streets to through traffic.
8.D.5 Community Awareness - The City shall work with community organizations and local media services to ensure adequate public awareness of available recreation opportunities.
8.D.6 Communication - Whenever possible, the City shall publish recreation literature in both English and Spanish.
8.D.7 Youth Consultation - The City shall maintain an open-door policy for the advice and suggestions of young people in recreation programming. Opportunities for youth leadership programs that empower youth and promote the development of self-esteem shall be developed.
8.D.8 Park Clean Up - Encourage participation by league sports in: park clean up after games, general maintenance, and site development.
8.D.9 Environmental Education - Develop an environmental education program to encourage appreciation of Watsonville's natural resources to include:
a.	development of trails, interpretive signs, and overlooks at public parks that are adjacent to sensitive environments
b.	encouragement of private environmental organizations to sponsor wetlands enhancements programs, and to provide docents for wetlands tours
c.	coordination with the School District to use specified areas as outdoor learning laboratories.
8.D.10 Community Gardens - Consider implementation of a community garden program. Undeveloped land that is being held for future use by the city is one example of land that could be used for community gardens.
8.D.11 Summer Programs - The City shall encourage summer recreation programs for Watsonville youth. One example is to pursue
109
Watsonville 2005
with State Parks a "junior lifeguard" summer program for Watsonville youth at Palm State Beach.
8.D.12 Cultural Education - Recreation programs, where possible, shall be designed to enhance understanding and appreciation of the cultural diversity of Watsonville.
8.D.13 Access for Disabled - The City shall ensure access for the disabled to city parks.
Each of the policies for Parks and Recreation serve to implement one or more goals. This policy-to-goal association is shown in the form of a matrix.
Recreation and Parks Goals and Policies
		Policies 8A 8B 8C 8D
Goals	8.1	• • • •
	8.2	• •
	8.3	•
	8.4	•
Sports enthusiasts play basketball at Peace Park, one of 16 public parks that serve the Watsonville area population.
110﻿q ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
The Watsonville Planning Area possesses a rich heritage of open space and natural resources. Farmland, water, wildlife habitat, and air quality are now recognized as limited resources which must be judiciously used and wisely managed to minimize stress on the area's natural resources.
This chapter of Watsonville 2005 addresses the state planning requirements for conservation and open space. It presents goals and policies for the protection and wise use of the environmental resources found in the Watsonville Planning Area. Additional City policies and actions on the preservation and enhancement of important agricultural soils are found in the Growth and Conservation Strategy chapter (3).
COMMUNITY CONCERNS
In the Watsonville Planning Area community concerns center around air and water quality, lakes, streams, riparian vegetation, prime agricultural soils, and freshwater marshes. Issues of community concern include the following:
1.	What precautions can be taken to reduce air pollution and maintain water quality?
2.	Can lakes and other waterways be protected for their scenic and wildlife habitat values?
3.	Can the wetlands associated with the sloughs be preserved for passive recreation and as wildlife refuges?
4.	Can the groundwater recharge areas be protected from urban development?
5.	Can urban run-off be prevented from contaminating water resources?
Photo: Courtesy ot the Register-Pajaronian
Habitat preservation is an important planning issue in Watsonville, where rivers, sloughs, and agricultural lands are prominent in the landscape.
111
Watsonville 2005
6.	Can open space areas containing rare and endangered plant species be preserved for their scientific value?
7.	Can important agricultural soils be preserved and maintained in active production?
8.	Can archeological resources be protected and preserved for future generations?
STRATEGY FOR ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT
The focus of this chapter is protecting and managing natural resources in a way that allows for human use and interaction, while sustaining the resource. This approach to conservation is one of stewardship. For example, conservation of farmland, a managed resource prevalent in the Planning Area, is addressed in many policies and measures throughout the General Plan. Protection of sloughs through measures such as a biological study, acquisition of key areas, establishment of a greenbelt, and careful environmental review of development on adjacent land is an example of the protection of open space.
THE CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT
The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) requires evaluation of the impact projects will have on the environment. The Act specifies the types of projects required to be evaluated and offers guidance with regard to the level of evaluation. The City of Watsonville includes environmental evaluation, in accordance with CEQA, in the approval of both private and public projects.

The City of Watsonville lies 16 miles southeast of Santa Cruz, 23 miles northeast of Monterey, and about 30 miles southwest of San Jose. The Watsonville Planning Area shares the same geography and climatic conditions as the larger Pajaro Val-
ley. The Pajaro Valley, the floodplain for the Pajaro River and its tributaries, is characterized by rich agricultural soils. The ridges of the Santa Cruz Mountains form the northeast extension of the Pajaro watershed, elevated terraces mark the northern and southern limits, and the Monterey Bay forms the westward extent of the valley.
Elevations in the Pajaro Valley range from sea level to 1,897 feet above sea level at Mount Madonna. Within the Watsonville urbanized area, elevations range between 10 and 160 feet above sea level. Most of the developed area of Watsonville is within a range of 25 to 75 feet above sea level.
CLIMATE
The climate of Watsonville makes it ideal for both growing crops and as a place to live. Temperature extremes are rare, ranging from occasional lows of 28 degrees F. to highs of 95 degrees F. These extremes are experienced for only short durations. The mild Mediterranean climate produces a long crop growing season of about 237 days per year.
Rainfall increases with distance inland from the Bay. Average annual rainfall is about 17 inches at the mouth of the Pajaro River, 21 inches at Watsonville, and as high as 50 inches at the crest of Mount Madonna. Ninety percent of all precipitation occurs between November and April with February being the wettest month. Wind direction is generally from the west off Monterey Bay.
X,X'X<-X,>X-X-X-X*X,X«-X-XwX<,X-X-X<X'X-X,X'X-X-X<-XvX,!«’X,X<X«X,X*X-X-
NATURAL RESOURCES
AIR RESOURCES
Watsonville is located within the North Central Coast Air Basin, which includes Monterey, Santa Cruz, and San Benito Counties. The air district generally has excellent air quality, and has qualified and applied for federal attainment status by virtue of meeting federal air quality standards. The district, however, has occasionally exceeded the more stringent state air quality standards for ozone and inhalable particulate matter less than 10 microns in
112
ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT, Chapter 9
diameter (PM^)- As a result, the area has been classified as a moderate nonattainment area for state purposes.
Ozone is produced by reactions between hydrocarbons and nitrogen oxides (NOx) in the atmosphere. Ozone is the primary component of "smog." The federal ambient air quality standard for ozone is 0.12 parts per million (ppm) while the stricter state standard is 0.09 parts per million. Monitoring of air quality is conducted by the Monterey Bay Unified Air Pollution Control District (MBUAPCD). The MBUA-PCD operates six ambient air monitoring stations in the North Central Coast Air Basin. These stations are located in Carmel Valley, Hollister, Salinas, Santa Cruz, Scotts Valley, and Watsonville. The MBUAPCD has prepared the 1991 Air Quality Management Plan to achieve the national ozone standard and more stringent state standard for inhalable particulates and ozone by implementing strategies to control emissions from stationary sources such as factories and from mobile sources such as automobiles.
The 1991 Air Quality Management Plan recommends adoption of 20 measures to control emission of reactive organic gases from stationary sources, five measures for stationary sources of oxides of nitrogen emissions and eight transportation control measures. These measures in combination with four measures included in the 1989 Air Quality Management Plan are anticipated to bring the basin into compliance with the state ozone standard by 1997. Programs to address particulates are also included in the 1991 Air Quality Plan. Those programs are projected to result in a reduction of approximately two tons of PM10 emissions by 1994.
The City of Watsonville has included a wide variety of programs in this chapter and the Transportation and Circulation chapter (10) to address air quality. The Land Use chapter (4) plans for increased densities of housing and jobs within the existing city and high density concentrations of housing and jobs in areas proposed to be annexed. This land use pattern strongly supports the use of transit and transportation system management (TSM) programs. Also, the City has adopted a trip reduction ordinance consistent with the Regional Congestion Management Program. New areas will be developed through specific
plans requiring that transit, TSM, and other trip reduction opportunities be aggressively pursued in the designs. As noted in the Transportation and Circulation chapter (10), Watsonville strongly supports the development of a fixed guideway system from Watsonville to Santa Cruz.
WATER RESOURCES
The water resources of the Planning Area are found both above and below the surface. Groundwater conservation is an important planning issue for Watsonville because the aquifers in the Pajaro Valley supply about 85 percent of the city’s water. Water quality is monitored by the Public Works Department.
Surface water resources include five small lakes, Corralitos and Salsipuedes Creeks, the Pajaro River, and the Watsonville, Struve, West Branch Struve, Gal-lighan, Hanson, and Harkins sloughs. Freshwater marshes have formed along these sloughs and now provide valuable habitat for water-oriented mammals, birds, reptiles, and amphibians. Five small lakes (Pinto, College, Kelly, Drew and Tynan) also provide wildlife habitat and an important flood protection function during the winter months when their combined area covers nearly 400 acres. College Lake accounts for half of the 400 surface acres but is usually dry during summer months. These lakes are used as resting places by migratory waterfowl. Pinto Lake is also an important regional recreational facility.
Precipitation within the Pajaro Valley watershed reaches the groundwater aquifers through seepage along the tributaries of the Pajaro River and by direct infiltration across a wide band of undeveloped land used for agriculture. When urbanization occurs over groundwater recharge areas, the rate of infiltration is reduced and the rate of surface run-off is increased. The potential for water pollution is also increased by urban run-off which may contain oil and various chemical compounds, and by agricultural fertilizers.
SOIL RESOURCES
Most of the soils found within the Planning Area are alluvial types associated with the drainage pattern of
113
Watsonville 2005
local creeks and streams. These soil types have high agricultural value and include the Laguna, Soquel, Corralitos, Pajaro, and Botella series.
Land in the Planning Area can be categorized on the basis of topography, drainage, and soil type.
1.	Uplands
Uplands are generally defined as the areas east and north of the city, with topography generally unfavorable for row crops. Drainage is good but soils are shallow and of medium texture. Slope tends to make upland soils very susceptible to erosion. These lands are used primarily for animal grazing and pasture.
2.	Alluvial Fans and Flood Plains
Alluvial fans and flood plains, the predominant land types within the Planning Area, have the best agricultural soils. Slopes are very gradual and soils tend to run deep and have good water retention.
3.	Low Terraces
These lands are found between the alluvial fans and the valley floor. Soil types found here are subject to considerable erosion if not protected.
4.	Basin
The basin area is formed at the lower reach of the Pajaro River. The land is very flat with high clay and organic content, resulting in poor drainage. These soils generally lack strength for the support of structures.
AGRICULTURAL LANDS
The agricultural heritage of Watsonville and the Pajaro Valley is an important aspect of Watsonville's character. Agriculture has historically provided an important life-style and employment choice for the residents of the Pajaro Valley. Within the 1990 City limits of Watsonville none of the land shown on the Land Use Diagram accompanying Watsonville 2005 is designated for agricultural use, although much of the City is located on agricultural land. Beyond the
1990 City limits agriculturally designated and utilized lands virtually surround Watsonville.
Agricultural lands are classified in several ways.
Two prominent classification systems for agricultural lands surrounding Watsonville are: (1) the Soil Conservation Service (SCS) Capability Classification Class I and II lands with a Storie rating of 60-100; and (2) the County of Santa Cruz land use designation Commercial Agriculture (CA). Lands currently under Williamson Act Contracts are also notable. Detailed descriptions of these classification methods and their applicability to the Pajaro Valley are included in Appendix B. Crops produced on these lands include row crops, primarily lettuce and berries, apple orchards, and some greenhouse operations. Lands within the urban limit line with these designations are shown on Figure 9-1.
The preservation of agricultural lands is important for a variety of reasons including: food production, employment, economic productivity, open space preservation, and linkage to cultural heritage. Today in the Pajaro Valley these needs must be balanced with the socio-economic realities of the community, the state and the countiy.
Through the 1950s, 60s and 70s the development of agricultural lands with urban sprawl was a concern of significant magnitude in California. The institution of Local Agency Formation Commissions (LAF-COs) in the State of California was substantially directed at stopping this trend. Recent trends in agricultural production in Santa Cruz County indicate an 18% decrease in the acreage in agricultural production in the County throughout the 1980s (1990 Crop Report). However, strong County policies through the 1980s severely limiting the annexation and development of agricultural lands have been stringently held to by Santa Cruz County and LAFCO. As a result, the 18% decrease in agricultural lands in production over the 1980s can not be attributed to urban sprawl, but to agricultural market factors discouraging agricultural production. These lands are not being converted to urban uses, they lie fallow because of other factors.
Watsonville has contributed significantly over the years to the preservation of the agricultural base of the Pajaro Valley. With the second highest developed
114
KEY
■ ■■■ Planning Area Boundary
•••••••• Urban Limit Line
City of Watsonville, Incorporated Area as of 1992
SCS Class I and II Stone Rating 60-100
County Land Use Designation - CA Commercial Agricultural
PLANNING DEPARTMENT
Important
Agricultural Lands within the Urban Limit Line
Source: Sphero of Inlluonco Study, Strolow and Associates. 1992
Thj graphic it not mienood to bo utod lor tiiospoc/hc tJcdtion mating Comu't tht City or County lor doiwiod mlormaiion
Figure 9-1
ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT, Chapter 9
density in Santa Cruz County, it has demonstrated its significant commitment to preserving that base. It has solidly supported the agricultural industries that comprise much of its economic base. In addition, Watsonville has worked hard over the years to support agricultural workers and their families by providing an affordable, full service community. Watsonville's ability to continue to meet that commitment is compromised by a variety of factors today including the County's stringent agricultural land preservation policies.
Watsonville 2005 maximizes preservation of agricultural land in the Pajaro Valley by emphasizing City-centered growth. New housing and jobs are provided by increasing densities in the existing City and through selective expansion of the City into adjacent lands. By focusing growth in and around the City, agricultural lands can be preserved in the outlying unincorporated areas.
Within the urban limit line and beyond the existing City limits, there are approximately 360 acres of land considered prime by the SCS which are not designated as agriculture on the Land Use Diagram. None of this land is in Williamson Act agricultural preserve. Assuming 285 acres are in production, the conversion of these lands to other uses would impact approximately 1.5 percent of the agricultural production lands in Santa Cruz County. This figure is small considering that Watsonville is virtually surrounded by agricultural lands.
Agricultural jobs are important to the labor force of Watsonville. Nonetheless, it is important to keep in perspective the number of jobs an acre of agricultural land creates. There are approximately 20,200 acres of land in the County in agricultural production (1990 Santa Cruz County Crop Report). The State of California Employment Development Division estimates that there were approximately 7,000 permanent agriculturally-related jobs in Santa Cruz County. These include both farm labor jobs and agricultural support industry jobs. This number is also supported by the 1990 Census which identified 7,099 agricultural, fishing and forestry jobs in Santa Cruz County. Assuming also an additional 1,200 peak month seasonal agricultural jobs (Migrant Farm Labor Report, State of California), each acre of land in Santa Cruz County in agricultural production pro-
duces four-tenths of a job. Many of those jobs would be filled by workers with low job skill levels, who are not presently making a living wage. If all of the Class I and II soil within the urban limit line, which is not designated as agriculture, converted from agricultural production, approximately 140 agricultural jobs would be lost.
The conversion of these lands would allow for the production of additional housing units and thousands of jobs at development densities exceeding those current high development densities and intensities present in Watsonville today. Many of those jobs would be filled by workers with low job skill levels, who are not presently making a living wage. Job skill training and commercial and manufacturing jobs would be emphasized to support these efforts. Without these lands, Watsonville will not be able to maintain its commitment to agriculture, agricultural workers and the agricultural heritage of the Pajaro Valley.
BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES 1
Important biological resources in Watsonville and vicinity are largely associated with water resources including marshes, creeks, rivers, lakes and sloughs. Wetland habitat preservation is an important planning issue, particularly when the natural setting provides protective cover for endangered or threatened species. In addition, these areas: function as life support for a variety of non-endangered species, provide open space and passive recreational areas, and offer valuable opportunities for research and education.
Farming and animal grazing over the last one hundred years has altered or removed many of the habitat areas for plants and native animals. Within the Planning Area the most significant remaining
1. Information for this portion of the General Plan was derived from: the California Department of Fish and Game (CDFG) Natural Diversity Data Base (NDDB), the 1975 Conservation Element of the General Plan, the Final Environmental Impact Report for the Villages, October 1990, prepared by CH2M Hill, and Draft Subsequent Environmental Impact Report for the Franich Annexation, September 7,1989 and the Final Subsequent Environmental Impact report for the Franich Annexation, May 1991, both prepared by Jones & Stokes Associates, Inc.
117
Watsonville 2005
biological resource is the network of slough and marsh habitat. The South County Slough System is a wetland/upland complex which includes Watsonville Slough, Struve Slough, West Struve Slough, Gal-lighan Slough, Hanson Slough and Harkins Slough. It is the largest and most significant wetland habitat between Pescadero Marsh to the northwest and Elkhorn Slough to the south. The South County Slough System is designated as an Area of Significant Biological Importance by the California Department of Fish and Game and is identified as a Significant Biotic Resource in the County's Growth Management Plan. This slough system is especially important as a refuge and resting area for resident, winter, and migrating fowl, and supports the largest concentration of migrant and wintering raptors in Santa Cruz County.
A large portion of West Struve Slough, located west of Highway 1, is managed by CDFG as a wildlife refuge (CH2M Hill Final Environmental Impact Report for The Villages, October 1990). Additional biological resources include those in the vicinity of the Pajaro River, Salsipuedes Creek and Corralitos Creek.
The City of Watsonville and the County of Santa Cruz have joined efforts1 to complete a biologic study to inventory the plant and animal resources included in the slough areas. The funding of this study is intended to be achieved as a result of the efforts of non-profit and for-profit organizations. Once the inventory is complete, a variety of protection measures are intended to be designed and implemented. These measures may include, but are not limited to, the designation of areas to be preserved, setbacks, urban run-off control, erosion control and the development of plans for interpretive facilities and trails. The preparation of the inventory and the implementation of follow-up protection methods is supported by Watsonville 2005.
Watsonville and its vicinity are fortunate to contain valuable habitat that supports members of species which are known to be diminishing throughout all or part of their natural ranges. Special status species include California fully protected species, California
1. In conjunction with AMBAG a water quality study was initiated in 1993.
species of special concern, state threatened and endangered species, federal candidates (Category 1 and 2) for threatened or endangered species status, and federal threatened and endangered species. Figure 9-2 lists the special status species that may exist within the urban limit line. A brief description of each of these species is included in Appendix C.
MINERAL RESOURCES
The State Board of Mining and Geology has adopted special regulations to protect lands classified MRZ-2 (lands where adequate information indicates that significant stone, sand, and/or gravel deposits are present, or where it is judged that a high likelihood for their presence exists; and lands otherwise designated as areas of statewide or regional significance relative to mineral resources). Mapping conducted in 1982 and Special Report 146, Parts I and IV, Mineral Land Classification: Aggregate Materials in the San Francisco-Monterey Bay Area, 1986 and 1987, prepared by the State Division of Mines and Geology, in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act, do not indicate any MRZ-2 designated resources or resources of statewide or regional significance within the Watsonville Planning Area. This report further indicates that the stone, sand, and gravel needs of Monterey Bay Region through the year 2030 can be more than met by the MRZ-2 reserves already identified (over twice the estimated consumption amount is available in existing MRZ-2 reserves).
One existing quarry, the O'Connell Quarry, is operating within the Planning Area. This existing facility, while not meeting State-identified criteria, has been identified as significant by the State, within Report No. 7, Designation of Regionally Significant Construction Aggregate Resources Areas in the South San Francisco Bay, North San Francisco Bay, Monterey Bay Production-Consumption Regions, January 1987, related to its current use as a supply of construction related aggregate in an urbanizing area. This quarry is located along the south side of Buena Vista Drive, southwest of Harkins Slough Road. O'Connell is owned by Santa Cruz County and is operated as part of its Buena Vista solid waste landfill operation. A cooperative agreement with Granite Construction Company allows the extraction of sand and gravel in accordance with a designated
118
ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT, Chapter 9
Figure 9-2 Special Status Species that may exist within the Urban Limit Line
Species	Legal Status	Preferred Habitat
Plants		
Gairdners Yampah	FC2	Grassland
Santa Cruz Tarplant	FC1, SE	Grassland
Wildlife		
California Tiger Salamander	FC2, SSC	Wetland, grassland
Santa Cruz Long-Toed Salamander	FE, SE	Wetland, riparian, oak woodland
Western Pond Turtle	FC2, SSC	Wetland, riparian, oak woodland
Red-Legged Frog	FC2, SSC	Wetland
Black-Crowned Night-Heron	SA	Wetland, riparian
Black-Shouldered Kite	CP	Wetland, grassland
Burrowing Owl	SSC	Grassland
California Horned Lark	FC2	Grassland
Ferruginous Hawk	FC2, SSC	Grassland
Golden Eagle	SSC	Grassland
Loggerhead Shrike	FC2	Grassland
Merlin	SSC	Grassland, wetland
Northern Harrier	SSC	Wetland, grassland
Peregrine Falcon	FE, SE	Wetland, grassland
Short-Eared Owl	SSC	Wetland, grassland
Tricolored Blackbird	FC2, SSC	Wetland, grassland, riparian
Yellow Warbler	SSC	Riparian
Steelhead	SA	Streams
FE = Federally listed endangered FC = Federal candidate
1	Category 1
2	Category 2
Status explanations:
SE = State listed as endangered SSC = State species of special concern
CP = California fully protected
SA = Special Animal (Species listed by CNDDB as
Special Animals, but not designated as protected under other categories listed above)
Source: The California Department of Fish and Game (CDFG) Natural Diversity Data Base (NDDB), the 1975 Conservation Element of the General Plan, the Final Environmental Impact Report for the Villages, October 1990, prepared by CH2M Hill, and Draft Subsequent Environmental Impact Report for the Franich Annexation, September 7, 1989 and the Final Subsequent Environmental Impact report for the Franich Annexation, May 1991, both prepared by Jones & Stokes Associates, Inc., the Final Environmental Impact Report for the Watsonville 2005 General Plan Update and Sphere of Influence Amendment, June 1993, prepared by CH2M Hill.
119
Watsonville 2005
schedule. The pit created by the extraction operation is then used for landfill. Quarrying and landfill are anticipated to continue at this site through at least 2005. Improved solid waste reduction and recycling programs may prolong the life of this operation. The reclamation plan for this site ultimately calls for the landfill to be covered over and planted for open space.
The O'Connell Quarry is located well beyond the city's urban limit line. Watsonville 2005 does not project urbanization in the vicinity of this quarry.
The County retains land use control of this area, with the City requesting the opportunity to comment on any plans or proposals for the area. It is the intention of the City of Watsonville to work with Santa Cruz County to allow this quarry/landfill operation to continue to the extent that significant nuisances, hazards, or environmental damage do not occur. The City shall also work with the County to ensure that reclamation occurs in a well-planned, timely, and comprehensive fashion.
Egrets are frequently seen along waterways in the Pajaro Valley. “Pajaro" means bird in Spanish.
COASTAL ZONE
The City of Watsonville has a Local Coastal Plan that describes use regulations for the five Coastal Zone properties within the City limits. The sites are shown on the Land Use Diagram. The specific uses and conditions applicable to these properties are outlined in the Local Coastal Plan and the Coastal Zone Implementation Plan, included within the Municipal Code. Amendment of these Plans will be required when additional coastal lands are brought under the jurisdiction of the City.
TIMBER RESOURCES
There are no economically significant timber resources in the Planning Area. However, there are scenic Redwood and Douglas Fir woodlands along the shaded ravines of the Santa Cruz Mountains to the east of Watsonville. These woodlands form a scenic backdrop to the city and perform a valuable watershed protection function. They also provide a recreational resource within a twenty minute drive from Watsonville.
ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCES
The Pajaro Valley's geographic location has provided a rich and varied array of archaeological resources. The State Archaeological Inventory has identified at least 19 recorded sites within the Planning Area and indicated a strong likelihood of future discoveries. Future development must respect these important scientific and cultural reasons. Toward that end, policies are included to protect them from the adverse impacts of development.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
A serious potential threat to the natural resources of the Pajaro Valley is contamination by hazardous materials. Hazardous material threats include products and by-products of local industry and commerce, toxic household products, and hazardous materials being transported through the area. The overall goal of the policies in this plan is to protect both the residents and the environment from damage by exposure to such materials.
120
ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT, Chapter 9
Policies focus on damage prevention through careful planning and monitoring, source reduction and waste minimization, and preparedness for organized management, containment, and clean-up when accidents occur. Additional related policies and implementation measures are found in the Transportation chapter, Public Facilities chapter, and Public Safety chapter.
ENERGY
Energy conservation and promotion of alternative energy resources can benefit Watsonville. Preserving non-renewable resources will help assure future availability. Reduction of gasoline consumption will assist the City in improving air quality, reducing traffic congestion, and providing gasoline cost savings to the residents. Reduction in natural gas and electric consumption will provide utility savings to the residents. The promotion of alternative energy will contribute to the job and tax base of the City.
The General Plan addresses reduced energy consumption in a variety of locations. The Housing, Urban Design and Scenic Resources chapters provide policies and implementation measures relative to reduction of energy consumption and promotion of the use of alternative energy resources in residential, commercial, and industrial developments. The Transportation and Circulation chapter outlines policies and programs for reducing automobile use and therefore fuel consumption and promotes the development and use of alternative transportation modes and electric vehicles. The Land Use chapter and accompanying Land Use Diagram encourages land use densities, intensities and locations that enable the use of transportation modes other than the single occupant automobile. The portion of the Environmental Resource Management chapter addressing the air quality includes a variety of measures to reduce fossil fuel dependency and encourage alternative transportation modes.
GOALS FOR ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
Goals for environmental resource management have been established to preserve the natural resources of the Planning Area. These goals provide for open space, conservation, and limitations on the extent of future urbanization.
Goal 9.1 Open Space Network
Provide a comprehensive network of open space land uses for outdoor recreation and environmental protection.
Goal 9.2 Open Space Preservation
Preserve the open space and agricultural land uses surrounding the urban limit line which contribute to the economic base, provide scenic vistas, and offer opportunities for scientific exploration.
Goal 9.3 Natural Resources
Identify and protect the natural resources of the Watsonville Planning Area.
Goal 9.4 Air Quality
Maintain or improve the present air quality level within the Pajaro Valley.
Goal 9.5 Water Quality
Ensure that surface and groundwater resources are protected.
Goal 9.6 Soil Conservation
Preserve and protect the soil resources throughout the community and minimize the environmental degradation caused by soil erosion, construction impact on soils, and deterioration of water quality caused by suspended solids.
Goal 9.7 Agricultural Soils
Limit the urbanization of productive agricultural soils to only those parcels contiguous with existing urban use, best suited for urban development, and within the urban limit line.
121
Watsonville 2005
Goal 9.8 Wildlife Habitat
Preserve and protect the remaining areas of wildlife habitat for their scenic and scientific value.
Goal 9.9 Mineral Resources
Provide for protection and appropriate conservation of economically important mineral resources.
Goal 9.10 Archaeological Resources
Identify and protect prehistoric resources for their scientific, educational, and cultural values.
Goal 9.11 Hazardous Materials
Protect the air, water, soil, and biotic resources from damage by exposure to hazardous materials through aggressive management of hazardous materials.
Goal 9.12 Energy
Promote the conservation of energy and the use of alternative energy resources in transportation and residential, commercial, and industrial development.
POLICIES AND IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
The policies for environmental resource management reflect the state mandate for open space and conservation elements. In general they serve to direct urban development away from areas with significant natural resources. Additional environmental resource management policies and implementation measures are included in the Public Facilities and Services chapter (11).
Policy 9.A Open Space Land Use
The City shall designate land as environmental management to protect ecological, scientific, and scenic values.
Implementation Measures
9.A.1 Environmental Protection - The City shall use planning measures, such as an urban limit line, greenbelts, open space zoning, conservation easements, and other tools, to
restrict urban development in environmentally sensitive areas.
9.A.2 Landscape Restoration - The City shall require landscape restoration with native plants from regional seed stocks on sites disturbed by urban development.
9.A.3 Land Purchase - When necessary and possible, the City shall purchase lands for open space uses including wildland preservation, parks, environmental safety, and scenic corridor preservation.
9.A.4 Biological Study - The City shall cooperate with the County in preparing a biological study for protection of the sloughs and habitat dependent on the sloughs located in and around Watsonville. A plant inventory and map of sensitive biological and botanical resources should be a part of the study.
9.A.5 Acquisition and Management Plan - The City Council shall consider approving an Open Space Acquisition Plan within two years of the adoption of Watsonville 2005.
The goal of the plan is to protect and manage wetlands, wetland-associated uplands, sensitive habitats, grasslands, and other environmentally sensitive habitats and agricultural lands. The plan shall evaluate acquisition priorities based on resource values, degree of threat, and availability. The plan shall explore and, where feasible, implement such means as public and private loans and grants, open space districts, transferrable density credits, dedications from property owners, purchase/leasebacks of agricultural lands, developer fees, and city funds to protect environmentally sensitive and agricultural lands.
Policy 9.B Natural Resource Protection
The City shall designate land necessary for the preservation of natural resources and to avoid conflicts with urban land uses.
122
Watsonville 2005
be limited to reductions in parking requirements, reduced development fees, increased development intensity or other mechanisms that encourage employer cooperation.
9.C.7 Other Use-based Incentives - The City shall provide incentives to high trip generation uses, such as schools, hospitals, and some commercial uses to develop trip reduction programs.
Discussion: Incentives may include but not be limited to those outlined above or others that encourage high trip generation use participation.
9.C.8 Transportation Management Associations -The City shall promote the creation of transportation management associations in areas of high employment density.
9.C.9 Environmental Review - The City shall use the environmental review process to determine both stationary source and transportation related potential air quality impacts for project proposals.
9.C.10 Construction-related Impacts - The City shall require construction contractors to implement a dust abatement program to reduce the effect of construction on local PM10 concentrations.
9.C.11 Planning for Electric Automobiles - The City Council shall consider an ordinance requiring all new development to install electrical power sources in parking areas and garages to recharge electric automobiles.
9.C.12 Promotion of Low-Emission Automobiles -Where feasible, the City shall consider replacing its fleet of city automobiles with clean fuel and low-emission vehicles as vehicles wear out.
9.C.13 Innovative Programs - The City shall look for ways to work with the private, nonprofit, and public sectors to achieve the implementation of innovative programs to mitigate new air quality impacts and
improve existing air quality. Innovative programs may include, but are not limited to, high emission level vehicle buy-back (old vehicle buy-back) programs, incentives to accommodate electric vehicles in new developments, and programs to encourage transit ridership by employees.
9.C.14 Trip Reduction - The City shall consider for adoption a trip reduction ordinance.
Policy 9.D Water Quality
The City shall provide for the protection of water quality to meet all beneficial uses, including domestic, agricultural, industrial, recreational, and ecological uses.
Discussion: Water conservation and use reduction is addressed in the Public Facilities chapter (11) of this Plan.
Implementation Measures
9.D.1 Recharge Protection - The City shall direct urban development away from the ground-water recharge zones and surface water bodies. Projects with potential to jeopardize water quality shall be required to include mitigation measures prior to project approval.
9.D.2 Erosion Control - The City shall continue to enforce regulations over grading activities and other land use practices that expose bare soil and accelerate soil erosion and sedimentation.
9.D.3 Water Monitoring - The City shall continue to monitor the quality of water pumped into the distribution system, and the quality of effluent leaving the system in the form of wastewater discharges.
9.D.4 Saltwater Intrusion - In conjunction with
PVWMA, the City shall participate in state-and federally-assisted studies to identify and solve saltwater intrusion problems within the Pajaro Valley.
124
ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT, Chapter 9
9.D.5 Wetland Protection - Where drainage from developments involves discharge into sloughs or wetlands, grease, sediment traps, or other protection measures shall be required. Mitigation monitoring shall be required and enforced by the City to ensure performance as appropriate.
Policy 9.E Soil Conservation
The City shall prevent degradation of local soil resources through erosion control improvement and grading guidelines.
Implementation Measures
9.E.1 Vegetation - The City shall require that
removal of vegetation from a site be limited to the area required for building, and that all exposed soils be provided with new vegetation prior to project completion.
9.E.2 Soil Stockpiling - The City shall require that topsoil disturbed during project grading be stockpiled at the site and reapplied after construction to promote vegetative growth, unless that soil is to be transferred to another site for agricultural use.
9.E.3 Wetland Protection - The City shall require that new construction on slopes leading toward sloughs and wetlands, maintain an undisturbed protective buffer between all cut and fill slopes and the riparian zone.
9.E.4 Sediment Containment - The City shall
require that all topsoil stored on-site during construction be contained to prevent escape of sediment from the site.
9.E.5 Winter Operations - The City shall require protective measures outlined in the grading ordinance to prevent soil erosion of disturbed soil during the normal rainy season between October 15 and April 15.
9.E.6 Agricultural Land Conservation - The City shall encourage retention of agricultural land beyond its urban limit line.
9.E.7 Consultation - The City shall consult with the Santa Cruz County Resource Conservation District (RCD) for development of soil erosion and sedimentation control plans for applicable areas.
Policy 9.F Wildlife Habitat Protection
The City shall designate for open space and environmental management those areas rich in wildlife species and fragile in ecological make-up. These habitat zones shall be made part of the greenbelt where appropriate.
Implementation Measures
9.F.1 Habitat Protection - Impacts to important wildlife habitat areas shall be identified as part of the City's development review and environmental review processes, and appropriate mitigations shall be considered. Mitigation measures to be considered include: designation of sensitive areas as open space, restriction of new development on lands that provide important wildlife habitat, setback requirements, habitat conservation plans, and habitat mitigation banking. Lands within the urban limit line that provide important wildlife habitat include, but are not limited to the following:
a.	Riparian Corridors
b.	Fresh Water Marshes and Sloughs
c.	Woodlands and Steep Slopes.
9.E2 Restoration - The City shall support and encourage public and private efforts to restore degraded natural habitat zones and, when possible, to acquire them for preservation.
9.F.3 Pesticide Control - The City shall carefully regulate and monitor, within the limits of its authority, the use of pesticides, herbicides, and fungicides in and adjacent to wildlife habitat zones.
9.E4 Fish and Game Consultation - The City shall refer development proposals to the California Department of Fish and Game for its
125
Watsonville 2005
recommendations on conservation measures for native plant communities, riparian vegetation, wildlife habitat, and wetland preservation.
Policy 9.G Mineral Resources
The City shall work in cooperation with the County and State to conserve economically significant mineral deposits including sand and gravel. Implementation Measures
9.G.1 Restoration - The City and County governments shall cooperate to ensure that adequate plans are prepared for landscape restoration following mineral extraction activities within the Watsonville Planning Area.
9.G.2 Mineral Inventory - The City shall work in conjunction with the State Division of Mines and Geology to inventory lands containing economically significant mineral deposits, and to designate appropriate land uses to avoid conflicts.
Policy 9.H Archaeological Resources
The City shall foster and provide for the preservation of cultural resources and artifacts of historic and prehistoric human occupation within the Pajaro Valley. Implementation Measures
9.H.1 Inventory - The City shall maintain an
inventory of historic and prehistoric sites, structures, and landmarks of historic and cultural significance in order to determine the potential impacts on these resources from proposed projects.
9.H.2 Protection Measures - The City shall notify the Regional Office, California Archaeological Site Survey, and the Ohlone Indian Cultural Association of projects within identified archaeological sensitive areas. An archaeological site survey by a professional archaeologist may also be required.
9.H.3 Project Conditions - The City shall require appropriate land use controls on projects that may endanger or destroy historic and prehistoric artifacts. Such controls include addition of fill to prevent disruption of site by grading, and site planning to avoid disturbance on sensitive portions of the site.
9.H.4 Private Participation - The City shall foster and encourage private efforts to preserve historic sites and cultural artifacts.
9.H.5 Ordinance - The City shall enforce the historic preservation ordinance.
Policy 9.1 Hazardous Materials
The City shall protect the natural environment through aggressive enforcement and compliance with hazardous materials plans.
Implementation Measures
9.1.1	Coordinated Management - The City shall review the Santa Cruz County Hazardous Waste Management Plan and shall continue to cooperate with the County to ensure the adequacy of the plan for future control of hazardous waste in the city and Planning Area.
9.1.2	Education - The City shall support the development of an educational program designed to ensure the effective and proper use of hazardous waste and to encourage source reduction, waste minimization, reuse, and recycling when possible.
9.13 Underground Tanks - The City shall require double containment and/or monitoring of all undeiground tanks.
9.1.4	Hazardous Household Waste - The City shall support the implementation of a household hazardous waste collection program. The program shall emphasize public education on how to reduce and minimize hazardous waste and recycle usable materials.
9.1.5	Emergency Preparedness - The City Fire Department shall develop and maintain
126
ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT, Chapter 9
aggressive efforts to prevent accidental hazardous materials releases, to preplan for potential emergencies, and to provide an effective and coordinated emergency response through the preparation of a Community-based Disaster Response Plan.
9.1.6	Buffer Zone - Where residential uses exist or are proposed adjacent to industrial and commercial uses, a buffer zone or barrier shall be used to decrease potential threat of contamination by hazardous materials.
Policy 9.J Energy
The City shall strive to reduce non-renewable energy resource consumption and promote the use of alternative energy resources.
9.J.1	Alternative Transportation - As outlined in
the Transportation and Circulation chapter, the City shall promote the use and development of alternative transportation modes intended to reduce the consumption of fossil fuels and other non-renewable energy resources.
Environmental Resource Management Goals and Policies
		Policies			
		9A	9B 9C 9D 9E 9F 9G 9H	9I	9J
	9.1	•	•		
	9.2	•			
	9.3	•			
	9.4	•			
Goals	9.5	•			
	9.6	•			
	9.7	•			
	9.8	•			
	9.9	•			
	9.10	•			
	9.11	•			
	9.12	•			
Each policy for environmental resource management serves to implement one or more of the 12 goals. This relationship is presented above in the form of a policy-to-goal matrix.
127
Watsonville 2005
9.J.2 Development - The City shall encourage
energy efficient design and design which utilizes solar opportunities in residential, commercial, and industrial development.
9.J3 Land Use and Transportation - Development shall be encouraged to occur in locations and at intensities that facilitate the use of alternative transportation modes to the extent compatible with the community.
Photo: Courtesy ol the Register-Pajaronian
One thousand native trees and shrubs plus 3,000 grass plants were planted to help restore Watsonville Slough as a condition of City approval for a new auto center on Main Street.
128