 Sustainability                                                                           Our Foundation
 Introduction
 Economic opportunity, a vibrant community, or miles of beautiful open space, there
 are many reasons why San Rafael inspires those who live, work, and play in this
 unique city. Over many decades, the City’s collection of neighborhoods has grown,
 filled in with families and businesses, matured, and become reinvigorated again with
 each new cycle of arrivals. Today, San Rafael is a living tapestry. It is exemplified by
 an enduring mix of community goodwill, respect for our diverse cultural roots,
 appreciation of our natural resources, and innovative thinking. Our community
 preserves those qualities that make this city a great place and seizes opportunities to
 enhance it. Because San Rafael has so much to offer, there are compelling reasons
 to plan judiciously for its future.
 The Sustainability Element is San Rafael’s guiding strategy to actively adapt to
 ongoing changes within the community and in the environment. In concert with other
 elements within the General Plan and with the City’s Climate Change Action Plan, it
 defines the City’s goal of becoming a sustainable community by providing stewardship
 of our shared natural resources, creating economic resilience, and contributing to the
 social well-being of its citizens. The Sustainability Element is a bridge spanning what
 San Rafael is today, and how it takes shape in the future. To meet the community’s
 present needs without compromising its ability to do the same for future generations,
 the City government is committed to achieving sustainability in all aspects of
 community planning and governance. While San Rafael is making progress towards
 this ideal, there is much more that can be and must be accomplished.
 Incorporating sustainability at the city government level supports a decision making
 process that examines constraints and opportunities, as well as short term gains and
 long term impacts. It clarifies the goals and vision of San Rafael and forms a
 comprehensive strategy recognizing that one solution can solve multiple problems.
 The Sustainability Element and other General Plan elements illustrate San Rafael’s
 hallmark of community based planning; where engaged residents and businesses
 work with City staff and elected officials to identify and resolve General Plan themes
 such as managing traffic, providing affordable housing and supporting economic
 diversity. While no General Plan element takes precedence over others, the
 Sustainability Element provides an additional focus on the City of San Rafael’s
 decision making process to ensure that our community’s valued foundations and
 resources are preserved, enhanced and restored.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                             SAN RAFAEL 2020/SUSTAINABILITY                    221

               Sustainability: Balancing the Environment, Economy and
               Social Equity
               Planning and development for the evolving needs of San Rafael brings many
               challenges. Well into its second century, the City and its residents value the distinct
               collection of neighborhoods and the surrounding open space. To preserve the
               character of San Rafael, land use and development are carefully evaluated to
               determine optimum use and impact on surrounding neighborhoods. The City
               meticulously manages its established netw ork of streets to run efficiently. To
               accommodate anyone w ishing to live here, the City encourages housing for a variety
               of income levels. Working w ith other elements of the General Plan, the
               Sustainability Element provides an additional thread tying all elements together,
               forging a community that exists in harmony w ith the environment and local
               economy, w hile promoting a healthy, engaged and culturally diverse community.
               M eeting present and future community needs requires San Rafael to balance three
               inter-related foundations of the community: the environment, the economy, and
               social equity. Each foundation is vital to a thriving community and must be valued
               equally in relation to the remaining tw o. For example, a healthy economy may
               provide many jobs, but jobs filled by employees w ho commute to w ork alone from
               outlying areas create negative consequences for the environment and society in the
               form of increased fuel consumption and traffic congestion, less local employment,
               and degradation of air quality.
               The Sustainability Element and other General Plan Elements take a broad view of the
               City’s planning issues, but hone in on the fundamental problems requiring solutions.
               San Rafael pledges to confront environmental, economic and societal imbalances so
               that our community becomes resilient and adaptable at its core.
                               Foundations of Sustainability
    Environment: A sustainable environment is one in which people, plants, animals and
    other organisms live harmoniously together within the same ecosystem, without doing
    harm to it or each other. Protection, restoration, management, and conservation of our
    shared natural resources such as land, water and air, is crucial to achieving a
    sustainable environment.
    Economy: A sustainable economy is diverse in its offerings of goods and services to a
    range of consumers within our community. A sound economy includes jobs that employ
    varying skill levels that match those found locally. Businesses in a sustainable
    economy are environmentally responsible, provide positive benefits to their employees
    and the community and have the strength to weather national and global market
    swings. Locally based businesses are especially important to a resilient local economy.
    Social Equity: Social equity in a sustainable community promotes inclusiveness in the
    City’s current and future planning and development. Access to community services,
    transportation, education, jobs, government and recreation are provided to all residents.
    A sustainable community also protects its residents from potential hazards through
    recognition and awareness of our changing environment, promoting adaptative
    behavior through programs and decision making strategies that include partnerships
    with the community.
222     SAN RAFAEL 2020/SUSTAINABILITY                            Reprinted 04/28/2017

     Community Partnerships for a Sustainable San Rafael
     Effective city governance starts with a strong partnership with the people it serves.
     San Rafael has a long history of providing options for residents, neighborhood
     associations, businesses, and other community groups to bring their ideas, issues and
     concerns directly to local government. The General Plan 2020, including the
     Sustainability Element, are prime examples of our community stepping up and
     working with City staff to communicate their needs and vision for a sustainable city.
     Through public workshops, community meetings, and the City’s website, these forums
     facilitate an ongoing dialogue, a key to keeping San Rafael responsive to its citizens.
     Feedback assists the City in prioritizing local issues, while allowing opportunities to
     educate and inform. The City recognizes that active community participation is vital to
     implementing effective governance.
     Public discussion sessions consistently mention improving and preserving San
     Rafael’s quality of life and vitality, while maintaining its essential character. The City’s
     General Plan elements, including the Sustainability Element specifically address these
     concerns.
     Climate Change Action Plan
     There is undeniable evidence that climate change is
     happening now. Excessive consumption of our earth’s
     natural resources for energy, transportation and lifestyle
     choices contribute to rising greenhouse gas (GHG)
     emissions largely in the form of carbon dioxide (CO2),
     which causes the global climate to warm. Higher
     temperatures triggered by climate change can bring
     intensive weather-related events; massive droughts and
     forest fires in some areas, severe rainstorms and flooding
     in others. In San Rafael, a primary concern regarding climate change is rising sea                    Satellite image of
     level due to the melting of polar ice caps. A 3’ rise in sea level would flood nearly all             San Rafael based on
                                                                                                           a 3 foot rise in sea
     of southeastern San Rafael and parts of downtown, devastating our community by
                                                                                                           level.
     destroying or disrupting our neighborhoods, local businesses and community                            Bay Conservation and
                                                                                                           Development Commission, 2009
     infrastructure.
     At the State level, law makers have also taken notice of climate change issues. In
     2006, California legislators signed into law AB32 and SB375, complementary plans to
     reduce GHG emissions to 1990 levels from ‘business-as-usual’ levels by 2020, a
                                      roughly 30% overall reduction. Using current GHG levels,
                                      this translates into a 15% reduction by 2020.
                                      Recognizing the magnitude of the reduction goal and the
                                      importance of complying, San Rafael began proactively
                                      studying the sources of GHG emissions in the
                                      community. In 2008, the City brought together residents,
                                      community groups, county and regional agencies, and
                                      environmental consultants for a series of workshops and
                                      outreach sessions to develop a comprehensive plan to
                                      curb GHG emissions and combat the effects of climate
                                      change. During its investigation, the City identified three
San Rafael’s GHG emissions in 2005
                                      major GHG contributors (transportation, buildings, waste)
     Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / SUSTAINABILITY                     223

                           and quantified community-wide emissions and those from the
                           City’s municipal operations.
                           The community vision and recommendations culminated as San Rafael’s Climate
                           Change Action Plan 2009 (CCAP) which targets an ambitious 25% GHG reduction
                           goal from 2005 levels by 2020 and an 80% reduction by 2050. The 25% GHG
                           reduction goal by 2020 exceeds the 15% expectation of AB 32 and will require
                           reductions beyond the specific programs in the CCAP to lower GHG emissions. The
                           remaining 10% reduction is anticipated to come from addition community reduction
                                                               efforts and effects of federal programs. The CCAP
                                                               is intended to be updated frequently based on
                                                               experience in implementing programs, monitoring
                                                               of GHG emissions, changes in state and federal
                                                               statutes and best practices of other local
                                                               governments.
                                                               The CCAP was updated in 2011 to include a
                                                               quantified GHG Reduction Strategy and monitoring
                                                               program, also a key component of the Sustainability
                                                               Element. To truly become a sustainable
                                                              community, San Rafael will need to accept that
                                                              program implementation is a dynamic process,
                                                              involving objective review, community input and
                                                              collaboration with sustainable thinking in both plan
                                                              and action.
San Rafael’s GHG           Measuring Progress
emissions forecast
                           While the Sustainability Element proposes many programs designed to fulfill our goal
and reduction goals
                           of significantly reducing our GHG emissions while simultaneously becoming a
                           sustainable community, the true test of progress will be achieving measurable results
                           based on quantifiable data. By using a defined set of indicators, the City can
                           compare results year by year and make adjustments as necessary to improve
                           program effectiveness. The Goals, Policies, and Programs section of this element
                           includes a set of indicators that the City will use in its annual reporting. For example,
                           collecting annual data on public bus ridership within San Rafael provides an indicator
                           of whether programs geared toward reducing auto transportation and CO2 emissions
                           in the City are successful. Because San Rafael is commited to cutting GHG
                           emissions 25% by 2020, monitoring progress on sustainability initiatives is extremely
                           important and it is imperative that San Rafael use indicators that are easily
                           understood, attainable, and quantifiable.
    224             SAN RAFAEL 2020/SUSTAINABILITY                             Reprinted 04/28/2017

 Relationship to Other Elements
 Sustainability is an “umbrella” objective that affects many aspects of community
 planning and municipal operations. Most elements of the General Plan contribute
 policies and programs that further the City’s sustainability goals.
  The Land Use and Housing Elements guide much of San Rafael’s growth along
     transit lines and in concentrated mixed-use areas such as the Downtown and
     Northgate/Civic Center. They seek to accommodate a very diverse community,
     including housing for all income levels.
  The Neighborhoods and Design Elements foster distinct neighborhoods with a
     unique sense of place, preservation of historic structures and natural hillsides and
     convenient mobility without dependence on automobiles.
  The Economic Vitality Element promotes a vibrant local economy,
     environmentally-friendly businesses and green jobs.
  The Circulation Element looks forward to a balanced transportation network with
     convenient transit, extensive bicycle facilities, pleasant pedestrian ways and private
     vehicles powered by renewable energy.
  The Governance Element fosters a local government that is inclusive, transparent
     and celebrates the diversity of the community.
  The Culture and Arts and Parks and Recreation Elements promote cultural and
     recreational activities which bring residents together in healthy ways.
  The Safety Element anticipates the need to adapt to the impacts of climate
     change such as sea level rise and disaster planning.
  The Open Space and Conservation Elements address preservation and
     restoration of natural areas and species habitat, energy and water conservation,
     waste reduction and green building.
  The Air and Water Quality Element fosters reduction in air and water pollution
     and soil preservation.
 GOAL 25:
 It is the goal of San Rafael to have a sustainable community; one that balances the
 needs of the environment, the economy and a diverse society. A sustainable
 community is one that improves its economy, built environment and lifestyles within
 the limits and opportunities provided by the natural environment. Living within the
 carrying capacity of natural systems will improve the resilience of our community to
 withstand market shifts and the effects of climate change.
 The Built Environment
 The way that we develop our city determines how efficiently we are able to use
 natural resources, including energy and building materials. The vast majority of San
 Rafael’s greenhouse gas emissions come from energy use in buildings and
 transportation. A denser living environment with services close by can reduce
 vehicular trips by 40 percent. Green building techniques can reduce energy use in
 buildings by 20-50 percent.
 SU-1. Land Use.
 Implement General Plan land use policies to increase residential and commercial densities
 within walking distance of high frequency transit centers and corridors.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                            SAN RAFAEL 2020/SUSTAINABILITY              225

           SU-1a. Transportation Alternatives. Consider land use and transportation alternatives
           (better bicycle and pedestrian access and increased transit feeder service) to best use the
           future Civic Center SMART Station.
                     Responsibility: Community Development, Public Works
                     Timeframe: Short Term
                     Resources: Grants, Transportation Agencies
           SU-1b. Walkable Neighborhoods. Determine areas in need of sidewalk improvements, land
           use changes, or modified transit stops to create walkable neighborhoods.
                     Responsibility: Community Development, Public Works
                     Timeframe: Long Term
                     Resources: Staff Time
       SU-2. Promote Alternative Transportation.
       Decrease miles traveled in single-occupant vehicles.
           SU-2a. Bike Share Program. Facilitate the creation of a bike share program, particularly in
           the Downtown area. Conduct a feasibility study to determine feasibility, scale, and costs.
                     Responsibility: Public Works, Economic Development
                     Timeframe: Long Term
                     Resources: Private Vendors, Grants, Parking District, Measure A
           SU-2b. Car Share Program. Facilitate the creation of a car share program,
                particularly in the Downtown area. Conduct a feasibility study to determine feasibility,
                scale, and costs.
                     Responsibility: Public Works, Economic Development
                     Timeframe: Long Term
                     Resources: Private Vendors, Grants, Parking District, Measure A
           SU-2c. Bus Service. Support Marin Transit and the Transportation Authority of Marin in the
           planning, funding and implementation of additional transit services that are cost-effective and
           responsive to existing and future transit demand.
                     Responsibility: Public Works
                     Timeframe: Long Term
                     Resources: Measure A, State Transportation Funds
           SU-2d. SMART. Encourage continued funding, development and use of SMART, which
           will provide residents and employees of San Rafael an additional transportation alternative to
           single-occupant vehicles.
                     Responsibility: Public Works
                     Timeframe: Short Term
                     Resources: SMART
           SU-2e. Sidewalk and Street Improvements. Continue to implement sidewalk and
           bicycle improvements in accordance with the adopted Bicycle and Pedestrian Master Plan
           and the Safe Routes to School program.
                     Responsibility: Public Works
                     Timeframe: Ongoing
                     Resources: State Transportation funds, Measure A
           SU-2f. Transit to Schools. Encourage the school districts, Marin Transit and the
           Transportation Authority of Marin to increase funding for school busing programs,
           promote carpooling and limit vehicle idling.
                     Responsibility: Public Works
                     Timeframe: Ongoing
                     Resources: General Fund, grants
226 SAN RAFAEL 2020/SUSTAINABILITY                               Reprinted 04/28/2017
SU-3. Alternative Fuel and Fuel Efficient Vehicles.
Promote the use of alternative fuel and fuel efficient vehicles.
     SU-3a. Public Charging Stations. Install charging stations for plug-in electric vehicles
     in City garages and parking lots.
        Responsibility: Public Works, Parking Services, Community Development
        Timeframe: Ongoing
        Resources: Grants, Parking District
     SU-3b. Charging Stations for Private Facilities (Deleted per Amendment on 12/5/16)
     SU-3c. Regional Charging Stations. Support regional efforts to encourage use of plug-in
     electric vehicles and widespread availability of charging stations for electric vehicles.
           Responsibility: Public Works, Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
SU-4. Renewable Energy.
Increase the supply of renewable energy sources. Promote and encourage residences to be
resource, energy and water efficient by creating incentives and removing obstacles to
promote their use.
     SU-4a. Marin Energy Authority. Support efforts of the Marin Energy Authority to
     increase the proportion of renewable power offered to residents and businesses and to
     provide financial and technical assistance for energy efficiency upgrades.
           Responsibility: City Manager
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Marin Energy Authority
     SU-4b. PACE Financing. Participate in an assessment district financing (PACE)
     program to fund installation of renewable energy systems and other efficiency upgrades to
     existing buildings.
           Responsibility: City Manager
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Resources: Staff Time, Outside financing
     SU-4c. Energy Efficiency Outreach. Continue to inform businesses and residents of
     programs and rebates to conserve energy.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     SU-4d. Wind and Solar. Consider methods to reduce barriers in the wind and solar
     system permit process, such as the expedited permit process for small residential rooftop
     solar systems.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Resources: Staff Time
     SU-4e. Regional Energy Office. Consider participation in the County’s Regional Energy
     Office.
           Responsibility: City Manager
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time
           Previously CON-17a (Regional Energy Office)
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                    SAN RAFAEL 2020 / SUSTAINABILITY 227

                                                                        SU-4f. Zoning and Building Code
                                                                        Review. Identify barriers to resource
              T it le     2 4    St an d ar d s                         efficiency in the Zoning and Building
                                                                        Codes and evaluate the suitability of
    The California Building Code establishes building                   removing those obstacles.
    energy efficiency standards for new construction                              Responsibility: Community
    (including requirements for entire new buildings,                             Development
                                                                                  Timeframe: Ongoing
    additions, alterations, and in nonresidential
                                                                                  Resources: Staff Time
    buildings, repairs). Since first established in 1977,
    the Building Energy Efficiency Standards (along                     Previously CON-18b (Energy-efficient
    with standards for energy efficiency in appliances)                 Homes)
    have helped Californians save more than $11.3
    billion in electricity and natural gas costs. The                   SU-4g. Clean Energy Production.
    Standards are updated periodically to allow                         Encourage options, such as photovoltaic
    incorporation of new energy efficiency                              cells, for energy production. Seek ways to
                                                                        provide incentives for solar and clean
    technologies and methods.
                                                                        energy systems.
                                                                                  Responsibility: Community
                                                                                  Development
                                                                                  Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                                                  Resources: Grants
                         Previously CON-18d (Incentives for Solar and Clean Energy) and CON-19a (Energy
                         Production)
               SU-5. Reduce Use of Non-Renewable Resources.
               Reduce dependency on non-renewable resources.
                   SU-5a. Green Building Regulations (Deleted per Amendment on 12/5/16)
                     SU-5b. Use of Alternative Building Materials. Evaluate the benefits and impacts of
                     amending the City’s building codes and zoning ordinances to allow the use of acceptable
                     resource-efficient alternative building materials and methods.
                          Responsibility: Community Development
                          Timeframe: Ongoing
                          Resources: Staff Time
                     Previously CON-18c (Use of Alternative Building Materials)
                     SU-5c. Energy Efficiency Programs. Develop and implement energy efficiency and
                     conservation programs to achieve a 20% reduction in energy use by 2020, including PACE
                     financing, stretch building codes, energy audits, upgrades upon resale, education and
                     outreach.
                          Responsibility: Community Development
                          Timeframe: Ongoing
                          Resources: Staff Time, Marin Energy Authority, grants
                     SU-5d. Water Efficiency Programs. Develop and implement water efficiency and
                     conservation programs to achieve a 30% reduction in water use by 2020, including water
                     efficient landscape regulations, PACE financing, water audits, upgrades upon resale,
                     education and outreach. Make available to property managers, designers and homeowners
                     information about water-conserving landscaping and water-recycling methods and resources.
                          Responsibility: Community Development, Marin Municipal Water District
                          Timeframe: Ongoing
                          Resources: Marin Municipal Water District, Staff Time
                         Merged with previous CON-20a (Water Conserving Landscaping)
228        SAN RAFAEL 2020/SUSTAINABILITY                                  Reprinted 04/28/2017

     SU-5e. Water Recycling. Support the extension of recycled water distribution infrastructure.
     Require the use of recycled water where available.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees
     Previously CON-20b (Water Recycling)
     SU-5f. Reflective Surfaces. Encourage the use of high albedo (reflectivity) materials for future
     outdoor surfaces such as parking lots, roadways, roofs and sidewalks.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
SU-6. Resource Efficiency in Site Development.
Encourage site planning and development practices that reduce energy demand, support
transportation alternatives and incorporate resource- and energy-efficient infrastructure.
     SU-6a. Site Design. Evaluate as part of development review, proposed site design for energy-
     efficiency, such as shading of parking lots and summertime shading of south-facing windows.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees
Previously CON-22 (Resource Efficiency in Site Development) and CON-22a (Site Design)
The Natural Environment
Sustainability demands a respect for nature and our reliance on natural resources.
By protecting and enhancing our environment we can reap rewards for generations
to come.
SU-7. New and Existing Trees.
Plant new and retain existing trees to maximize energy conservation and carbon
sequestration benefits.
     SU-7a. Tree Inventory. Inventory tree and vegetative cover to determine existing resources and
     carbon sequestration, and establish citywide goals and strategies to increase carbon sequestration.
           Responsibility: Public Works
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time, grants
     SU-7b. Tree Preservation. Adopt ordinances to regulate the removal and replacement of
     significant trees.
           Responsibility: Public Works
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time, fees
      SU-7c. Parking Lot Landscaping. Maintain zoning regulations for parking lot landscaping to
     increase shading and reduce thermal gain.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     SU-7c. Carbon Offset Program. Consider the feasibility of a local carbon offset program to
     support tree planting and maintenance.
           Responsibility: Public Works, Finance
           Timeframe: Short Term
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                    SAN RAFAEL 2020 / SUSTAINABILITY 229
                 Resources: Staff Time, contributions
       SU-8. Local Food Production.
       Increase local food production.
       SU-8a. Farmers Markets. Continue to promote local farmers markets.
                 Responsibility: Economic Development
                 Timeframe: Ongoing
                 Resources: Economic Development
       SU-8b. Home and Community Gardens. Encourage the creation of home and community
                 gardens, including possible use of surplus City properties for community gardens.
                 Responsibility: Community Services
                 Timeframe: Long Term
                 Resources: Staff Time, grants, partnerships
       SU-8c. Community Garden Standards. Examine practices and standards that could be
                 established to permit community gardens by right based on performance standards
                 Responsibility: Community Services
                 Timeframe: Ongoing
                 Resources: Staff Time, Grants
       Previously PR-16a (Community Gardens)
       Lifestyles
       The success of the community in becoming more sustainable is largely dependent upon
       the willingness of residents to adopt lifestyles which are less demanding on natural
       resources. The City can encourage and enable residents and businesses to adopt
       sustainable lifestyles and operations.
       A sustainable community celebrates and is strengthened by its diversity. All residents
       have decent jobs, housing and an opportunity to participate in the governance of their
       community.
       SU-9. Social Diversity and Equity.
       Enhance social equity among all segments of the community.
       SU-9a. Affordable Housing. Continue to expand the supply of affordable housing, which
                 reduces commute times and congestion.
                 Responsibility: Econonomic Development, Community Development
                 Timeframe: Ongoing
                 Resources: Developer Contributions
       See also H-4 (Governmental and Community Collaboration), H-6 (Funding for Affordable
       Housing),H-16 (Second Units), H-17 (Reguatory Incentives for Affordable Housing), H-18
       (Inclusionary Housing Requirements), EV-12 (Workforce Housing), G-1 (Jobs and Diversity),
       G-2 (Variety of Housing), G-6 (Broad-Based Involvement), and G-7 (Community Participation).
       SU-10. Zero Waste.
       Reduce material consumption and waste generation, increase resource re-
       use and composting of organic waste, and recycle to significantly reduce
       and ultimately eliminate landfill disposal.
       SU-10a. Zero Waste. Implement and monitor the progress of actions contained in
       the Zero Waste Goal and Zero Waste Strategic Plan.
                 Responsibility: City Manager
                 Timeframe: Short Term
230 SAN RAFAEL 2020/SUSTAINABILITY                                Reprinted 04/28/2017
           Resources: Marin Hazardous and Solid Waste JPA
     SU-10b. Home Composting. Develop a program to assist and educate residents in home-
     composting.
           Responsibility: City Manager
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Marin Hazardous and Solid Waste JPA
     SU-10c. Community Composting. Create a community-scale composting program for food and
     green waste.
           Responsibility: City Manager
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Marin Hazardous and Solid Waste JPA
     SU-10d. Organic Waste-to-Energy. Encourage the creation of an organic waste-to-energy
     program.
           Responsibility: City Manager
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Resources: Staff Time
     SU-10e. Recycling. Encourage efforts to promote recycling, such as encouraging businesses to
     recycle building and other materials, promoting composting by restaurants, institutions and
     residences, and supporting Marin Conservation Corps’ work to promote recycling.
           Responsibility: City Manager, Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     Previously CON-21a (Recycling)
     SU-10f. Recyclable Waste Receptacles. Support efforts by Marin Sanitary to install recyclable
     waste receptacles in heavy pedestrian areas to encourage recycling of plastics, glass, etc.
           Responsibility: City Manager, Community Development
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Resources: Staff Time
     Previously CON-21b (Recyclable Waste Receptacles)
     SU-10g. Recycling for Apartments and Nonresidential Buildings. Encourage recycling
     facilities and programs for apartment and nonresidential buildings. Consider the cost and benefits
     of expanding recycling facilities and programs for apartment and nonresidential buildings.
           Responsibility: City Manager
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     Previously CON-21c (Recycling for Apartments and Nonresidential Buildings)
     SU-10h. Demolition Waste. Study ways to actively encourage greater recycling and reuse of
     demolition waste.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time
     Previously CON-21d (Demolition Waste)
     SU-10i. Recycling Education. Encourage Marin Sanitary to continue its recycling
     education programs, and to reach out to those not aware of the “reduce, reuse and recycle”
     techniques.
           Responsibility: City Manager
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                   SAN RAFAEL 2020 / SUSTAINABILITY 231

            Previously CON-21e (Recycling)
            SU-10j. Incentives for Waste Reduction and Recycling. Work with
            the City’s waste franchisee to create additional incentives in the rate
            structure for waste reduction and recycling and expand the range of
            recycled products if resale markets exist.
                Responsibility: City Manager, Marin Sanitary
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Fees
            SU-9f. Construction Debris (Deleted per Amendment on 12/5/16)
            SU-10k. Reuse Facilities. Assist in the development of additional reuse facilities (resale
            shops, refilling stations, repair shops and resource recovery yards).
            Responsibility: Community Development, Economic Development
                Timeframe: Long Term
                Resources: Staff Time
            SU-9h. Non-Recyclable Single Use Items. (Deleted per Amendment on 12/5/16)
            SU-9i. Commercial and Multi-Family Recycling. (Deleted per Amendment on 12/5/16)
       SU-11. Community Education and Engagement.
       Increase community education and engagement in sustainability efforts.
            SU-11a. Conservation Programs. Continue to connect businesses
            and residents with programs and rebates to conserve energy and water.
                Responsibility: Community Development
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Grants
            SU-11b. Resilient Neighborhoods and Businesses. Implement the
            Resilient Neighborhoods and Businesses program to encourage
            behavioral changes to reduce carbon emissions through effective
            education and peer group support.
                Responsibility: Community Development
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Grants
            SU-11c. Promote Sustainability Efforts. Use the City’s website and
            City publications and work with community organizations to
            promote sustainability efforts to both residents and businesses.
                Responsibility: City Manager
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time
            SU-11d. Green Festival. Partner with other agencies and
            organizations to hold an annual “green festival” to promote
            sustainability efforts.
                Responsibility: Community Development
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time
            SU-11e. Vehicle Idling. Educate and encourage businesses and residents to
            limit vehicle idling.
                Responsibility: Police
                Timeframe: Long Term
                Resources: Staff Time
232 SAN RAFAEL 2020/SUSTAINABILITY                                Reprinted 04/28/2017

The Economy
A diverse and local economy which provides opportunities and services for all segments of
the community is more resilient to potential market shifts, including those which may result
from the effects of climate change and changing sources of energy.
SU-12. Environmentally Beneficial Economy.
Support environmentally beneficial businesses and job creation.
     SU-12a. Local Green Businesses. Continue to promote new green businesses
     opportunities.
           Responsibility: Economic Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Economic Development
     SU-12b. Marin County Green Business Program. Support and encourage green
     businesses in conjunction with Marin County’s Green Business Program.
           Responsibility: Economic Development; Marin County
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Economic Development
     Incorporated CON-17b (Green Business Program)
     SU-12c. Environmentally Beneficial Jobs. Support the creation of environmentally
     beneficial jobs, particularly for low income residents.
           Responsibility: Economic Development
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Economic Development
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                               SAN RAFAEL 2020 / SUSTAINABILITY 233

                       Monitoring Sustainabilty Indicators and Objectives
                       Achieving a more sustainable community and responding to climate change
                       will take concerted efforts. It will be necessary to monitor our progress and
                       effectiveness, and to change course as warranted.
                       SU-13. Monitor Sustainability Objectives and Indicators.
                       Monitor success in achieving sustainability objectives and greenhouse gas
                       reductions.
                       SU-13a. Monitor Sustainability Indicators and Greenhouse Gas Inventory.
                       Periodically update the community and municipal greenhouse gas inventories, monitor
                       changes in the identified sustainability indicators and periodically update the Climate
                       Change Action Plan to achieve greenhouse gas reduction goals.
                          Responsibility: Community Development
                          Timeframe: Ongoing
                          Resources: Staff Time, grants
                       SU-13b. Future Development and Capital Improvements. Evaluate future development
                                                                              applications and the City’s Capital
                                                                              Improvement Program against
                    Sustainability Indicators                                 compliance with the Sustainability
                                                                              Element and the GHG Emissions
    Indicators are quantifiable objectives that allow us to monitor           Reduction Strategy.
    and gauge our effectiveness at achieving sustainability                   Responsibility: Community
    goals.                                                                    Development Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                                              Resources: Staff Time, grants
    1. Decrease miles travelled in single-occupant vehicles on
       local streets.                                                         SU-13c. Annual Reports. Prepare an
                                                                              annual report to the Planning
             Between 2005 and 2020 achieve:
                                                                              Commission and City Council
              A 10% reduction community-wide.                                assessing the implementation of
              20% of City employees using alternate modes of                 sustainability programs and the GHG
               commuting.                                                     Emissions Reduction Strategy.
              500 new housing units within ½ mile of high                    Responsibility: Community
               frequency transit.                                             Development
    2. Promote energy savings from transportation.                            Timeframe: Ongoing
             Between 2005 and 2020 achieve:                                   Resources: Staff Time
              A 20% reduction in annual per vehicle gallons of
                                                                              SU-12d. Sustainability Coordinator.
               fuel purchased.                                                (Deleted per Amendment on 12/5/16)
              100 electric vehicle charging stations in public
               locations.                                                     SU-13d. Sustainability Commission.
    3. Reduce material consumption and achieve resource re-                   Maintain a Sustainability Commission
       use.                                                                   to advance sustainability efforts.
             Between 2005 and 2025 achieve:                                   Continue to hold the Climate Change
              A 94% diversion of waste from landfills.                       Action Plan (CCAP) Quarterly Forum,
                                                                              which provides oversight on the
    4. Reduce dependency on non-renewable resources.
                                                                              implementation progress of
             Between 2005 and 2020 achieve:                                   sustainability programs.
              A 20% reduction community electricity and                      Responsibility: Community
               natural gas use.                                               Development
              A 30% reduction in household water use.                                 Timeframe: Short Term
    5. Enhance social equity among all segments of the                                 Resources: General Fund
       community.
             Between 2005 and 2020 achieve:
              560 new units of deed-restricted affordable
               housing.
234           SAN RAFAEL 2020/SUSTAINABILITY                                 Reprinted 04/28/2017

 GOAL 26:
 It is the goal of San Rafael to have municipal operations that are highly resource
 efficient and anticipate the effects of climate change. Municipal operations constitute
 only one percent of the community’s greenhouse gas emissions, but can be a leader in
 sustainable practices. The City should anticipate and mitigate the effects of sea level rise
 and natural disasters which will be exacerbated by climate change.
 SU-14. Municipal Programs.
 Implement municipal programs to demonstrate the City’s commitment to sustainability
 efforts and reducing greenhouse gases.
       SU-14a. Alternative Transportation Options. Provide transit and carpool incentives to
       City employees, including alternative work schedules and telecommuting opportunities.
            Responsibility: Public Works
            Timeframe: Long Term
            Resources: General Fund, grants
       Incorporated CON-23a (City Carpool)
       SU-14b. Alternative Fuel for City Fleet. Continue to implement existing City policy to
       purchase alternative fuel vehicles and increase the efficiency of the vehicle fleet.
            Responsibility: Public Works
            Timeframe: Ongoing
            Resources: General Fund, grants
       Incorporated CON-24c (City Vehicle Fleet)
       SU-14c. Limit Idling of City Vehicles. Adopt a policy to limit City vehicle idling where
       practical. Evaluate equipping trucks with an auxiliary electrical system for illumination and
       warning signs.
            Responsibility: Public Works, Police Fire
            Timeframe: Short Term
            Resources: Staff Time
       SU-13d. Green Purchasing (Deleted per Amendment on 12/5/16)
       SU-13e. Energy Audits Municipal Buildings (Deleted per Amendment on 12/5/16)
       SU-14d. City Electricity. Participate in the Marin Energy Authority by switching all
       City accounts over to the Light Green option in 2010 and the Deep Green option (100%
       renewable power) by 2020. Consider the use of renewable energy technology such as
       solar, cogeneration and fuel cells in the construction or retrofitting of City facilities.
            Responsibility: City Manager
            Timeframe: Short Term
            Resources: Staff Time
            Incorporated CON-24d (Renewable Energy Sources in City Facilities)
       SU-14e. Streetlights and Traffic Signals. Pursue funding to complete the retrofit of City
       traffic signals and retrofit streetlights with LED fixtures.
            Responsibility: Public Works
            Timeframe: Short Term
            Resources: Staff Time
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                   SAN RAFAEL 2020/SUSTAINABILITY                235

           SU-14f. Employee Awareness. Increase City employees’awareness of
           climate protection issues, and develop an internal committee to
           implement plans.
                Responsibility: City Manager
                Timeframe: Short Term
                Resources: Staff Time
           SU-14g. Local Government Agency Involvement. Continue to
           provide a leadership role with other local governmental agencies to
           share best practices and successes.
                Responsibility: Community Development, Marin Climate and
                Energy Partnership
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time
           SU-14h. Advancing GHG and Sustainability Efforts. Advocate for
           state and federal legislation that advance greenhouse gas reductions and
           other sustainability efforts.
                Responsibility: City Manager
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time
           SU-14i. Civic Buildings. Require that new, expanded or renovated City
           buildings that exceed 5,000 square feet achieve CalGreen standards.
           This requirement shall not apply to City facilities which are leased.
                Responsibility: Public Works Department
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: General Fund, Capital Improvement Program, bonds or
                grants
           Previously CON-18f (Civic Buildings)
           SU-14j. Green Business Certification. Participate in Marin County’s
           Green Business program to become certified as a Marin Green Business.
           As part of the programs, review ways for the City to improve recycling
           and resource-efficient purchases and designate a staff person in each
           department to establish and maintain recycling in City facilities.
                Responsibility: Community Development, City Manager
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time
           Previously CON-24a (Green Business Certification)
           SU-14k. Regional Collaboration. Participate in regional collaborations
           between public agencies to enact and support new programs or shared
           improvements which promote or utilize renewable energy sources or
           reduce energy demand.
                Responsibility: City Manager
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time
           Previously CON-24b (Regional Collaboration)
           SU-14l. Backup Energy Provision. Evaluate backup energy provisions
           for critical city facilities and upgrade as needed. Encourage the use of
           alternatives, such as fuel cell and solar generator backups, to the
           sustained use of gasoline-powered generators.
                Responsibility: Public Works
                Timeframe: Short Term
                Resources: Staff Time
236 SAN RAFAEL 2020/SUSTAINABILITY                                Reprinted 04/28/2017

       See S-34a (Disaster Preparedness Plan) and S-34c (Neighborhood Disaster Preparedness).
       Previously CON-25a (Backup Energy Provision)
       SU-15. Adapting to Climate Change.
       Increase understanding and preparation to adapt to the effects of climate change,
       including sea level rise.
       SU-15a. Vulnerability Assessment. Participate in Marin County’s regional vulnerability
       assessment, and prepare a local vulnerability assessment for San Rafael.
            Responsibility: Public Works
            Timeframe: Long Term
            Resources: Staff Time, grants
       SU-15b. Emergency Planning. Continue to provide emergency planning and
       community awareness.
            Responsibility: Emergency Services
            Timeframe: Ongoing
            Resources: Staff Time, grants
       SU-15c. Levee Analysis. Develop a program of levee analysis, including inventorying
       heights, testing and maintaining public and private levees.
            Responsibility: Public Works
            Timeframe: Long Term
            Resources: Staff Time, grants, private property owners
       SU-15d. Sea Level Monitoring and Planning. Work with the Bay Conservation and
       Development Commission (BCDC), and other regional agencies, to monitor sea level rise
       and plan for shoreline defense.
            Responsibility: Public Works
            Timeframe: Short Term
            Resources: General Fund, grants
Reprinted 04/28/2017                               SAN RAFAEL 2020/SUSTAINABILITY             237

                               This page intentionally left blank
238 SAN RAFAEL 2020/SUSTAINABILITY                              Reprinted 04/28/2017
Culture and Arts                                                                                Our Quality of Life
Introduction
The City of San Rafael is committed to addressing the interests and needs of a
culturally diverse community and to promoting cross-cultural understanding through
the arts. The City supports a range of cultural activities that includes the visual, literary
and performing arts; historic preservation; and community celebrations. Recognized
as the cultural center of the County, the City provides cultural, theatrical, literary and
artistic opportunities for youth and adults at Community Centers, Public Libraries and
the Falkirk Cultural Center. San Rafael is home to more than fifty arts and cultural
organizations including, among others, Art Works Downtown, Belrose Theatre, Marin
Ballet, the Marin Historical Museum, Marin Shakespeare Company, the Marin
Symphony, the Rafael Film Center, and Youth in Arts. The City will work to preserve
existing and develop new cultural institutions.
                                                                                                      Falkirk Cultural
                                                                                                      Center, listed on
                                                                                                      the National
                                                                                                      Historic Register,
                                                                                                      i s o wn e d a n d
                                                                                                      operated by the
                                                                                                      City of San Rafael.
                                                                                                      Built in 1888 and
                                                                                                      s a ve d f r o m
                                                                                                      demolition in
                                                                                                      1974, the Queen
                                                                                                      Anne Victorian
                                                                                                      was named after
                                                                                                      the birthplace of
                                                                                                      o wn e r C a p t a i n
                                                                                                      Robert Dollar.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                               SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CULTURE AND ARTS               239
                               GOAL 27: QUALITY CULTURAL AND
                               LIBRARY SERVICES
                               It is the goal for San Rafael to have quality arts, cultural, historical and library
                               facilities, services and programs that serve a diverse population. Arts and culture
                               are an integral part of San Rafael’s quality of life. The City of San Rafael recognizes
                               the value of cultural heritage and the arts to enrich and inspire its residents, build a
                               sense of community, attract visitors, and revitalize the city, as well as to provide
                               economic opportunity and generate revenue.
                                                                                     CA-1. Cultural Center of
                                                                                     Marin.
                                                                                     Continue to promote San Rafael as
                                                                                     the center of culture and arts in Marin
                                                                                     County and strengthen partnerships
                                                                                     between the City and local artists, art
                                                                                     agencies and organizations, schools
                                                                                     and businesses.
                                                                                     CA-1a. Community Vision of Culture
                                                                                     and Arts in San Rafael (Deleted per
                                                                                     Amendment on 12/5/16)
                                                                                     CA-1b. Promotion of Cultural
                                                                                     Offerings (Deleted per Amendment on
                                                                                     12/5/16)
                                                                                     CA-1c. Partnerships. Encourage arts
                                                                                     groups, schools and businesses to conduct
                                                                                     programs in City venues.
 Artists from as far                    Responsibility: Community Services
 a wa y a s I t a l y r e -
                                        Timeframe: Ongoing
 created the Sistine
 Chapel ceiling at
                                        Resources: Staff Time, Fees, Contributions and Donations, Partnerships
 the 10th annual
 Yo u t h I n A r t s
 Festival.
                               CA-2. Arts Plan.
                               Advance an Arts Plan with a vision and strategy that:
                               • Promotes effective public participation including San Rafael arts and cultural
                                    organizations, residents and workers in formulation of cultural policies and
                                    governance;
                               • Encourages programs to enhance the missions of San Rafael arts and cultural
                                    organizations;
                               • Maximizes use of City venues for cultural and arts events and programs.
                                    CA-2a. Funding. Identify funding to prepare an Arts Plan for San Rafael.
                                        Responsibility: Community Services
                                        Timeframe: Short Term
                                        Resources: Grants, Community Partnerships, Staff Time
                                    CA-2b. Arts Plan. Prepare an Arts Plan in partnership with the community, evaluating the
                                    current state of community arts and culture, incorporating, as feasible, vision plans
240                         SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CULTURE AND ARTS                                         Reprinted 04/28/2017

     developed by local organizations for culture and arts in San Rafael, conducting a needs
     assessment, setting goals and writing a strategic plan.
           Responsibility: Community Services
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Grants, Community Partnerships, Staff Time
CA-3. Cultural and Arts Programs and Activities.
Encourage and provide an array of both public and private cultural arts programs and
activities addressing the needs and interests of the whole community.
     CA-3a. Youth Programs. Develop additional programming for children and youth.
           Responsibility: Community Services
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time, Fees, Grants
     CA-3b. Art Classes and Cultural Activities. Continue to provide arts classes and
     cultural activities.
           Responsibility: Community Services
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees, Grants
     CA-3c. Educational Programs. Promote cooperative educational cultural programs
     enlisting the aid of public and private institutions.
           Responsibility: Community Services, Library
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time, Fees, Grants, Partnerships
     CA-3d. City Facilities. Use City facilities, including Falkirk, for art exhibits and cultural
     performances by youth groups.
           Responsibility: Community Services
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time, Fees, Grants
     CA-3e. Funding Source. Seek a consistent funding source for arts and cultural activities.
           Responsibility: Community Services, Management Service
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time, Grants, Volunteers, Partnerships
CA-4. Ethnic and Cultural Activities.
Encourage and develop activities, entertainment and events that reflect a diverse
ethnic and cultural heritage. Encourage participation in the arts as another method to
promote intercultural understanding.
     CA-4a. Ethnic Activities, Cultural Performers and Diversity Programs. Provide
     venues and support for programs that enable members of the community to participate in
     diverse cultural activities.
           Responsibility: Community Services, Economic Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time, Fees, Grants
CA-5. Public Art.
Promote a stimulating and engaging environment through the greater display of
artwork in public places.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                   SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CULTURE AND ARTS 241
           CA-5a. Art in Public Places. Seek a long-term source of funding for public art, such as
           an endowment fund, community partnerships, or an Art in Public Places Ordinance.
                Responsibility: Community Services
                Timeframe: Long Term
                Resources: Staff Time, Grants, Volunteers, Partnerships
       CA-6. Community Art.
       Encourage community art projects that create a greater understanding and appreciation
       of art and artists through community involvement.
           CA-6a. Neighborhood Arts Program. Develop neighborhood arts programs at the
           community centers.
                Responsibility: Community Services
                Timeframe: Long Term
                Resources: Grants, Volunteers, Partnerships
           CA-6b. Mural Review. Review and modify, as needed, the Planning Commission’s
           resolution regarding mural review and approval.
                Responsibility: Community Development
                Timeframe: Long Term
                Resources: Staff Time
           CA-6c. Community Art Contributions. (Deleted per Amendment on 12/5/16)
       CA-7. Event Participation.
       Encourage public and private participation in and support of arts and cultural events.
           CA-7a. Sponsorship of Events. Continue to sponsor arts and cultural events for public
           and private participation.
                Responsibility: Community Services, Economic Development
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time, Event Admission Fees, Grants, Volunteers, Partnerships
       CA-8. Facility Development. (Deleted per Amendment on
       12/5/16)
            CA-8a. Marin Center. (Deleted per Amendment on 12/5/16)
242 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CULTURE AND ARTS                                    Reprinted 04/28/2017

CA-9. Falkirk Cultural Center.
Use the Falkirk Cultural Center as a venue to
support and foster the arts and to celebrate local
culture. Rehabilitate, expand and develop, as
appropriate, the Falkirk building and grounds in
keeping with its listing on the National Register
of Historic Places.
       CA-9a. Falkirk Master Plan (Deleted per
       Amendment on 12/5/16)
       CA-9b. Funding for Falkirk Cultural Center.
       Seek funding to sustain Falkirk’s facilities and
       programs through expansion and income
       producing activities.
           Responsibility: Community Services
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
       CA-9c. Community Support of Falkirk. Establish organization(s) to support Falkirk’s
       activities.
           Responsibility: Community Services
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff time, Volunteers, Partnerships                                                                   Falkirk’s cultural
                                                                                                                             offerings, which
                                                                                                                             include parlor
                                                                                                                             performances and
                                                                                                                             concerts on the
                                                                                                                             l a wn , a r e
                                                                                                                             sometimes
                                                                                                                             historical, often
                                                                                                                             educational and
                                                                                                                             a l wa ys
                                                                                                                             entertaining.
                                                                Cu lt u r a l Af f a i rs S erv i c e
                                                                                L e ag u e ( C AS L )
                                                              Established in the mid-1970s, CASL is a
                                                              volunteer organization offering substantial
                                                              support for various activities at Falkirk
                                                              Cultural Center, such as Holiday
                                                              d e c o r a t i o n s , v o l u n t e e r s t a f f i n g f o r e ve n t s ,
                                                              fundraising, and building upgrades.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                             SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CULTURE AND ARTS                                         243

                                The Public Library
                                San Rafael Public Library, founded in 1887, is one of the most heavily used services
                                in the City of San Rafael. Some 3,000 people visit the Library each week, seeking
                                books to read for enjoyment, answers to questions, and information to complete
                                homework or work-related assignments. The newest waves of users seek information
                                via the Internet. The 14,000 sq. ft. San Rafael Public Library houses 125,000 items,
                                including books, videocassettes, DVDs, books on cassette and CD, music CDs,
                                microfilm, magazines, and newspapers. The Marin Literacy Program is based at the
                                Library. Other programs include story times, summer reading, author talks, art
                                lectures, delivery to the homebound, book clubs, and special events.
                                                                           The Canal Library Center at Pickleweed Park,
                                                                           housed in a room of the community center,
                                                                           offers reference books and a small collection of
                                                                           children’s books that may be borrowed.
                                                                           Services include story times, computer access
                                                                           for children, and homework assistance.
                                                                           The community places a high priority on the
                                                                           Library’s mission to provide books and other
                                                                           materials as well as access to online
                                                                           resources. It also values the work of the Marin
                                                                           Literacy Program and the Library’s role in
                                                                           nurturing children’s love of books and learning.
 Th e C a r n e g i e wi n g    CA-10. Library Services.
 of the San Rafael              Provide library services to meet the information and recreational needs of the
 Public Library was             community.
 built in 1908.
                                     CA-10a. Library Collections. Expand and adapt the collection to meet the changing needs
                                     of the community for different formats and interests while preserving a core collection of
                                     materials of continuing value.
                                          Responsibility: Library
                                          Timeframe: Ongoing
                                          Resources: Staff Time, Rental Fees, Grants
                                     CA-10b.Children’s and Youth Services. Emphasize programming and services for
                                     children and teens.
                                          Responsibility: Library
                                          Timeframe: Ongoing
                                          Resources: Staff Time, Grants
                                     CA-10c. Senior Services. Develop programming and services for older adults.
                                          Responsibility: Library
                                          Timeframe: Long Term
                                          Resources: Staff Time, Grants
                                     CA-10d. Marin Literacy Program. Continue to build on the success of the Marin
                                     Literacy Program that provides tutoring for adults as well as support and training for
                                     volunteer tutors.
                                          Responsibility: Library
                                          Timeframe: Ongoing
                                          Resources: Grants
244                          SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CULTURE AND ARTS                                        Reprinted 04/28/2017

CA-11. San Rafael Public Library.
Because the present library is too small to adequately
provide the collection and services needed for a community
of San Rafael’s size, renovate and expand or replace the
San Rafael Public Library in Downtown.
     CA-11a. Facility Needs. Complete the library facility study
     of space needs for library services citywide. Consider
     potential new funding options to finance needed expansion
     of library facilities. Needs include the following:
     • Public Meeting Rooms. Provide public meeting rooms,
           large and small, within the library renovation and
           expansion
     • Seating. Provide adequate seating for quiet reading and
           study in new library facilities.
     • Children and Youth Services. Upgrade and expand
           space for children’s services, and dedicate space to teen                                       San Rafael
                                                                                                           children enjoy
           services, to enhance collections, technology and programming.
                                                                                                           t h e l i b r a r y’ s
           Responsibility: Library, Management Services, Public Works                                      reading
           Timeframe: Short Term                                                                           programs.
           Resources: Staff Time, Bonds, Grants, Tax, Donations
     CA-11c. Communications Infrastructure and Technology Access. Develop and
     maintain state-of-the-art electrical and telecommunications infrastructure throughout the
     Library building. Expand public access to the Internet and word processing as well as
     instruction in online research through library subscription to online databases.
           Responsibility: Library
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time, Bonds, Tax, Grants
CA-12. Community-Based Libraries.
Expand community-based library services in east and north San Rafael to assure that
library services are provided throughout the city.
     CA-12a. Opportunities for Community-Based Libraries. Look for opportunities, such
     as the expansion of Pickleweed Park Community Center and The Mall at Northgate, for
     community-based libraries. Consider partnerships with the school districts to make high
     school libraries available to the public.
           Responsibility: Library
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time, Grants, Bonds, Tax
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                    SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CULTURE AND ARTS               245

                                    GOAL 28: PROTECTED CULTURAL
                                    HERITAGE
                                    It is the goal for San Rafael to have protected and maintained historic buildings
                                    and archaeological resources as part of San Rafael’s cultural heritage. A mission
                                    city established in 1817, San Rafael values its history and the people and buildings
                                    that have shaped it.
                                    Many of San Rafael’s older buildings remain today, adding an historic character and
                                    atmosphere to the City. The diversity of architecture offers a pleasing blend of new
                                    and old buildings of various types and styles. In 1986, the City completed the San
                                    Rafael Historical/Architectural Survey identifying and rating the architectural and
                                                                     historical significance of selected buildings and areas.
                                                                     Approximately 295 structures were listed and
                                                                     evaluated. High concentrations of historic buildings are
                                                                     located in Downtown, Gerstle Park and the Dominican
                                                                     neighborhoods.
                                                                     City policy has been to protect and build upon the
                                                                     historic character that exists in the City. The City
                                                                     adopted a Historic Preservation Ordinance in 1978. The
                                                                     ordinance established guidelines regarding remodeling
                                                                     or demolishing historic buildings. The ordinance is
                                                                     implemented by the Design Review Board and Planning
                                                                     Commission. See Exhibit 24 for a list of historical
                                                                     landmarks in San Rafael.
                                                                     In 2002, there were 63 known archeological sites
    Th e B o yd                     identified in the San Rafael Planning Area. These sites contain archaeological
    Gatehouse                       resources, which include deposits and remains left by the local Native Americans and
    currently houses                other early inhabitants. These sites are located primarily at the base of hills on the
    t h e Ma r i n H i s t o r y
    Museum, which                   perimeter of the San Pedro peninsula and in the Miller Creek area. These locations
    began construction              likely offered fresh water. A portion of the Miller Creek School site served as a central
    of a new facility in            village in the Gallinas Valley for at least 3,000 years.
    2005.
                                    City policy protects known archeological resources to the maximum extent feasible.
                                    Generally, new development is required to avoid sites. The Community Development
                                    Department maintains an archaeological sensitivity database based on parcels and
                                    proximity to potentially sensitive sites. Data includes parcels that have been examined for
                                    archaeological remains, known archaeological sites, National, State, and local landmark
                                    locations, recognized historic building locations, and the archaeological sensitivity zones
                                    established by the data. If an archeological site is uncovered during construction, activity
                                    is halted and an examination is made by a qualified archeologist in consultation with the
                                    American Indian Council of Marin. Work can resume when appropriate mitigation
                                    measures are implemented. The City has also established an Ordinance that states
                                    procedures and regulations for archaeological resource protection.
246                              SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CULTURE AND ARTS                                      Reprinted 04/28/2017


       CA 13. Historic Buildings and Areas.
       Preserve buildings and areas with special and recognized historic, architectural or
       aesthetic value including but not limited to those on the San Rafael
       Historical/Architectural Survey. New development and redevelopment should respect
       architecturally and historically significant buildings and areas.
           CA-13a. Inventory Update. Update the City’s Historical/Architecture Survey, which is
           an inventory of buildings of architectural value, historic buildings and/or districts and
           historic elements such as signs, monuments and gates. Maximize the use of volunteers in
           updating the survey with professional assistance as needed.
                Responsibility: Community Development
                Timeframe: Long Term
                Resources: Staff Time, Volunteers, Grants
           CA-13b. Preservation Ordinance. Continue to implement the City’s Historic
           Preservation Ordinance through the design review process. Update the City’s Historic
           Preservation Ordinance and review the development application review procedures for the
           various classifications of buildings on the Historical Architecture Survey, including
           effective ways to review proposed changes to historic properties.
                Responsibility: Community Development
                Timeframe: Ongoing. (Update: Short Term)
                Resources: Staff Time
           CA-13c. Historic Preservation Advisory Committee. Establish a technical advisory
           committee or contract with an architectural historian, to provide the Design Review Board
           and Planning Commission with advice in design matters and policies related to the
           preservation and/or modification of historic structures.
                Responsibility: Community Development
                Timeframe: Short Term
                Resources: Staff Time, Fees
           CA-13d. Public Education. Encourage historic preservation activities and the formation
           of historic preservation groups in neighborhoods to heighten awareness of historic
           landmarks and how architecture and landscape define the character of an area. Encourage
           schools to incorporate units about local history into their school programs. Continue to
           support efforts to install plaques recognizing historic locations in San Rafael.
                Responsibility: Community Development
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time
           CA-13e. Preservation Reference Materials. Maintain at Falkirk a special collection of
           preservation materials and resources. Enhance public awareness of the collection, and
           include a photographic record of local preservation efforts.
                Responsibility: Community Services
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time, Grants
           CA-13f. Public Events. Encourage organizations such as the Marin Historical Society to
           produce events, publications, and exhibits about the historic resources that exist in San
           Rafael.
                Responsibility: Community Services, Community Development
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time
248 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CULTURE AND ARTS                                          Reprinted 04/28/2017

     CA-13g. Public Recognition. Through the annual Design Awards program, publicly
     recognize property owners who have done an exceptional job of preserving an historical
     property.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     See PR-7b (Marin History Museum), LU-2a (Development Review), NH-29a (Implement
     Downtown Design Guidelines) and NH-32 (Historic Character).
CA-14. Reuse of Historic Buildings.
Encourage the adaptation and reuse of historic buildings, in order to preserve the
historic resources that are a part of San Rafael’s heritage.
     CA-14a. Historical Building Code. Use the State historical building code to encourage
     adaptive reuse of historic buildings.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     CA-14b. Zoning. Investigate possible zoning exemptions to regulations such as on-site
     parking, signs, and setbacks in order to encourage adaptive reuse.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Resources: Staff Time
     CA-14c. Incentives. Investigate the use of incentives such as transfer of development
     rights, easements, and property tax relief to encourage preservation of historic buildings.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     See CD-3c (Revisions to Design Guidelines), CD-10 (Nonresidential Design Guidelines),
     CD-11a (Compatibility of Building Patterns), CD-12 (Industrial Areas), CD-13 (Single-
     Family Residential Design Guidelines), CD-4d (Design Guidelines) and S-9 (Seismic
     Safety of Existing Buildings).
CA-15. Protection of Archaeological Resources.
Recognize the importance of protecting significant archaeological resources by:
• Identifying, when possible, archaeological resources and potential impacts on
     such resources.
• Providing information and direction to property owners in order to make them
     aware of these resources.
• Implementing measures to preserve and protect archaeological resources.
     CA-15a. Archeological Resources Ordinance. Continue to implement the existing
     Archeological Resources Ordinance.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                   SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CULTURE AND ARTS 249

                This page intentionally left blank
250 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CULTURE AND ARTS             Reprinted 04/28/2017
Parks and Recreation                                                                            Our Quality of Life
Introduction
The purpose of the Parks and Recreation Element is to identify and document present
park facilities; compare those facilities with current and long-term needs; establish
attainable goals to meet the community’s recreation needs; and develop and adopt
policies and programs that will accomplish those goals.
Standards
The criteria used to determine the size, type and location of parks and recreational
facilities include:
•     Park acreage standards based on acreage per 1,000 residents.
•     Location standards based on the distance from a neighborhood to either a
      neighborhood or community park.
•     Neighborhood and Citywide recreational needs to coordinate park user
      characteristics with specific types of facilities.
Assessment of San Rafael’s
Parks and Recreation Needs
Despite an abundance of citywide and
regional park and open space land in San
Rafael, there are several neighborhoods
inadequately served by local recreation
facilities. Deficiencies may result from
inadequate space, lack of variety of facilities
provided, or distance to a park. In San
Rafael, space options are limited and cannot
be addressed by general standards. The
Recreation policies, therefore, include a map
and a needs assessment identifying potential
areas for recreation improvements.
Recreational programs and park facilities
play a critical role in determining our quality
of life. The City of San Rafael is committed to
ongoing improvements to address the
recreational needs of its residents.
                                                                                                     C h i l d r e n l o ve t h e
San Rafael has a number of new, recently
                                                                                                     n e w wa t e r f e a t u r e
improved and planned recreation facilities:                                                          at Freitas Park.
      • New soccer and baseball fields at Pickleweed Park;
      • Two softball fields and a new playground at Bernard Hoffman;
      • A renovated pool at the Terra Linda Recreation Center;
      • Renovated playgrounds at Santa Margarita, Gerstle and Bret Harte Parks;
      • Lighted baseball/softball fields at McInnis Park;
      • New sections of the Bay Trail network along the Jean and John Starkweather
           Shoreline Park; and
      • A new skate park at McInnis Park.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                         SAN RAFAEL 2020 / PARKS AND RECREATION                251

 E xh i b it   2 5:   Pa rk s     a n d      Re c r e at i o n     F a ci lit i es      i n    S an       R af ae l
    Ne ig h b o r h o o d P a r ks                            Di xi e S ch o o l Di st ri ct
    1. Arbor Park – 0.3 acres                                 42. Dixie Elementary School – 11.4 acres
    2. Bayside Mini Park – 0.1 acres                          43. Don Timoteo Elementary (leased to St. Mark’s
    3. Beach Park - 0.4 acres                                     School) – 10.0 acres
    4. Bret Harte Park – 0.5 acres                            44. Lucas Valley Elementary (closed) – 10.0
    5. Fred Jensen Park – 0.3 acres                               acres
    6. Freitas Park – 3.5 acres                               45. Mary Silveira Elementary – 9.9 acres
    7. Hartzell Park – 0.4 acres                              46. Miller Creek Middle School – 17.0 acres
    8. Hillview Park – 0.2 acres                              47. Santa Margarita (leased to Marindale School)
    9. Munson Park – 0.4 acres                                    – 11.0 acres
    10. Oleander Park – 2.0 acres                             48. Vallecito Elementary – 25.0 acres
    11. Peacock Gap Park – 7.0 acres                          49. Nova Albion (Dixie School District Offices),
    12. Los Ranchitos Park – 2.7 acres                            Community Garden – 10.4 acres
    13. Riviera Park – 2.6 acres
    14. Russom Park – 7.0 acres                               M arin w o o d Co m m u n it y
    15. San Rafael City Plaza – 0.2 acres                     S erv ic e s Di st r ict
    16. Santa Margarita Park – 5.0 acres                      50. Gallinas Ave. Mini Park – 0.1 acres
    17. Schoen Park – 0.1 acres                               51. Marinwood Community Center
    18. Sun Valley Park – 2.1 acres                           52. Marinwood Park – 25.0 acres
    19. Victor Jones Park – 7.0 acres
                                                              L u c a s V al le y Co m m u n it y
    Co m m u n it y Pa rk s                                   S erv ic e Ar e a
    20. Albert Park – 11.5 acres                              53. Lucas Valley Community Center – 2.0 acres
    21. Bernard Hoffman Field – 3.8 acres
    22. Boyd Park – 42.0 acres                                M arin Co u n t y
    23. Gerstle Park – 6.0 acres                              54. Adrian Rosel – 0.7 acres
    24. Pickleweed Park – 17.0 acres                          55. Candy’s Park – 1.5 acres
    25. Jean and John Starkweather Shoreline Park             56. Castro Field – 1.5 acres
         – 20.0 acres                                         57. Marin Center – 20 acres
                                                              58. McInnis Park – 450 acres
    Community Centers                                         59. McNear’s Beach 55 acres
    26. Pickleweed Community Center                           60. McPhail Playfield – 1.5 acres
    27. San Rafael Community Center                           61. Pueblo Park – 2.0 acres
    28. Terra Linda Community Center
                                                              St at e P ar k
    S an R af a el Ci t y S ch o o l                          62. China Camp State Park – 1,640 acres
    Di st ri ct
    29. Bahia Vista Elementary School – 5.0 acres
    30. Coleman Elementary School – 4.0 acres
    31. Davidson Middle School – 15.3 acres
    32. Gallinas Elementary School – 11.2 acres
    33. Glenwood Elementary – 24.6 acres
    34. Laurel Dell Elementary – 1.2 acres
    35. McPhail Elementary School (closed) – 9.8
         acres
    36. Old Gallinas Elementary School – 7.8 acres
    37. San Pedro Elementary – 7.3 acres
    38. San Rafael High School – 29.7 acres
    39. Short Elementary School – 1.0 acres
    40. Sun Valley Elementary – 5.0 acres
    41. Terra Linda High School – 30.2 acres
252                    SAN RAFAEL 2020 / PARKS AND RECREATION                         Reprinted 04/28/2017


       Looking Ahead
       The City of San Rafael faces the challenge of adapting and improving its parks and
       recreation resources to meet the changing needs and priorities of the community.
       Improvements to consider for the future are as follows:
            •    Sport fields and facilities.
            •    Community pool south of Puerto Suello Hill.
            •    Park upgrades.
            •    New recreation facilities in neighborhoods deficient in parks.
            •    Recreation programs and facilities to meet the needs of an increasing senior
                 population.
       This element addresses existing sites and possible future sites and opportunities for
       expanded recreational use. These include local school sites, private schools, county
       parks, and open space sites. Programs must be developed to address shared capital
       expense outlay and continuing maintenance costs. This is particularly important in
       light of past over-use and lack of maintenance resources that resulted in below
       standard recreational fields.
       To maintain the City’s public parkland-to-population ratio, developers are expected to
       dedicate land consistent with the City’s standard. Schools contribute an additional 150
       acres of existing local recreation facilities, providing most of the City's organized
       sports facilities. School sites may also be the only remaining land in a neighborhood
       suitable for intensive recreation use. To maintain levels of recreation service, it is
       important that the City promote retention of key school recreation facilities, particularly
       as schools are sold or leased.
       The Parks and Recreation Element should be updated during the five-year General
       Plan review and amended to reflect evolving community recreational needs and
       resources.
254 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / PARKS AND RECREATION                          Reprinted 04/28/2017

GOAL 29: PARKS AND PROGRAMS
FOR ALL
It is the goal for San Rafael to have recreation facilities and programs, parks and
playfields for all age groups throughout the community. San Rafael recognizes the
essential nature of Parks and Recreational services to its residents. Numerous parks,
public spaces, and playing fields are integral to the life of the City. Recreational
facilities and playfield are well maintained and consistently upgraded. Attention to
community need generates proposals for new facilities.
Neighborhood and Community Park Standards and Needs
PR-1. Standards.
Maintain, and where possible exceed, a recreation standard of three acres of park and
recreation facilities per 1,000 residents.
     PR-1a. Recreation standard. Use the recreation standard when evaluating proposals for
     new parks. Consider the creation of neighborhood parks of less than three acres when it
     can be demonstrated that such a facility would satisfy an unmet neighborhood need,
     provide recreational value and be a sufficient size to support desired infrastructure.
           Responsibility: Community Services
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time, Grants, Fees and Dedications
PR-2. Park Development Criteria.
Use the following criteria as a guide to improving the park system:
a. Neighborhood parks should serve populations of at least 3,000 within a radius of
     one-half mile, and have a minimum size of three acres.
b. Community parks should serve a population of 10,000 to 30,000 within a radius of
     three to five miles, and have a size of 20 acres or more.
     PR-2a. Park Criteria. Use the park development criteria when evaluating proposals for
     new parks and park improvements.
           Responsibility: Community Services
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time, Grants, Fees
PR-3. Neighborhood Recreational Needs.
Serve all neighborhoods with neighborhood and/or community parks that meet the
needs of the community. Priority areas should include Canal, Dominican, and
Montecito neighborhoods.
     PR-3a. Neighborhood Recreational Needs. Develop individual park plans as
     opportunities become available, determining cost estimates and priorities.
           Responsibility: Community Services
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Resources: Staff Time, Grants
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                               SAN RAFAEL 2020 / PARKS AND RECREATION 255
                                     PR-3b. Parks and Recreation Commission Priorities. On a periodic basis, work with
                                     the Parks and Recreation Commission to recommend priorities for park improvements.
                                          Responsibility: Community Services
                                          Timeframe: Ongoing
                                          Resources: Staff Time
                                 PR-4. City Recreational Needs.
                                 Provide opportunities for recreational activities for boys and girls, teens, and adults
                                 through the creation of additional facilities such as fields for active sports, a public
                                 pool south of Puerto Suello Hill, and a community Senior Center.
                                     PR-4a. All-Weather Fields. Provide cost-effective all-weather fields to optimize year-
                                     round use of community sports facilities. As fields are rebuilt, consider the feasibility of
                                     using year-round surfaces.
                                          Responsibility: Community Services
                                          Timeframe: Short Term
                                          Resources: Staff Time, Grants, Donations
                                     See also PR-11b (Public Pool) and PR-12a (Senior Facilities).
                                 PR-5. Review of Needs.
                                 Conduct a review of San Rafael’s recreational, facility and program needs, as part of
                                 the five-year update of General Plan 2020, and amend policies as needed.
                                     PR-5a. Needs Survey. Prepare an updated citywide recreation needs survey to help
                                     provide direction for future park and program development.
                                          Responsibility: Community Services
                                          Timeframe: Short Term
                                          Resources: Staff Time, Grants
                                                                     Parks and Recreational Facilities
                                                                     PR-6. Community Center
                                                                     Improvements.
                                                                     Upgrade or expand San Rafael’s community centers
                                                                     to meet the passive and active recreational needs of
                                                                     the population.
                                                                     a. Pickleweed Community Center. Renovate and
                                                                          expand the facility according to the Pickleweed
                                                                          Expansion Plan (April, 2002).
                                                                     b. San Rafael Community Center. Complete
                                                                          implementation of the Albert Park Master Plan.
                                                                     c. Terra Linda Community Center. Prepare a site
                                                                          master plan addressing buildings and grounds.
   San Rafael’s
   p a r k s h a ve b e e n
   i m p r o ve d f o r              PR-6a. Community Center Improvements. Prepare plans, seek funding and improve
   safety and                        community center facilities
   a c c e s s i b i l i t y.             Responsibility: Community Services
                                          Timeframe: Short Term- Pickleweed and San Rafael Centers
                                          Long term-Terra Linda Center
                                          Resources: Staff Time, Grants, Donations
256                           SAN RAFAEL 2020 / PARKS AND RECREATION                            Reprinted 04/28/2017

PR-7. Community Park Improvements.
Upgrade San Rafael’s community parks to meet the recreational needs of the served
population.
a. Albert Park. Complete implementation of the park master plan with the addition
     of group picnic facilities, basketball court, water play feature and the Downtown
     Promenade (from Mahon Creek at Albert Park Lane to Andersen Drive with views
     of Mission San Rafael Archangel).
b. Bernard Hoffman. Complete field improvements and restroom installation.
c. Boyd Park. Implement the Boyd Park
     Master Plan (including History Museum).
     Explore uses for vacant parcel on Robert
     Dollar Drive adjacent to the Park.
d. Gerstle Park. Prepare a master plan that
     addresses renovation and development needs.
e. Pickleweed Park. Complete construction of
     the Jean and John Starkweather Shoreline
     Park around Pickleweed Park.
f. Shoreline Park. Complete implementation
     of the Jean and John Starkweather Shoreline
     Park Master Plan, continuing to oversee the
     development of the privately- and publicly-owned
     sections of the park consistent with the San
     Rafael Shoreline Park Master Plan and the
     Shoreline Enhancement Plan.
                                                                                                      Shoreline Park
     PR-7a. Community Park Improvements. Prepare plans, seek funding and improve                      has been
     community park facilities                                                                        i m p r o ve d w i t h
           Responsibility: Community Services                                                         grants from
           Timeframe: Short Term: Gerstle Park, Pickleweed Park and Shoreline                         ABAG and
           Park: Long Term: Albert Park, Bernard Hoffman, and Boyd Park                               partnerships
           Resources: Staff Time, Grants, Donations                                                   wi t h t h e
                                                                                                      c o m m u n i t y.
     PR-7b. Marin History Museum. (Deleted per Amendment on 12/5/16))
PR-8. Neighborhood Park Improvements.
Upgrade San Rafael’s neighborhood parks to meet the recreational needs of the served
population.
a. Beach Park. Prepare a master plan prior to expiration of the lease of adjacent City
     property to the San Rafael yacht Harbor. Consider possible expansion and
     improvements which would support the proposed Canal Waterway Vision.
b. Bret Harte Park. Complete implementation of the Bret Harte Park Master Plan.
     Evaluate ways to improve access from the park into hillside open space land to the
     south to provide picnic and hiking opportunities.
c. Freitas Park. Complete implementation of the Freitas Park Master Plan. Consider
     the sale of the northern parcel to provide funding for Freitas Park improvements.
d. Munson Park. Improve the park consistent with the recommendations of the
     North San Rafael Vision Promenade Conceptual Plan.
e. Peacock Gap Park. Update the Peacock Gap Park Master Plan as needed to
     improve trails and access to open space.
f. Ranchitos Park. Build the park as part of approved subdivision improvements.
g. Riviera Park. Improve playground equipment.
h. Russom Park. Prepare a park master plan.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                           SAN RAFAEL 2020 / PARKS AND RECREATION                        257

       i.   Santa Margarita Park. Complete implementation of the Santa Margarita Park
            Master Plan.
       j. Schoen Park. Prepare a park master plan to finalize Shoreline Park link, and to
            provide appropriate recreation amenities.
       k. Sun Valley Park. Complete planned park improvements.
       The following parks require no further park improvements at this time. During the
       five-year General Plan review, they will be assessed to determine if the situation has
       changed:
              Bayside Mini Park                        Oleander Park
              Beach Park                               Terra Linda Park
              Hartzell Park                            Victor Jones Park
            PR-8a. Neighborhood Park Improvements. Prepare plans, seek funding and improve
            neighborhood park facilities. Encourage partnerships with neighborhood organizations and
            residents in projects to improve existing parks.
                 Responsibility: Community Services
                 Timeframe: Short Term: Bret Harte, Freitas, Ranchitos, Riviera, Santa Margarita,
                 Schoen and Sun Valley/Long Term: Beach, Munson, Peacock Gap, and Russom Park
                 Resources: Staff Time, Capital Improvements, Grants, Donations, and Partnerships.
       PR-9. New Parks.
       Provide additional park sites as identified below. Park sites should be in the service
       area and designed to meet the needs of the targeted population, giving priority to
       underserved neighborhoods. If sites are unavailable, consider alternative park sites
       that are within the vicinity of the service area. Encourage the development of new
       parks as follows:
       a. Bellam/Windward Way site. Prepare a park master plan that responds to the
            traffic and environmental constraints of the property. Explore passive and active
            recreational opportunities. Consider development on a portion of the site for
            private or public non-recreational use if it would benefit the neighborhood and
            provide funding for park improvements.
       b. Montecito/Happy Valley. Pursue opportunities to provide a neighborhood park.
            Encourage San Rafael High School or School District corporation yard to provide
            a neighborhood park with play facilities for toddlers and young children. Work
            with San Rafael City Schools to identify a potential park site.
       c. Dominican. Pursue opportunities to provide a neighborhood park and/or
            recreation facilities in Dominican/Black Canyon. For example, encourage
            Dominican University to provide a neighborhood park and/or access to
            recreational facilities. Work with Dominican University in conjunction with the
            future Master Plan to identify potential park and/or recreational facilities.
       d. Lincoln/San Rafael Hill. Pursue opportunities to provide a neighborhood park in
            the Lincoln/San Rafael Hill neighborhood.
       e. Unincorporated Areas. Encourage the County to provide on-site recreation
            facilities in new subdivisions due to their low-density character (i.e., lack of
            population to support additional public neighborhood park facilities) and the
            distance to existing neighborhood park and school facilities.
258 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / PARKS AND RECREATION                            Reprinted 04/28/2017
     PR-9a. New Parks. Prepare plans, seek funding and create new neighborhood park
     facilities.
           Responsibility: Community Services
           Timeframe: Ongoing: Unincorporated areas/Long Term: Montecito/Happy Valley and
           Dominican
           Resources: Staff Time, Grants, Donations
     See NH-62 (Park and Recreation) and NH-124 (Improved Recreation).
PR-10. Onsite Recreation
Facilities.
Require onsite recreation facilities in new
multifamily residential projects and
encourage construction of onsite recreation
facilities in existing multifamily residential
projects, where appropriate.
     PR-10a. Onsite Recreation Facilities.
     Continue to implement zoning regulations to
     require appropriate recreational facilities.
           Responsibility: Community
     Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees
PR-11. Public Pools.
Address the need for more public pools south of Puerto Suello Hill in San Rafael.                        Th e T e r r a L i n d a p o o l
                                                                                                         w a s r e n o va t e d i n
                                                                                                         2002.
     PR-11a. High School and University Pools (Deleted per Amendment on 12/5/16)
     PR-11b. Public Pool. Explore opportunities to construct a year-round pool in central San
     Rafael.
           Responsibility: Community Services
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time, Grants, Donations
PR-12. Senior Recreational Facilities.
Provide dedicated facilities for senior recreational activities.
     PR-12a. Senior Facilities. Identify a site(s) and seek funding for senior recreational
     facilities.
           Responsibility: Community Services
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time, Grants, Donations
     See PR-4. (City Recreational Needs).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                              SAN RAFAEL 2020 / PARKS AND RECREATION                          259
       PR-13. Commercial Recreation.
       Encourage private sector development of commercial recreational facilities to serve
       community needs by:
       a. Permitting compatible commercial concessions at community and regional parks
            to provide sources of funding for public parks.
       b. Encouraging major employers to provide for the recreational needs of their
            employees on site or in conjunction with City recreation facilities or programs.
       c. Encouraging commercial recreational facilities open to the general public.
            PR-13a. Commercial Recreation. Consider amending the zoning ordinance to allow a
            floor area ratio exemption for on-site recreational facilities open to the public.
                 Responsibility: Community Development
                 Timeframe: Short Term
                 Resources: Staff Time
       PR-14. Amateur Multi-sport Athletic Fields.
       Strive for the development of publicly or privately funded, large multi-sport athletic
       field clusters to address the needs of the community.
            PR-14a. Athletic Fields. Explore opportunities to construct multi-sport athletic fields in
            San Rafael.
                 Responsibility: Community Services
                 Timeframe: Long Term
                 Resources: Staff Time, Grants
       PR-15. Downtown Recreation.
       Encourage the creation of recreational facilities and gathering places open to the
       public, such as plazas, green spaces, and unexpected places such as the alley
       improvements behind Art Works Downtown.
            See LU-2a (Development Review).
       PR-16. Community Gardens.
       Continue to support and maintain community gardens and look for ways to sustain the
       gardens.
            PR-16a. Community Gardens. (Revised as SU-8c. Community Garden Standards)
       PR-17. Park Design.
       Design recreation facilities to be safe, attractive and easy-to-maintain in order to
       minimize conflicts with surrounding neighborhoods and to protect sensitive natural
       resource areas.
            PR-17a. Park Plan Review. Work with qualified landscape architects, the Design Review
            Board, the Parks and Recreation Commission, and the Planning Commission when
            preparing and reviewing park master plans and designing park improvements. Review
            park plans and projects similar to the level of design review required of privately
            developed recreational facilities.
                 Responsibility: Community Services, Community Development
                 Timeframe: Ongoing
                 Resources: Staff Time
260 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / PARKS AND RECREATION                                Reprinted 04/28/2017
PR-18. Community Involvement in Park Planning.
Encourage and facilitate the participation of residents, sports groups and civic
organizations in park planning and design.
     PR-18a. Community Involvement. Work with park neighbors, user groups, civic
     organizations and neighborhood associations when preparing park master plans and
     designing park improvements.
           Responsibility: Community Services
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time, Grants
PR-19. Park Maintenance.                                                                  Na yl o r      Ac t
Maintain public recreation facilities and parks.
                                                                   Education Code §39363.5 requires that whenever
     See I-1a (Capital Improvement Programming).                   surplus school land is sold, the first priority is given for
                                                                   parks and recreation purposes. Naylor legislation
Coordination with School                                           (Education Code §39390 et seq.) requires that school
                                                                   districts first offer land for sale to public agencies.
Districts and Other Agencies and
                                                                   Through this legislation, the City may purchase certain
Jurisdictions                                                      outdoor school recreation lands at reduced prices. The
                                                                   City must adopt a plan designating portions of land
PR-20. School Site Recreation                                      proposed for recreation open space purchase. Purchase
Facilities.                                                        is generally a last option if other methods of recreation
Attempt to secure the continued public use of                      facility retention are inadequate.
recreational facilities at schools that are closed,
or that could be closed during the time of the                     The Naylor legislation is helpful in retaining school
plan. Refer to Appendix D for recreation                           recreation facilities but is limited in scope. School gyms,
facilities on school sites and acreage to retain.                  multipurpose rooms, and the City's child care programs
                                                                   are also desirable to retain but do not qualify for
     PR-20a. Preservation of School Recreation                     purchase under Naylor legislation which limits purchases
     Facilities. Allow clustering of development in                to land which is used for school playground, playing field
     order to preserve recreation facilities at surplused          or other outdoor recreation purposes and open space
     school sites.                                                 land particularly suited for recreational purposes.
           Responsibility: City Manager, Community
                                                                   Bernard Hoffman Park was acquired by the City through
           Services
           Timeframe: Ongoing                                      the Naylor Act provisions.
           Resources: Staff Time
     PR-20b. School Site Recreational Facilities.
     When a school site is proposed to be sold, designate a School Liaison Committee
     composed of two City Council and two School Board members to identify ways to acquire
     recreation facilities on the school site, after consultations with affected community and
     neighborhood residents, appropriate staff and advisory committees.
           Responsibility: City Manager, Community Services
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
PR-21. City-School Cooperation.
Memorialize cooperation efforts between the City and school districts for the joint
development, maintenance, and use of school facilities for educational programs, park
development, and recreational use.
     See G-15a (Joint Use of Educational Facilities).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / PARKS AND RECREATION                     261

                               PR-22. Relationship to Other Public Agencies.
                               Cooperate with Marin County and the State to coordinate the use and management of
                               facilities and programs on City, County and State park lands.
                                   PR-22a. Cooperative Ventures. Maximize opportunities to expand recreational facilities
                                   and increase recreational programming through cooperative ventures with the State and
                                   County.
                                         Responsibility: Community Services
                                         Timeframe: Ongoing
                                         Resources: Staff Time, Grants, Donations
                               Financing Parks and Recreation
                               PR-23. Funding.
                               Establish and maintain a public and private funding program for park and recreation
                               facilities development and maintenance.
                                   PR-23a. Funding. Seek new and ongoing sources of funds for park development and
                                   maintenance. Pursue private donation and dedications, Federal, State and other grant
                                   sources, use of assessment districts, public/private joint ventures and all other available
                                   means to implement park and recreation policies. Sources of funding include user fees, the
                                   Capital Improvements program, Friends of San Rafael for specific parks, private
                                   foundations, and the Parkland Dedication Ordinance. Encourage the dedication of land for
                                   parks, as well as monetary contributions and gifts-in-kind for facilities and programs.
                                   Consider naming park facilities in exchange for significant donations to an ongoing
                                   maintenance fund.
                                         Responsibility: Community Services
                                         Timeframe: Short Term
                                         Resources: Staff Time
                                                 PR-24. Contributions by Rental Residential
                                                 Development.
                                                 Explore the feasibility of requiring contributions from rental
           Q u im b y       Ac t                 residential development towards park improvements.
    Section 66477 of the California              PR-24a. Rental Residential Contributions. Evaluate the feasibility of
    Government Code provides                     adopting an ordinance to require developers of apartments to contribute to
    local jurisdictions with the                 park improvements.
    authority to acquire parklands in            Responsibility: Community Services, City Attorney
    association with new residential             Timeframe: Ongoing
    land divisions. Commonly                     Resources: Staff Time
    referred to as the Quimby Act,
    this provision of state law allows
    a city, by ordinance, to require             PR-25. Contributions by Ownership Residential
    the dedication of land, payment              Development.
    of an in-lieu fee, or a                      Require developers of new residential housing to provide for the
    combination of both, for park                recreational needs of future residents of that development in
    and recreational purposes as a               accordance with Recreation Element standards and Quimby Act
    condition for approving a                    Subdivision Parkland Dedication Requirements. Needs would be
    subdivision map.
                                                 satisfied by the dedication of land and development of recreation
                                                 facilities to serve the new residents. In-lieu fees will be required if a
                                                 finding is made that dedication and development of parkland is not a
                                                 feasible or appropriate option.
262                        SAN RAFAEL 2020 / PARKS AND RECREATION                               Reprinted 04/28/2017
     PR-25a. Parkland Dedication Ordinance. Maintain and update as necessary the
     Parkland Dedication Ordinance
           Responsibility: Community Services, City Attorney
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
PR-26. Sale, Lease or Contractual Agreements.
Provide that funds from the sale of City parks or open space shall be used for park or
open space acquisition or improvements. Provide that funds from the lease of, or
through contractual agreements involving, City parks or open space shall be used for
capital improvements, or operation and maintenance costs.
     PR-26a. Use of Funds from Sale of City Parks or Open Space. With the sale of parks or
     open space, ensure that the funds are used appropriately for park or open space acquisition
     or improvements, or that lease revenue is used for improvements, operations or
     maintenance.
           Responsibility: Community Services
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
Recreational Programs
PR-27. Recreational Programs for Changing Community
Needs.
Continually adapt recreational programs to meet changing community needs and
interests.
     PR-27a. Recreational Programs. As part of seasonal program planning, monitor,
     evaluate and develop appropriate recreational programs for the community.
           Responsibility: Community Services
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
PR-28. Summer Recreation Programs.
Provide summer recreation programs at locations convenient to each neighborhood.
     PR-28a. Summer Programs. Offer summer youth recreational programs at the
     Community Centers and other appropriate venues.
           Responsibility: Community Services
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees, Grants, Donations, Staff Time
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                              SAN RAFAEL 2020 / PARKS AND RECREATION 263
                          This page intentionally left blank
264 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / PARKS AND RECREATION                   Reprinted 04/28/2017
Safety                                                                                        Our Quality of Life
Introduction
The Safety portion of the General Plan is aimed at reducing potential risk of death,
injuries, damage to property, and the economic and social dislocation resulting from
fire, flood, and geologic hazards, and other public health and safety hazards. The
General Plan provides policies and standards for the type, location, intensity and
design of development in areas of potential hazards. The intent is not to remove all
risks associated with each specific type of hazard, but to reduce risks to life and
property and to make informed decisions about land use and development near these
hazards.
                                                                                                   San Rafael
                                                                                                   p o l i c e a t wo r k o n
                                                                                                   Fourth Street.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                     SAN RAFAEL 2020 / SAFETY                265
       GOAL 30: A SAFE COMMUNITY
       It is the goal of San Rafael, as the first priority for city government, to provide
       excellent fire, public safety and paramedic services and to be prepared in the case
       of disaster or emergency. San Rafael residents deserve to feel safe and secure
       wherever they live, work and play.
       General
       S-1. Location of Future Development.
       Permit development only in those areas where potential danger to the health, safety,
       and welfare of the residents of the community can be adequately mitigated.
            S-1a. Entitlement Process. Through the entitlement process, evaluate applications for
            geoseismic and hazardous materials dangers and require appropriate mitigations.
                Responsibility: Community Development, Fire
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Fees
       S-2. Location of Public Improvements.
       Avoid locating public improvements and utilities in areas with identified flood,
       geologic and/or soil hazards to avoid any extraordinary maintenance and operating
       expenses. When the location of public improvements and utilities in such areas cannot
       be avoided, effective mitigation measures will be implemented.
            See S-1a (Entitlement Process).
       S-3. Use of Hazard Maps in Development Review.
       Review Slope Stability, Seismic Hazard, and Flood Hazard Maps at the time a
       development is proposed. Undertake appropriate studies to assure identification and
       implementation of mitigation measures for identified hazards.
            See S-1a (Entitlement Process).
266 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / SAFETY                                        Reprinted 04/28/2017
Geologic and Seismic Safety
Significant geologic and seismic hazards that exist within the San Rafael Planning
Area include earthquakes, liquefaction, flow failures, lateral spreading, lurching,
differential settlement, landslides, mudslides, subsidence and expansive soil. These
hazards have the potential to damage or destroy residences, streets and utilities.
Certain geologic hazards, such as liquefaction, expansive soils or small landslides,
may be reduced or eliminated through engineering solutions such as special
foundations or slide repair. In some instances, an engineering solution may not be
economically feasible, and avoidance of the hazard may be the best way to assure
public health and safety. High occupancy and emergency response facilities may not
be appropriate in areas of high seismic or geologic hazard.
Geologic and seismic hazards should be considered in planning the location, design,
intensity, density and type of land uses in a given area. Long term costs to the City,
such as maintenance, liability exposure and emergency services, are potentially
greater where high hazards exist.
S-4. Geotechnical Review.
Continue to require geotechnical investigations for development proposals as set forth
in the City's Geotechnical Review Matrix (Appendix F). Such studies should
determine the actual extent of geotechnical hazards, optimum design for structures, the
advisability of special structural requirements, and the feasibility and desirability of a
proposed facility in a specified location.
    S-4a. Geotechnical Review of Proposed Development. Require soils and geologic peer
    review of development proposals in accordance with the Geotechnical Review Matrix to
    assess such hazards as potential seismic hazards, liquefaction, landsliding, mudsliding,
    erosion, sedimentation and settlement in order to determine if these hazards can be
    adequately mitigated. Levels of exposure to seismic risk for land uses and structures are
    also outlined in the Geotechnical Review Matrix, which shall be considered in conjunction
    with development review.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees
     S-4b. Geotechnical Review Matrix. Periodically review and update the Geotechnical
     Review Matrix, which describes procedures for site-specific investigations for projects
     being reviewed according to proposed occupancy, type and hazard zone(s) within which
     the site is located.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
S-5. Minimize Potential Effects of Geological Hazards.
Development proposed within areas of potential geological hazards shall not be
endangered by, nor contribute to, the hazardous conditions on the site or on adjoining
properties. Development in areas subject to soils and geologic hazards shall
incorporate adequate mitigation measures. The City will only approve new
development in areas of identified hazard if such hazard can be appropriately
mitigated.
     See LU-2a (Development Review).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                            SAN RAFAEL 2020 / SAFETY 267
       S-6. Seismic Safety of New Buildings.
       Design and construct all new buildings to resist stresses produced by earthquakes. The
       minimum level of seismic design shall be in accordance with the most recently
       adopted building code as required by State law.
            S-6a. Seismic Design. The minimum seismic design of structures should be in accordance
            with the building code, as adopted in accordance with State law.
                  Responsibility: Community Development
                  Timeframe: Ongoing
                  Resources: Permit Fee
            See CA-14a (Historic Building Codes).
       S-7. Minimize Potential Effects of Landslides.
       Development proposed in areas with existing landslides or with the potential for
       landslides (as identified by a registered engineering geologist or geotechnical
       engineer) shall not be endangered by, nor contribute to, the hazardous conditions on
       the site or on adjoining properties. Development in areas subject to landslide hazards
       shall incorporate adequate mitigation measures that have a design factor of safety of at
       least 1.5 for static conditions and 1.0 for pseudo-static (earthquake) conditions. The
       landslide mitigation should consider multiple options in order to reduce the secondary
       impacts (loss of vegetation, site grading, traffic, visual) associated with landslide
       mitigation. The City will only approve new development in areas of identified
       landslide hazard if such hazard can be appropriately mitigated.
            See S-4a (Geotechnical Review of Proposed Development).
       S-8. Seismic Safety of Existing Buildings.
       Encourage the rehabilitation or elimination of structures susceptible to collapse or
       failure in an earthquake. Historic buildings shall be treated in accordance with the
       Historic Preservation Ordinance.
            S-8a. Seismic Safety Building Reinforcement. Enforce State and local requirements for
            reinforcement of existing buildings.
                  Responsibility: Community Development
                  Timeframe: Ongoing
                  Resources: Staff Time
            See CA-14c (Incentives).
       S-9. Post Earthquake Inspections.
       Require post-earthquake building inspections of critical facilities, and restrict entry
       into compromised structures. Inspections shall be conducted when the earthquake
       intensity if VII or higher per the Modified Mercalli Intensity Scale. Require
       inspections as necessary in conjunction with other non-city public agencies and
       private parties for structural integrity of water storage facilities, storm drainage
       structures, electrical transmission lines, major roadways, bridges, elevated freeways,
       levees, canal banks, and other important utilities and essential facilities.
            S-9a. Inspection List. Identify a list of facilities that would be inspected after a major
            earthquake. The list shall identify City-owned essential or hazardous facilities as defined
            by Category 1 and 2 of Table 16-K of the Uniform Building Code, and shall prioritize the
            list for inspection scheduling purposes in case of an earthquake.
                  Responsibility: Community Development
                  Timeframe: Short term
                  Resources: Staff time
268 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / SAFETY                                              Reprinted 04/28/2017


Hazardous Materials
Hazardous materials exist in San Rafael because they are used by businesses,
transported on highways and streets, and are present in small quantities in private
homes in the form of solvents, cleaning fluids and other substances. Although there
are no hazardous waste (Class I) landfill sites in Marin County, such materials may be
present in the Planning Area due to historic industrial uses, the types of material used
to fill low lying sites for development, or due to materials deposited in dump sites prior
to current regulations governing
sanitary landfills. Being in the
vicinity of sites with hazardous
materials is an everyday                                                  “ CU P A”
experience for residents; they may
be exposed through various ways               The Unified Program (UP) was created by Senate Bill 1082 (1993)
including personal use and                    to consolidate, coordinate, and make consistent the administrative
handling of hazardous materials,              requirements, permits, inspections, and enforcement activities for
excavation of contaminated sites,             the following environmental and emergency management
and improperly disposed                       programs:
hazardous materials.
                                              • Hazardous Materials Release Response Plans and Inventories
                                                   (Business Plans)
The City of San Rafael is
authorized by the California State            • California Accidental Release Prevention (CalARP) Program
Environmental Protection Agency
as a Certified Unified Program                • Underground Storage Tank Program
Agency (CUPA) for the
administration, regulation, and               • Aboveground Petroleum Storage Act Requirements for Spill
                                                  Prevention, Control and Countermeasure (SPCC) Plans
enforcement of environmental
programs that fall under the CUPA             • Hazardous Waste Generator and Onsite Hazardous Waste
umbrella.                                         Treatment (tiered permitting) Programs
CUPA provides oversight on                    •   California Uniform Fire Code: Hazardous Material Management
hazardous materials management                    Plans and Hazardous Material Inventory Statements
and enforces State environmental              The Unified Program is intended to provide relief to businesses
programs at the local and regional            complying with the overlapping and sometimes conflicting
level. CUPA collaborates with                 requirements of formerly independently managed programs. The
other regulatory agencies in the              Unified Program is implemented at the local government level by a
management of identified hazards              Certified Unified Program Agency (CUPA).
to ensure safety standards are
met.
The San Rafael Fire Department manages the Marin Household Hazardous Waste
(HHW) Program for most cities in Marin County. The Fire Department, together with
the Marin County Hazardous and Solid Waste Joint Powers Authority (Zero Waste
Marin) and Marin Recycling & Resource Recovery Association, operate the Marin
HHW Facility. Residents of San Rafael may bring paint, adhesives, motor oil,
pesticides, household batteries, latex paint, computer monitors, televisions, and
bleach cleaners to the facility free of charge. The Fire Department also assists
businesses in determining actions needed to comply with State and Federal laws
regarding storage and handling of hazardous materials on site. San Rafael
businesses may dispose of small quantities of hazardous waste by appointment and
for a fee.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                       SAN RAFAEL 2020 / SAFETY              271

                       S-10. Location of Public Improvements.
                       To minimize threat to human health or any extraordinary construction and monitoring
                       expenses, avoid locating improvements and utilities in areas with dangerous levels of
                       identified hazardous materials. When the location of public improvements and utilities
                       in such areas cannot feasibly be avoided, effective mitigation measures will be
                       implemented.
                            See LU-2a (Development Review).
                       S-11. Restriction of Businesses.
                       Restrict siting of businesses or expansion of businesses that have the potential for a
                       significant hazardous materials release within one- quarter mile of schools.
                            S-11a. Survey of Facilities. Survey existing industrial facilities within one-quarter mile of
                            the schools. The survey would be used to determine the presence of hazardous materials
                            and evaluate the risk of an accidental release that could adversely affect the health and
                            safety of students and school staff.
                                 Responsibility: Community Development
                                 Timeframe: Short term
                                 Resources: Staff time
                       S-12. Use of Environmental Databases in Development Review.
                       When development is proposed, determine whether the site has been recorded as
                       contaminated. Undertake appropriate studies to assure identification and
                       implementation of mitigation measures for sites on or near identified hazards.
                                                 S-12a. Environmental Database. Maintain environmental and
                                                 hazardous materials-related databases, and update information on an
                                                 ongoing basis. In addition, include the information in the State
                                                 GeoTracker database (database of contaminated Underground Storage
                                                 Tanks sites).
                                                           Responsibility: CUPA
                                                           Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                           Resources: Staff Time
                                                 S-12b. Environmental History. Through the environmental review
                                                 process, provide information about available environmental history of
                                                 a site and proposed mitigation measures if warranted.
                                                           Responsibility: CUPA
                                                           Timeframe: Ongoing
   CUPA is                                                 Resources: Staff Time
   responsible for
   the safe
   disposal of         S-13. Potential Hazardous Soils Conditions.
   h a za r d o u s    Where development is proposed on sites with known previous contamination, sites
   materials.          filled prior to 1974 or sites that were historically auto service, industrial or other land
                       uses that may have involved hazardous materials, evaluate such sites for the presence
                       of toxic or hazardous materials. The requirements for site-specific investigation are
                       contained in the Geotechnical Review Matrix.
                            S-13a. Potentially Hazardous Soils Map. Prepare a map showing sites with known soil
                            and groundwater contamination, in order to identify new developments that warrant
                            environmental investigation and testing.
                                 Responsibility: CUPA
                                 Timeframe: Long Term
                                 Resources: Staff Time
272                 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / SAFETY                                            Reprinted 04/28/2017
     S-13b. Hazardous Soils Cleanup. Require remediation and cleanup in accordance with
     regional and local standards in order to develop on sites where hazardous materials have
     impacted soil or groundwater. At a minimum, remediation and clean up of contaminated
     sites shall be in accordance with regional and local standards. The required level of
     remediation and clean-up shall be determined by the Certified Unified Program Agency
     (CUPA) based on the intended use of the site and health risk to the public.
           Responsibility: CUPA
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Resources: Staff Time
     S-13c. Local Implementing Agency. The Certified Unified                               S et t l em en t
     Program Agency (CUPA) shall oversee the investigation and
     closure of contaminated underground storage tank sites.                 Settlement occurs from structures and
           Responsibility: CUPA                                              other loads that cause deformation of the
           Timeframe: Ongoing                                                subsurface soils. Settlement from
           Resources: Staff Time                                             structures is usually minor and usually
                                                                             occurs during construction or within the
S-14. Hazardous Materials Storage, Use and                                   first few weeks after construction.
Disposal.                                                                    However, it can occur up to 30 years
Enforce regulations regarding proper storage, use and                        following construction.
disposal of hazardous materials to prevent leakage, potential
explosions, fires, or the escape of harmful gases, and to                    Consolidation of the San Francisco Bay
prevent individually innocuous materials from combining to                   mud can result in significant settlement of
form hazardous substances, especially at the time of disposal.               the ground surface. Bay mud underlies the
                                                                             eastern portion of San Rafael. San
     S-14a. CUPA Program. Continue to participate in the CUPA                Rafael’s filled areas continue to
     program.                                                                consolidate and settle causing a variety of
           Responsibility: City Manager                                      problems for property users and the City
           Timeframe: Ongoing                                                alike.
           Resources: Staff Time, Fees
S-15. Hazardous Waste Management.
Support measures to responsibly manage hazardous waste consistent with protection
of the public health, welfare, safety and the environment. The City of San Rafael
supports the Marin County Hazardous Waste Management Plan as adopted by the
State, County and Cities within Marin County.
     See S-14a (CUPA Program).
S-16. Transportation of Hazardous Materials.
Enforce Federal, State and Local requirements and standards regarding the
transportation of hazardous materials. Support, as appropriate, legislation that
strengthens safety requirements for the transportation of hazardous materials.
     S-16a. Safe Transport of Hazardous Materials. Support California Highway Patrol’s
     efforts to ensure the safe transport of hazardous materials.
           Responsibility: Fire, Police, CUPA
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                           SAN RAFAEL 2020 / SAFETY              273

                                    Flood Control, Subsidence and Erosion
                                    Once the San Rafael Basin storm drain improvement projects are completed, they will
                                    nearly achieve the flood protection objectives set by the Department of Public Works
                                    over the last 50 years. However, subsidence of the areas underlain with bay mud will
                                    continue for several decades. Subsidence or settlement may result in flooding as
                                    ground levels are lowered. Without levee maintenance, flooding poses a serious
                                    threat to the east San Rafael area. Title 18 “Protection of Flood Hazard Areas” of San
                                    Rafael Municipal Code establishes standards and regulations governing development
                                    in flood-prone sites.
                                    Sandy soils on moderate to steep slopes or clayey soils on steep slopes are
                                    susceptible to erosion when exposed to concentrated surface water flow. The
                                    potential for erosion is increased when established vegetation is disturbed or
                                    removed. Within the valley areas, stream and river flow erodes the banks and causes
                                    the location of the stream or river to meander. The erosion undercuts the stream
                                    banks and leads to slope instability. The natural erosion and stream meander can
                                    undermine structures or roadways and cause damage or collapse. The potential for
                                    erosion damage is limited to localized areas.
                                    S-17. Flood Protection of New Development.
                                    Design new development within the bay mud areas to minimum floor elevation that
                                    provides protection from potential impacts of flooding during the “100-year” flood.
                                    The final floor elevation (elevation of the first floor at completion of construction)
                                    shall account for the ultimate settlement of the site due to consolidation of the bay
                                    mud from existing and new loads, taking into account soils conditions and the type of
                                    structure proposed. Design for settlement over a 50-year period is typically considered
                                    sufficient.
                                                                     S-17a. Title 18 Flood Protection Standards. Evaluate and
                                                                     revise the City's Title 18 flood protection standards for new
                                                                     development based on Federal and regional criteria.
                                                                              Responsibility: Community Development
                                                                              Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                                              Resources: Fees
                                                                     See LU-2a (Development Review).
                                                                     S-18 Storm Drainage Improvements.
                                                                     Require new development to improve local storm
                                                                     drainage facilities to accommodate site runoff anticipated
                                                                     from a “100-year” storm.
                                                                     S-18a. Storm Drainage Improvements. Require that new
                                                                     development proposals which are likely to affect the limited
                                                                     capacity of downstream storm drainage facilities provide a
Funding from storm
                                         hydrological analysis of the storm drain basin of the proposed development and evaluate
d r a i n i m p r o ve m e n t s
come from the
                                         the capacity of existing downstream storm drainage facilities and fund improvements to
General Fundand                          accommodate increased drainage from the project site resulting from a 100-year storm,
Federal and State                        where practical.
grants.                                       Responsibility: Community Development
                                              Timeframe: Ongoing
                                              Resources: Fees
274                              SAN RAFAEL 2020 / SAFETY                                             Reprinted 04/28/2017


       S-19. Flood Control Improvements Funding.
       Support Federal and State legislation that provide funding for the construction of flood
       control improvements in urbanized areas, and seek such funding as it becomes
       available. Additionally, continue to use any available local sources of funding to
       provide flood control improvements.
           S-19a. Incremental Flood Control Improvements. Where needed and possible, new
           development/redevelopment projects shall include measures to improve area flood
           protection. Such measures would be identified and required through the development
           review process.
                Responsibility: Community Development, Public Works
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Fees
       S-20. Levee Upgrading.
       When waterfront properties are developed or redeveloped, require levee upgrading, as
       appropriate, based on anticipated high tide and flood conditions, to maintain an
       appropriate levee height.
           S-20a. Levee Maintenance Funding. Coordinate with property owners to ensure
           adequate levee heights. Evaluate potential ways for affected private property owners to
           fund levee maintenance such as Assessment or Maintenance Districts.
                Responsibility: Public Works Department
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: CIP, Federal funds (FEMA for emergency repairs), Mitigation Funds,
                Assessment District.
           S-20b. Ground Elevation Surveys. Perform periodic ground elevation surveys within the
           Canal Neighborhood to determine ground elevations throughout the area, including the
           levee system. The result of the survey shall be used to determine the need for levee
           heightening for flood protection purposes. When a need for levee heightening is
           determined, the City shall heighten the levees as necessary on public property and require
           that levees on private property be heightened.
                Responsibility: Public Works
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff time
                See LU-2a (Development Review).
       S-21. Rise in Sea Level.
       Support efforts to address rise in sea level by: a) continually monitoring changes in
       projection information, data and technology; b) utilizing the “Climate Adaptation –
       Sea Level Rise” San Rafael White Paper (January 2014) as a starting point for
       pursuing critical tasks and actions including the preparation of a vulnerability
       assessment; and c) coordinating with the County of Marin and other local, state,
       federal agencies in planning for long-term adaptation.
                S-21a. Rise in Sea Level. (Deleted per Amendment on 12/5/16)
           S-21a. Local Hazard Mitigation Plan. Prepare and adopt a local/multi-hazard
           mitigation plan, which includes addressing rise in sea level and measures for disaster
           preparedness and adaptation.
                Responsibility: Fire Department
                Timeframe: Short-term
                Resources: Staff time; available grants
276 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / SAFETY                                           Reprinted 04/28/2017

     S-21b. Vulnerability Assessment- BayWAVE Program. Coordinate and work with the
     County of Marin and other local jurisdictions in the BayWAVE Program to prepare and
     adopt a vulnerability assessment of the bay shoreline and areas susceptible to rise in sea
     level.
           Responsibility: Public Works and Community Development
           Timeframe: Short-term
           Resources: Staff time
S-22. Erosion.
Require appropriate control measures in areas susceptible to erosion, in conjunction
with proposed development. Erosion control measures and management practices
should conform to the most recent editions of the Regional Water Quality Control
Board’s Erosion and Sediment Control Field Manual and the Association of Bay Area
Governments’ Manual of Standards for Erosion and Sediment Control or equivalent.
     S-22a. Erosion Control Programs. Review and approve erosion control programs for
     projects involving grading one acre or more or 5,000 square feet of built surface as
     required by Standard Urban Stormwater Management Plans (SUSUMP). Evaluate smaller
     projects on a case-by-case basis.
           Responsibility: Public Works, Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees
     S-22b. Grading During the Wet Season. Discourage grading during the wet season and
     require that development projects implement adequate erosion and/or sediment control and
     runoff discharge measures.
           Responsibility: Public Works, Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Clean Water Program
S-23. Septic Systems.
Discourage the use of septic systems within San Rafael’s Planning Area. If no other
alternatives exist, then soil tests shall be required to determine if the on-site soils are
suitable for development of a septic system for disposal of wastewater. In hillside
areas, an evaluation of the additional water from a septic system on hillside stability
shall also be required. New or improved septic systems shall be designed by a
registered civil engineer that specializes in septic design.
     See LU-2a (Development Review).
S-24. Creeks and Drainageways.
Seek to retain creek channels in their natural state in order to prevent undue erosion of
creek banks. Protect creekside habitat and provide maintenance access along creeks
where appropriate.
     S-24a. Agency Permits. Through development review, consult with and require necessary
     permits from State and Federal resource agencies, such as U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
     California Fish and Game, Bay Conservation and Development Commission, and the
     Regional Water Quality Control Board.
           Responsibility: Community Development, Public Works
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees
     See CON-6a (Municipal Code Compliance) and CON-8a (Creek Restoration).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                           SAN RAFAEL 2020 / SAFETY 277

       S-25. Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB)
       Requirements
       Continue to work through the Marin County Stormwater Pollution Prevention
       Program to implement appropriate Watershed Management plans as dictated in the
       RWQCB general National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit for Marin
       County and the local stormwater plan.
            S-25a. Compliance with RWQCB. Review development plans for compliance with
            RWQCB permit, in conjunction with Marin County Stormwater Pollution Prevention
            Program (MCSTOPP).
                 Responsibility: Public Works
                 Timeframe: Ongoing
                 Resources: Stormwater funds, Fees
       Public Safety and Emergency Response
       Police Department
       The mission of the San Rafael Police Department is to provide police services to the
       community, and to reduce crime and the fear of crime through the development of
       partnerships with the community it serves and other public and private agencies
       through the utilization of all available resources. Reductions in crime since 1988 have
       resulted from several proactive policing programs.
       •    Participation in the interdepartmental Health and Safety Coordinating Committee,
            with joint inspection teams investigating the health and safety conditions in San
            Rafael’s residences.
       •    Creation of the award winning Mental Health Liaison Program, which is
            instrumental in assisting mentally-ill homeless who are repeat criminal violators to
            receive the treatment they need to live a crime-free life.
       •    Partnership with social service agencies to investigate the criminal aspect of
            criminal violence, while other agencies provide advocacy for victims of domestic
            violence and counseling for anger management.
       •    Neighborhood outreach to community groups to improve traffic safety and reduce
            traffic accidents through monitoring and reducing speeding on local streets, and
            participating in Public Works’ Traffic Coordinating Committee to identify and
            reduce neighborhood traffic problems.
       •    Improved School Liaison Program to reduce and prevent crimes on school
            campuses.
       •    Continued monitoring of gang activity and partnerships with community
            organizations to provide alternative activities for youth.
       Policing programs involve continually building on the Department’s Community
       Policing strategy, which is the foundation for the department’s direction and long-term
       goals. The “Commitment to Community” which appears on all patrol cars, the
       department website, and more direct public contact with officers are direct results of
       this strategy.
278 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / SAFETY                                        Reprinted 04/28/2017

Fire Department
The mission of the San Rafael Fire Department is to ensure the safety, health and
well-being of all individuals, property, and the environment through a comprehensive
range of programs designed to respond to threats from fire, illness and injury,
environmental hazards and natural disasters. The Department is responsive to the
community’s growing needs though its programs for Community Fire Servicing,
Emergency Response, Fire Prevention, Disaster Preparedness and Environmental
Services. The San Rafael Fire Department recently completed a “Standard of Cover
Plan” to identify appropriate response times and the number of personnel required to
mitigate an emergency, and to provide an overall risk assessment of fire in San
Rafael.
Because of the Fire Department’s effectiveness in adopting and implementing firesafe
construction, the volume of fire-related calls has declined dramatically over the years;
calls for emergency medical service total 70 to 80 percent of calls for service. With the
aging of San Rafael’s population over the next decade, calls for paramedic service will
increase, as will the cost and expectations of service. The Fire Department is
committed to providing quality, accessible and cost-effective paramedic care in
response to changing needs.
The City has prepared a number of studies and regulations related to wildland safety.
The Fire Department’s recent study Wildland Urban Intermix Threat Analysis
evaluated safety issues related to wildland fires in San Rafael’s hillside areas. A Fire
Management Plan, which includes a Transportation and Evacuation Plan component,
was prepared for each ‘High Hazard” area identified in the study. San Rafael’s ISO
rating is Class 3 (on a scale of 1 to 10, with 1 being the highest rating). Water supply
received a relative classification of 1. Minimum roadway width requirements are set
forth in the Fire Department’s “Access Road Requirements,” which are implemented
as part of development review. In addition, required vegetation clearances around
structures are addressed in the California Fire Code, as adopted by the City of San
Rafael.
Disaster Preparedness
Emergency (disaster) preparedness planning consists of three major components:
government actions, private organization emergency response actions, and individual
or small group actions. Emergency preparedness planning recognizes that in the first
72-hours after a major disaster, people must be self-sufficient. Governments cannot
provide all of the services that may be needed. Therefore, disaster preparedness
involves planning efforts by local government, private organizations and local groups
to identify resources, provide public awareness and formulate plans about what to do
in an emergency situation. The Community Emergency Reponse Team (CERT)
program offers training for neighbors to work together and to be self-sufficient during
a major disaster.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                       SAN RAFAEL 2020 / SAFETY 279

                                  S-26. Fire and Police Services.
                                  Maintain adequate cost-effective fire protection, paramedic and police services.
                                  Minimize increases in service needs from new development through continued fire
                                  prevention and community policing programs.
                                       S-26a. Public Safety Training. Provide and encourage public safety employee training to
                                       ensure team members’ skills remain current. Encourage and support new employees to
                                                            join programs, such as Urban Search and Rescue and disaster relief
                                                            training programs (CERT).
                                                                     Responsibility: Fire, Police, Public Works
                                                                     Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                                     Resources: Staff Time, Grants
                                                            S-26b. Vehicle and Equipment Maintenance. Maintain and upgrade
                                                            vehicles and equipment as necessary.
                                                                     Responsibility: Fire, Police, Public Works
                                                                     Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                                     Resources: Capital Improvements, Grants
                                                            S-26c. Fire Prevention and Safe Design. Through the development
                                                            review process, require review by Fire Department and Police
                                                            Department for fire prevention and safe design.
                                                                     Responsibility: Fire, Police
                                                                     Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                                     Resources: Fees
                                                            S-27. Community Policing and Fire Service.
                                                            Actively promote Community Policing and Community Fire
                                                            Servicing in order to facilitate closer relations between police and
                                                            fire departments and neighborhood groups, businesses and
                                                            residents.
   Community
   policing
   became a City                       S-27a. Restorative Justice Program. Develop a community-based restorative justice
   philosophy in                       program, which would provide for alternative sentencing methods and a diversion program
   1997.                               where offenders are accountable to the community. Cooperate with County authorities to
                                       review, identify and evaluate alternative sentencing methods to enhance the community.
                                                                       Responsibility: Police
                                                                       Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                                       Resources: Staff Time, Grants, Fines
                          W h at I s                                   S-27b. Business Regulation. Maintain and adopt, as
          Re st o r at iv e J u st ic e?                               necessary, regulatory ordinances and regulatory procedures
                                                                       for businesses determined to be susceptible to criminal
        Res tor a ti v e j us t ic e is a r es po ns e                 activities not otherwise regulated by Federal and State
        to c r im e t ha t r ec o gn i z es th a t                     agencies, such as massage parlors.
        c r im in a l b eh a v i or i nj ur es v ic tim s                        Responsibility: Police
        an d t he en t ir e c om m un it y. It is a                              Timeframe: Ongoing
        pr oc es s t ha t s e ek s t o r ep a ir t he                            Resources: Fees
        har m c a us ed b y c r im e b y i n vo l v i ng
        v ic t im s a nd c om m uni t i es i n th e                    S-27c. Community Fire Servicing. Continue to provide
        j us t ic e s ys tem t hr o u gh pr oc es s es                 health and fire safety outreach programs to community
        s uc h as d ir ec t r es ti t ut i on , v ic t im -            groups.
        of f en der m ed i at i on an d p ol ic i es                             Responsibility: Fire
        th at pr om ot e v ic t im s ’ r i gh ts .                               Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                                                 Resources: Staff Time
280                          SAN RAFAEL 2020 / SAFETY                                                 Reprinted 04/28/2017

S-28. Paramedic Services.
Continue to seek adequate and cost-effective
ways to provide accessible and reasonable
emergency medical services.
     S-28a. Paramedic Tax. Continue to support the
     paramedic tax.
           Responsibility: City Manager
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Volunteers
     S-28b. Partnerships for Prevention Programs.
     Seek public and private partnerships, such as
     cooperating with hospitals and other public and
     private medical providers, to offer prevention
     programs and medical information.
           Responsibility: Fire, Police
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time                                                                       San Rafael’s
                                                                                                       paramedic
S-29. Effective Communication System.                                                                  services are
                                                                                                       funded in part by
Ensure that all City agencies with public safety responsibilities are provided with                    a p a r a m e d i c t a x.
effective, reliable and robust emergency communications systems and equipment. The
system and equipment should have adequate capacity and redundancy to ensure these
agencies can accomplish their missions. Appropriate consideration should also be
given to the communications needs of agencies that may be required to supply mutual
aid to or from other jurisdictions.
     S-29a. Involvement with Marin Emergency Radio Authority. Maintain active
     involvement with Marin Emergency Radio Authority (MERA) and pursue installation and
     activation of the MERA radio system.
           Responsibility: Fire, Police, Public Works
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
S-30. Maintenance and Landscaping for Fire Safety.
Encourage, where appropriate, special planting, removal and maintenance programs to
reduce potential fire hazards in the hills, wildland areas and urban interface areas.
     S-30a. Fire Hazard Maps. As part of the City’s Fire Hazard Program, maintain maps
     identifying potential fire hazard areas in San Rafael.
           Responsibility: Fire
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time, Grant
     S-30b. Fire Protection Ordinance. Continue to implement Wildlife Urban Interface
     (WUI) standards within the Ordinance to reduce fire hazards in areas in the urban interface
     area.
           Responsibility: Fire
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time
     See OS-2 (Open Space Management).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                          SAN RAFAEL 2020 / SAFETY                281

                                 S-31. New Development in Fire Hazard Areas.
                                 Design new development located on or adjacent to natural hillsides to minimize fire
                                 hazards to life and property.
                                     S-31a. New Development. Through the development review process, require appropriate
                                     mitigation measures such as fire preventive site design, landscaping and building
                                     materials, and the use of fire suppression techniques such as sprinklering.
                                          Responsibility: Fire, Community Development
                                          Timeframe: Ongoing
                                          Resources: Fees
                                 S-32. Safety Review of Development Projects.
                                 Require crime prevention and fire prevention techniques in new development,
                                 including adequate access for emergency vehicles.
                                     S-32a. Safe Buildings. Continue to review development applications to insure that
                                     landscaping, lighting, building siting and design, emergency access, adequate water
                                     pressure and peakload storage capacity, and building construction materials reduce the
                                                        opportunity for crime and fire hazards.
                                                                  Responsibility: Fire, Community Development, Police
                                                                  Timeframe: Ongoing
                   Di sa st e r                                   Resources: Fees
     A natural (i.e. flood, earthquake) or              See LU-2a (Development Review).
     man-made (terrorist, chemical release)
     event that exceeds City capability to              S-33. Disaster Preparedness Planning.
     respond using normal resources.                    Ensure disaster preparedness in cooperation with other public
                                                        agencies and appropriate public-interest organizations. Expand
                                                        abilities of residents to assist in local responses to disasters.
                                     S-33a. Disaster Preparedness Plan. Update and publicize the City's emergency response
                                     (disaster) plan in conformance with State guidelines.
                                          Responsibility: Public Works
                                          Timeframe: Ongoing
                                          Resources: Staff Time
                                                          S-33b. Urban Search and Rescue Techniques. Continue to ensure
                                                          that Urban Search and Rescue techniques remain current.
                                                                   Responsibility: Fire, Public Works
                                                                   Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                                   Resources: Staff Time
                                                          S-33c. Neighborhood Disaster Preparedness. Continue to coordinate
                                                          neighborhood disaster response preparedness planning efforts through
                                                          Fire and Police Department programs and through coordination with
                                                          the American Red Cross, American Heart Association and other
                                                          community groups. Provide technical assistance as needed to review
                                                          adequacy of neighborhood disaster plans.
                                                                   Responsibility: Fire, Police
                                                                   Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                                   Resources: Staff Time
Urban Search and
Rescue teams train
r e g u l a r l y.
 282                          SAN RAFAEL 2020 / SAFETY                                           Reprinted 04/28/2017
     S-33d. Standardized Emergency Management System. Continue to train City
     employees in the Standardized Emergency Management System offered by the Governor’s
     Office of Emergency Services.
           Responsibility: Fire, Public Works
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     See S-26a (Public Safety Training).
     S-33e. Training of Citizen Police Academy and
     DART Graduates. Organize neighborhood teams
     of Citizen Police Academy and CERT graduates,
     and provide training on how to maintain public
     safety in their neighborhood during emergency
     situations.
           Responsibility: Fire, Police
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
S-34. Emergency Operation Center.                                                                        Th r o u g h
                                                                                                         Community Fire
Create a well-equipped Emergency Operation Center that is permanent and centrally                        Servicing, the Fire
located to coordinate emergency responses to emergencies.                                                Department
                                                                                                         reaches out to
     S-34a. Emergency Operations Center. Determine the location of, and explore funding                  residents of all
     sources for a permanent and centrally located Emergency Operation Center as well as                 ages.
     alternative emergency locations.
           Responsibility: City Manager, Public Works
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time, Grants
S-35. Safety Personnel in Times of Emergency.
Make provisions to continue essential emergency public services during natural and
other catastrophes.
     S-35a. Employee Transportation. To ensure adequate safety personnel in an emergency,
     explore ways to transport public safety employees from outlying areas when damaged
     infrastructure prevents them from driving to San Rafael.
           Responsibility: Fire, Public Works
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time
     S-35b. Mutual Aid Agreements. Continue to explore the feasibility of mutual aid
     agreements that provide public safety personnel in times of emergency.
           Responsibility: Fire, Police
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time
     S-35c. Housing Incentives. Support State legislation and City initiatives that would
     provide incentives for public safety employees to live in San Rafael, so that they may be
     readily available if a disaster should occur.
           Responsibility: City Manager
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                            SAN RAFAEL 2020 / SAFETY              283

                              S-36. Emergency Connectors.
                              Pursue the development of local emergency connectors in the short-term and
                              permanent roadway connections between Terra Linda and Downtown San Rafael.
                              Seek adequate emergency connectors to all areas of San Rafael, and between San
                              Rafael and adjacent communities.
                                           S-36a. Emergency Connectors. Evaluate and improve the following emergency
            EMERGENCY                      connectors in light of costs, effectiveness, and impacts:
            CONNECTORS                     1. Provide emergency street connectors throughout the City, including the
                                                existing connection between Freitas Parkway and Fawn Drive, the all-weather
                                                connection between Freitas and Fawn and between Ridgewood and Fawn, and
   Emergency connectors are
                                                the connection between Del Ganado and Butterfield Road;
   defined as routes available             2. Maintain the ability to use the private portion of Sienna Way in Dominican in
   only for emergency vehicle                   case of emergency, as an alternative exit for Mountain View.
   use, as well as general                 3. Maintain emergency access between Peacock and Biscayne Drives for
   circulation routes that are                  emergency vehicle use only.
   needed/important for                              Responsibility: Fire, Public Works
   emergency vehicle use.                            Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                     Resources: Staff Time
                                           See C-23a (Better Signage).
                              S-37. Functioning Public Utilities Following Earthquake.
                              Locate and construct vital public utilities as well as communication and transportation
                              facilities in a way that maximizes their potential to remain functional during and after
                              an earthquake.
                                   S-37a. Engineering Standards. Continue to build public utilities to adopted engineering
                                   standards.
                                        Responsibility: Community Development
                                        Timeframe: Ongoing
                                        Resources: Staff Time, Capital Improvements Program
                              S-38. Building Code and Fire Code Update.
                              Continue updating the Building and Fire Codes as necessary to address earthquake,
                              fire and other hazards and support programs for the identification and abatement of
                              existing hazardous structures.
                                   S-38a. State Required Code Updates. Continue to adopt State-required code updates
                                   with provisions for public review and input.
                                        Responsibility: Fire, Community Development
                                        Timeframe: Short Term
                                        Resources: Staff Time
284                        SAN RAFAEL 2020 / SAFETY                                            Reprinted 04/28/2017
S-39. Public Safety Facilities .
Ensure that public safety facilities are designed and constructed adequately to
efficiently operate paramedic, fire and police services, including in times of disaster.
     S-39a. Public Safety Facilities. Evaluate needed upgrades to public safety facilities,
     particularly seismic safety improvements, and seek funding mechanisms. In order to meet
     the existing and projected future needs of the San Rafael Police Department, the City will
     determine the department’s existing and project facility needs; obtain the necessary
     funding for the needed improvement; and, purchase, construct, and/or renovate the
     necessary additional facilities.
           Responsibility: Fire, Police
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time
     See I-2a (Long Term Needs).
S-40. Outreach.
Encourage educational outreach to promote
awareness and caution among residents regarding
disaster preparedness of possible natural hazards,
including soil conditions, earthquakes, flooding,
and fire hazards. Establish an outreach program,
including establishing programs. Publicize
disaster plans by neighborhood.
     S-40a. City’s Website. Manage and update the
     Fire Department’s website to provide information
     and links to meet the fire servicing needs of the
     community.
           Responsibility: Fire
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     S-40b. Enrollment in Training Programs.
     Increase enrollment in the training programs for
     residents and neighborhood associations.                                                            P o l i c e wo r k a s
           Responsibility: Fire                                                                          p a r t n e r s wi t h t h e
           Timeframe: Long Term                                                                          schools on
           Resources: Staff Time                                                                         educational
                                                                                                         programs.
     S-40c. Neighborhood Educational Programs. Support educational programs, such as
     CERT and Citizen’s Police Academy in the neighborhoods.
           Responsibility: Fire, Police
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                            SAN RAFAEL 2020 / SAFETY                  285

                This page intentionally left blank
286 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / SAFETY                       Reprinted 04/28/2017
Noise                                                                                             Our Quality of Life
Introduction
Noise is part of everyday life in a community. Noise is generally defined as unwanted
sound. Whether a sound is unwanted depends on when and where it occurs, what the
listener is doing when it occurs, characteristics of the sound (loudness, pitch and
duration, speech or music content, irregularity), and how intrusive it is above
background sound levels.
In the City of San Rafael,
vehicular traffic on the
roadways is the single
largest source of noise.                      E xh i b it       3 0:  T yp ic a l       So u n d       L ev e ls
Airplanes and mechanical
equipment are also                         Common Outdoor                                     Common Indoor
contributors, as are                          Sound Levels           Noise Level Db (A)         Sound Levels
intermittent sources such           Commercial Airliner Takeoff at
                                                                            110          Rock Band
as leafblowers and                     1,000 feet
construction equipment.
Average noise levels are                                                    100          Ambulance Siren at 100 feet
highest along Highways              Gas Lawn Mower at 3 feet                 90          Food Blender at 3 feet
101 and 580 and along
major traffic corridors. The        Diesel Truck at 50 feet                              Garbage Disposal at 3 feet
City of San Rafael will                                                      80
                                    Noisy Urban Daytime                                  Shouting at 3 feet
continue its efforts to curb
noise impacts from                                                           70
existing sources and will
also take actions that                                                                   Vacuum Cleaner at 10 feet
prevent adverse levels of           Commercial Area                          60
                                                                                         Normal Speech at 3 feet
noise from being
generated by new                                                                         Large Business Office
sources. Such efforts               Quiet Urban Daytime                      50
include encouraging the                                                                  Dishwasher Next Room
design of new
                                    Quiet Urban Nighttime                                Small Theatre
development projects in a                                                    40
manner that minimizes the           Quiet Suburban Nighttime                             Large Conference Room
exposure of residents and
workers to excessive                                                         30
levels of noise.
                                    Quiet Rural Nighttime                                Bedroom at Night
                                                                             20
                                    Rustling Leaves                                      Broadcast & Recording Studio
                                                                             10          Soft Whisper
                                                                              0          Threshold of Hearing
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                             SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NOISE              287
                              Effects of Noise on People
                              The noise environment has a significant impact on the City's overall quality of life.
                              Below are some of the effects of noise on people.
                                                                  •    Medical and Annoyance Effects. According to the
                                                                       Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), noise
     Ho w      i s  No i s e       M easu r ed ?
                                                                       above 40-45 dBA can disturb a sleeping person:
                                                                       whether a person awakens will depend on noise
    Sound is the result of the vibration of an object,
                                                                       levels, type of noise, stage of sleep, age, and so
    which is transmitted through the air in waves
                                                                       on. (EPA, 1974). Older people and persons who
    that in turn vibrate the eardrum. Sound is
                                                                       are ill are particularly susceptible to sleep
    measured in a logarithmic scale using units
                                                                       interference caused by noise. Speech interference
    called decibels (dB). Since the human ear
                                                                       begins occurring at 45-50 dBA, and becomes
    does not hear all sounds equally, a special
                                                                       severe at 60 dBA or above. Damage to the human
    weighted decibel measurement (dBA) is used
                                                                       ear can occur at about 70 dBA. Sounds above 70
    to simulate human hearing.
                                                                       dBA can cause physical stress reactions, such as
                                                                       tightening of the stomach muscles, increased
    Ldn (Sound Level, day-night average) is the
                                                                       heartbeat and adrenaline flow. Over a period of
    average dBA sound level during a 24-hour
                                                                       time these reactions can lead to ulcers, intestinal
    day. Sound levels during the night are
                                                                       malfunctions, and heart disease. Permanent
    weighted over those during daylight hours, by
                                                                       hearing damage can occur at 80- 85 dBA, if
    adding ten decibels to actual sound levels
                                                                       sustained over eight hours a day over the course of
    during the period from 10 p.m. to 7 a.m. to
                                                                       a worker’s career. Higher levels cause hearing
    recognize the increased annoyance factor
                                                                       damage in shorter period of time.
    related to noise at night. Examples of typical
    sound levels are shown in Figure 30.
                                                                  •    Economic Effects. Studies have found that work
                                                                       performance can be affected at noise levels of 65
    The outdoor noise environment throughout the
                                                                       dBA and above. Some effects of noise on work
    United States varies considerably. Outdoor
                                                                       performance are as follows: Noise is more likely to
    Day-Night Average (Ldn) sound levels can be
                                                                       reduce the accuracy of work than to reduce
    as low as 30 to 40 dBA (Ldn) in wilderness
                                                                       quantity. Complex tasks are more likely to be
    areas and as high as 85-90 dBA (Ldn) in noisy
                                                                       affected by noise. Higher frequency, intermittent
    industrial urban areas. In San Rafael, Ldn
                                                                       and impulsive sounds are more disruptive than
    levels in residential areas are as low as 45
                                                                       lower or more steady state sounds. Noise causes
    dBA (Ldn) in quiet valleys shielded from major
                                                                       higher accident rates. Other adverse economic
    roads and as high as 65-75 dBA (Ldn) along
                                                                       costs of noise are housing turnover; soundproofing
    highways and major roads.
                                                                       for noise-producing equipment and noise-impacted
                                                                       buildings; and the expense of constructing noise
                                                                       barriers adjacent to noise sources.
                              Basis for Noise Standards
                              Acceptable levels of noise vary from land use to land use. Also, in any one location,
                              the noise level will vary over time, from the lowest background or ambient levels to
                              that of passing airplanes or construction equipment. Various techniques have been
                              developed that measure the effects of noise levels over a period of time.
                              It is difficult to specify noise levels that are generally acceptable to everyone. What is
                              annoying to one person may be unnoticed by another. Standards may be based on
                              documented complaint activity in response to noise levels, or based on studies on the
288                        SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NOISE                                               Reprinted 04/28/2017

ability of people to sleep, talk, or work under various noise conditions. All such
studies, however, recognize that individual responses vary considerably. Standards
usually address the needs of most of the general population.
With this caution in mind, noise standards for planning purposes need to examine
outdoor and indoor noise levels acceptable for different uses. The standards must
relate to existing conditions in the City so that they are realistically enforceable and
consistent with other General Plan policies. (See Appendices F and G for Noise
Contours for 2001 and 2020.)
Addressing Noise Impacts in the General Plan
The General Plan seeks to limit the impacts of noise on residents and employees in
two ways. First, the Plan contains standards to determine the suitability of new land
uses depending upon the extent of noise exposure in the area. Second, Plan policies
limit the extent of new noise sources that proposed development can add to existing
noise levels in the surrounding area and through implementation of the City’s Noise
Ordinance, which limits what is commonly described as “nuisance noise.”
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                            SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NOISE 289

       GOAL 31: ACCEPTABLE NOISE
       LEVELS
       It is the goal of San Rafael to have acceptable noise levels. Excessive noise
       is a concern for many residents of San Rafael. These concerns can be managed
       with proper mitigation or through the implementation of the noise ordinance.
       The City of San Rafael recognizes the issue of noise and has standards to
       protect people from excessive, unnecessary and unreasonable noises from any
       and all sources in the community.
       Noise Impacts on New Projects
       N-1. Noise Impacts on New Development.
       Protect people in new development from excessive noise by applying noise standards
       in land use decisions. Apply the Land Use Compatibility Standards (see Exhibit 31) to
       the siting of new uses in existing noise environments. These standards identify the
       acceptability of a project based on noise exposure. If a project exceeds the standards in
       Exhibit 31, an acoustical analysis shall be required to identify noise impacts and
       potential noise mitigations. Mitigation should include the research and use of state-of-
       the-art abating materials and technology.
            N-1a. Acoustical Studies. Require acoustical studies for all new residential projects
            within the projected Ldn 60 dB noise contours (see Exhibit 31) so that noise mitigation
            measures can be incorporated into project design. Acoustical studies shall identify noise
            sources and contain a discussion of the existing and future noise exposure and the
            mitigation measures that may be used to achieve the appropriate outdoor and indoor noise
            standards.
                Responsibility: Community Development
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Fees
290 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NOISE                                            Reprinted 04/28/2017
                                                  E xh i b it 3 1
                            L an d     U s e Co m p at ib i lit y St a n d a rd s
                                         f o r N ew D ev e l o p m en t
                                          Exterior Noise Exposure to the Site
                                                         Ldn (dB)
Land Use                                                    50     55     60      65       70         75   80
      Residential, Hotels, Motels
      Schools, Libraries, Churches,
       Hospitals, Nursing Homes
      Auditoriums, Concert Halls,
       Amphitheaters
      Sports Arena, Outdoor Spectator
       Sports
      Playgrounds, Neighborhood Parks
      Other Outdoor Recreation and
       Cemeteries
      Office and Other Commercial Uses
      Industrial, Manufacturing, Utilities,
       Agriculture
                                                Interior Noise Exposure
                                                         Ldn (dB)
                                                            35     40     45      50       55         60   65
       Bedrooms in Residential units not in
       Downtown
       Other Rooms in Residential Units not
       in Downtown
       Bedrooms in Residential units in
       Downtown
       Hotels, Motels, Downtown Multifamily
                     Normally Acceptable – Specified land use is satisfactory, based upon the assumption that
                     any buildings involved are of normal conventional construction, without any special noise
                     insulation requirements.
                     Conditionally Acceptable – Specific land use may be permitted only after detailed analysis
                     of the noise reduction requirements and needed noise insulation features included in the
                     design.
                     Clearly Unacceptable – New construction of development clearly should not be
                     undertaken.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                           SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NOISE          291

       N-2. Exterior Noise Standards for Residential Use Areas.
       The exterior noise standard for backyards and/or common usable outdoor areas in new
       residential development is up to Ldn of 60 dB. In common usable outdoor areas in
       Downtown, mixed-use residential, and high density residential districts, up to Ldn of
       65 dB may be allowed if determined acceptable through development review.
           See N-1a (Acoustical Studies).
       N-3. Planning and Design of New Development.
       Encourage new development to be planned and designed to minimize noise impacts
       from outside noise sources.
           N-3a. Noise Mitigation. Require, where appropriate, the following mitigation measures to
           minimize noise impacts on proposed development projects:
           1. Site planning. Proper site planning is the first mitigation measure that should be
                investigated to reduce noise impacts. By taking advantage of the natural shape and
                terrain of the site, it often is possible to arrange the buildings and other uses in a
                manner that will reduce and possibly eliminate noise impacts. Specific site planning
                techniques include:
                a. Increasing the distance between the noise source and the receiver;
                b. Placing non-noise sensitive land uses such as parking lots, maintenance facilities,
                      and utility areas between the source and the receiver;
                c. Using non-noise sensitive structures such as garages to shield noise-sensitive
                      areas; and
                d. Orienting buildings to shield outdoor spaces from a noise source.
           2. Architectural layout of buildings. In many cases, noise reduction can be attained by
                careful layout of noise-sensitive spaces. Bedrooms, for example, should be placed
                away from freeways. Quiet outdoor spaces can be provided next to a noisy highway
                by creating a U-shaped development, which faces away from the highway.
           3. Noise Barriers. Absorptive types of noise barriers or walls should be used to reduce
                noise levels from ground transportation noise sources and industrial sources. A barrier
                must interrupt the line of sight between the noise source and the receiver in order to
                reduce noise level both outdoors and indoors. A barrier should provide at least Ldn 5
                dB of noise reduction to achieve a noticeable change in noise levels.
           4. Construction modifications. If site planning, architectural layout, noise barriers, or a
                combination of these measures does not achieve the required noise reduction, then
                mitigation should be facilitated through construction modification to walls, roofs,
                ceilings, doors, windows.
           5. Alternatives to Sound Walls. Encourage new development to identify alternatives to
                the use of sound walls to ease noise impacts.
                Responsibility: Community Development
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Fees
292 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NOISE                                                Reprinted 04/28/2017
Noise Impacts on Existing Development
N-4. Noise from New Nonresidential Development.
Design nonresidential development to minimize noise impacts on neighboring uses.
a. Performance Standards for Uses Affecting Residential Districts. New
     nonresidential development shall not increase noise levels in a residential district
     by more than Ldn 3 dB, or create noise impacts that would increase noise levels to
     more than Ldn 60 dB at the property line of the noise receiving use, whichever is
     the more restrictive standard.
b. Performance Standards for Uses Affecting Nonresidential and Mixed Use
     Districts. New nonresidential projects shall not increase noise levels in a
     nonresidential or mixed-use district by more than Ldn 5 dB, or create noise impacts
     that would increase noise levels to more than Ldn 65 dB (Office, Retail) or Ldn 70
     dB (Industrial), at the property line of the noise receiving use, whichever is the
     more restrictive standard.
c. Waiver. These standards may be waived if, as determined by an acoustical study,
     there are mitigating circumstances (such as higher existing noise levels), and no
     uses would be adversely affected.
     N-4a. Require Acoustical Study. Identify through an acoustical study noise mitigation
     measures to be designed and built into new nonresidential and mixed-use development,
     and encourage absorptive types of mitigation measures between noise sources and
     residential districts.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees
N-5. Traffic Noise from New Development
Minimize noise impacts of increased off-site traffic caused by new development.
Where the exterior Ldn is 65 dB or greater at a residential building or outdoor use area
and a plan, program, or project increases traffic noise levels by more than Ldn 3 dB,
reasonable noise mitigation measures shall be included in the plan, program or project.
     N-5a. Traffic Noise Studies. Require acoustical studies to evaluate potential off-site noise
     impacts resulting from traffic generated by new development.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees
N-6. Traffic Noise.
Attempt to minimize traffic noise through land use policies, law enforcement, and
street improvements.
     N-6a. Enforce Speed Limits. Enforce speed limits on roads generating numerous noise
     complaints.
           Responsibility: Police Department
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Police Department Operating Budget
     N-6b. Mixed-Use (Deleted per Amendment on 12/5/16)
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                              SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NOISE 293
            N-6c. Coordination with Local and State Agencies. Coordinate with CalTrans, Marin
            Countywide Planning Agency, Congestion Management Agency and other agencies to
            achieve noise reduction along Pt. San Pedro Road, Highways 101 and 580, and the
            Sonoma Marin Area Rail Transit corridor.
                 Responsibility: Community Development
                 Timeframe: Short Term
                 Resources: Staff Time
            N-6d. Vehicle Code. Enforce the California Vehicle Code regarding noisy vehicles.
                 Responsibility: Police Dept.
                 Timeframe: Ongoing
                 Resources: Police Department Operating Budget
            N-6e. Street Improvements. Pursue feasible cost-effective new street paving technologies
            to minimize traffic noise.
                 Responsibility: Public Works
                 Timeframe: Long Term
                 Resources: Staff Time
            N-6f. Widening of US 101 and 580. Encourage Caltrans to mitigate highway noise
            impacts as a part of the US 101 widening project. Review and comment, as necessary, on
            any proposed sound walls in San Rafael. Encourage Caltrans to use noise mitigation
            measures other than walls if they can be shown to be effective. These measures may
            include alternative pavement types and sound-absorptive treatments on existing and future
            noise barriers.
                 Responsibility: Public Works, City Council
                 Timeframe: Ongoing
                 Resources: Staff Time
            See C-21a (Traffic Calming Program).
       N-7. Airport/Heliport.
        To the extent allowed by federal and state law, consider and mitigate noise impacts of
       any changes in facilities or operations that require use permit mitigations or other land
       use permits at the San Rafael Airport in north San Rafael and the heliport in East San
       Rafael (see Noise Contours for San Rafael Airport and Heliport in Exhibits 32 and 33).
            See LU-2a (Development Review).
       N-8. Sonoma Marin Area Rail Transit.
       If a commuter rail service or other use is developed along the Sonoma Marin Area
       Rail Transit right-of-way, minimize noise impacts on existing development.
            N-8a. Future Transitway Mitigation Measures. A detailed noise assessment and
            appropriate mitigation measures should be prepared for any rail project on the Sonoma
            Marin Area Rail Transit right-of-way. The analysis should address the City’s noise
            standards and the Federal Transit Administrations (FTA) guidelines.
                 Responsibility: Community Development or Joint Powers Authority
                 Timeframe: Long Term
                 Resources: Potential Taxes (Sales)
294 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NOISE                                           Reprinted 04/28/2017



N-9. Nuisance Noise.
Minimize impacts from noise levels that exceed community sound levels.
     N-9a. Enforce and Update the Noise Ordinance. Enforce and update, as necessary, the
     City's Noise Ordinance that addresses common noise nuisances including amplified music,
     outdoor mechanical equipment and construction activities.
           Responsibility: Police Department
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     N-9b. Mitigation for Construction Activity Noise. Through environmental review,
     identify mitigation measures to minimize the exposure of neighboring properties to
     excessive noise levels from construction-related activity.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fee
     N-9c. Noise Specifications. Include noise specifications in requests for equipment
     information and bids for new City equipment and consider this information as part of
     evaluation of the bids.
           Responsibility: Public Works
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time, Capital Improvements
     N-9d. San Rafael Rock Quarry. Seek to minimize noise impacts of the quarry and
     brickyard operations through cooperative efforts with the County of Marin through its
     code enforcement and land use entitlement processes.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     See NH-143a (Rock Quarry Plan) and NH-144a (Rock Quarry Impacts).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                   SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NOISE               297
                          This page intentionally left blank
298 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NOISE                                  Reprinted 04/28/2017
Open Space                                                                             Our Natural Resources
Introduction
Natural features and resources have shaped both the growth and form of San Rafael
and provide many of the attractive characteristics of the area. San Rafael has a
significant diversity of natural features and assets that are important to preserve
through land use planning. Those important resources include bay lands and water,
canal frontage, streams, a ridgeline edge for the community, clean air and valuable
wildlife habitat. A central concern of the General Plan, therefore, in considering the
location, design, intensity and type of land uses in the City, is to continue to protect
natural resource areas.
In 1972, voters approved a tax levy and the formation of the Marin County Open
Space District to acquire and maintain open space, park and recreational lands. In
that same year there was also a San Rafael voter-approved bond measure, where
individual neighborhoods passed bonds to purchase open space in the area. With
these events taking place, emphasis was given to the importance of purchasing open
space for the community. Since then tremendous progress has been made in securing
and protecting open space throughout the County. San Rafael has largely met its
initial objectives by securing 3,285 acres of open space within the City limits and
almost 7,300 acres in the Planning Area. The Marin County Open Space District has
also secured considerable land in San Rafael’s Planning Area. One-quarter of the
land in San Rafael’s Planning Area is secured open space.
                                                                                                      Oak trees and
                                                                                                      grasslands are
                                                                                                      valuable open
                                                                                                      space habitat.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                     SAN RAFAEL 2020 / OPEN SPACE          299

       GOAL 32: PROTECTED OPEN SPACE
       It is the goal of San Rafael to preserve and protect open space and the natural
       environment for all to enjoy. Preservation of open space and the natural
       environment have been a priority for San Rafael residents for many years. Whenever
       possible, the natural terrain and vegetation of the community should be preserved and
       maintained.
       OS-1. Open Space Preservation.
       Preserve, through a variety of methods, the open space areas identified in the
       Inventory of Potential Open Space Sites (See Appendix I). Retain and protect open
       space areas that serve as delineators between neighborhoods and between adjacent
       communities, as wildlife habitat, and as visual assets for the community. Open space
       areas can also function as connections between neighborhoods, for example with the
       creation of pathways in environmentally appropriate areas.
            OS-1a. Open Space Inventory. Update the Inventory of Potential Open Space Sites.
            Identify and prioritize open space parcels for future protection. Maximize the use of
            available resources when assessing City involvement in securing open space by applying
            the following non-prioritized evaluation criteria:
            a. Environmental health and safety issues (specifically geology and hydrology), and
                 potential geoseismic hazards.
            b. Resource Areas and Aesthetics (visual backdrop or edge, unique site features,
                 shorelines/ridgelines, wetlands, wildlife habitat including wildlife movement corridors
                 and habitat for endangered species).
            c. Importance to the community as a whole or adjoining neighborhoods.
            d. Merits of alternative uses.
            e. Proximity to other open space areas.
            f. Recreation potential.
            g. Accessibility.
            h. Availability of outside financial assistance.
            i. Potential maintenance and management costs and liability exposure for the City.
                 Responsibility: Community Development
                 Timeframe: Long Term
                 Resources: Staff Time, Grants
            OS-1b. Preservation Opportunities. Through the development review process, preserve
            open space areas identified on the Open Space Inventory. Encourage the dedication of
            open space areas that are adjacent to public open space. Possibilities also include
            acquisition of fee title or acquiring easements for preserving open space. When potential
            open space is not contiguous to existing public open space, the preference is to retain the
            open space in private ownership. When portions of a site are retained as private open
            space, ensure the preservation and management of that open space through appropriate
            means, including required maintenance, as determined though development review. Work
            with other public and non-profit agencies to identify sources for acquisition and
            maintenance of open space.
                 Responsibility: Community Development, Public Works, City Manager
                 Timeframe: Ongoing
                 Resources: Fees, Grants, Donations, Bonds
            OS-1c. Cluster Development. As part of the development review process, encourage the
            clustering of development to preserve desired open space.
                 Responsibility: Community Development
                 Timeframe: Ongoing
                 Resources: Fees
300 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / OPEN SPACE                                         Reprinted 04/28/2017

                         OS-2. Open Space Management.
                         Maintain and manage City Open Space lands. Designate appropriate uses to specific
                         sites. Determine maintenance needs to address uses and the preservation of natural
                         amenities. Address illegal camping and campfires, disease control, erosion control,
                         urban/wildlife interface, recreation and other activities harmful to open space
                         environment, as well as vegetation management and wildlife habitat protection issues.
                              OS-2a. Open Space Management Plan(s). Establish a committee with representatives
                              from neighborhood associations, environmental organizations, user groups and other
                              stakeholders to prepare an Open Space Management Plan(s). The plan should address use
                              and ongoing maintenance of open space areas. The management plan should address
                              appropriate access points, parking areas, public information signage, trail extensions,
                              restoration of erosion and other degraded areas, and guidelines for the location of
                              amenities such as picnic tables and benches. Amend zoning provisions as needed.
                              Funding options should be explored and identified for open space management such as
                              open space maintenance assessment districts, agreements with other public agencies for
                              maintenance, neighborhood "adoption," volunteer programs, private funding and other
                              means.
                                   Responsibility: Public Works, Police Department, Fire Department, Community
                                   Services, Community Development
                                   Timeframe: Long Term
                                                                 Resources: Staff Time, Grants, Volunteers, Donations
                                                       OS-2b. Removal of Invasive Species. Use volunteer and other
                                                       types of work crews to remove selected invasive vegetation from
                                                       open space areas.
                                                                 Responsibility: Public Works
                                                                 Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                                 Resources: Staff Time, Volunteers
                                                       OS-2c. Diseased Vegetation. Work with County and regional
                                                       experts in finding solutions for the prevention and disposal of
                                                       diseased vegetation, such as vegetation affected by Sudden Oak
                                                       Death Syndrome.
                                                                 Responsibility: Public Works
                                                                 Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                                 Resources: General Fund
                                                       OS-2d. Illegal Encampments. Continue to work with private
                                                       and public property owners to identify and remove illegal
                                                       encampments in open space areas.
                                                                 Responsibility: Police, Fire, Community Development
                                                                 Timeframe: Ongoing
 San Rafael
                                   Resources: Staff Time, Fines
 hillsides were
 purchased in                 See CON-15a (Invasive Plant Ordinance), CON-15b (Removal of Invasive Species on
 the 1970s and                Public Property).
 p r e s e r ve d a s
 open space for          OS-3. Open Space Use.
 p e r p e t u i t y.
                         Protect and preserve the natural value of open space and wildlife habitat areas while
                         permitting educational and recreational uses compatible with these resources. Specific
                         use objectives include:
                         a. Open space areas should be maintained in a natural state.
                         b. Open space areas are a community resource for use and enjoyment by the
                              residents of San Rafael.
                         c. Uses of open space areas shall be secondary to open space preservation, and
                              limited to those uses with a minimal impact on the environment.
302                   SAN RAFAEL 2020 / OPEN SPACE                                        Reprinted 04/28/2017
     OS-3a. Management of Private Open Space. In designating open space as part of a
     development project or with the dedication of land for open space, identify limitations to
     uses in those areas, such as restrictions on ornamental landscaping, structures and fences.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees
     See OS-2a (Open Space Management Plans).
OS-4. Access to Open Space.
Encourage provision of access to open space areas in the design of adjacent
development. Secure access paths shown on Exhibit 34 as part of subdivision
approvals and design access paths to avoid or minimize neighborhood and user
conflicts with sensitive wildlife habitat areas.
     OS-4a. Access Points. Through the development review process, identify access points
     and parking areas to be retained and required improvements.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees
OS-5. Coordination with Other Jurisdictions.
Coordinate San Rafael’s open space system with adjacent cities, Marin County, the
State, and regional and private open space systems.
     OS-5a. Coordination with Other Jurisdictions. Continue to work with public agencies
     managing open space within the San Rafael Planning Area to ensure a coordinated system.
           Responsibility: City Manager, Public Works
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
OS-6. Utilities in Open Space.
Discourage utilities in open space areas. Necessary utilities in open space should be
located and designed to minimize harm to the area's environmental and visual quality.
     OS-6a. Utilities in Open Space. Use zoning ordinance provisions and the design and
     environmental review processes to evaluate the location and design of public utilities.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees
OS-7. Public Education.
Provide education programs to residents about wildlife, fire hazard, watershed
protection and open space habitat.
     OS-7a. Public Education. Continue outreach and public education. Examples include the
     dissemination of educational materials and programs related to wildland fire prevention,
     feral cats, and Marin County Stormwater Pollution Prevention Program (MCSTOPPP)
     requirements.
           Responsibility: Fire, Public Works
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time, Grants
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                          SAN RAFAEL 2020 / OPEN SPACE 303

                         This page intentionally left blank
304 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / OPEN SPACE                            Reprinted 04/28/2017
Conservation                                                                           Our Natural Resources
Introduction
Conservation helps prevent the wasteful destruction and neglect of San Rafael's
natural resources, particularly scarce resources. The City recognizes that natural
resources must be maintained for their economic and recreational use as well as for
their ecological value. The Conservation Element policies address water, air quality
and wildlife and cover the topics of Wetlands; Diked Baylands; Creeks and
Drainageways; Native Plants, Animals and Habitat; and Resource Management.
San Rafael’s Habitats
San Rafael is rich with diverse habitats, such as creeks and drainageways, seasonal
freshwater wetlands, tidal wetlands and riparian areas that are valued resources for
San Rafael’s wildlife. Protection, restoration or enhancement of damaged habitats is
important for the continued health of San Rafael’s natural environment.
Habitats have been damaged by the spread of non-native invasive plants. The City
must build on its efforts to manage undesirable invasive species. Landscaping with
native species should be encouraged for restoration projects.
Protection of the creeks and drainageways and wetlands, and the plants and animals
that live in and near them, can be achieved by managing public access along these
areas and by minimizing encroachment by new development to only that which is
unavoidable. This can be accomplished by preserving buffer areas along creeks and
drainageways, associated riparian areas and wetlands. Another way to protect creeks
is to improve public access points so that uncontrolled foot traffic does not damage
these sensitive habitats.
                                                                                                    Th e e n d a n g e r e d
                                                                                                    S a l t M a r s h H a r ve s t
                                                                                                    Mouse in his (or
                                                                                                    her) Pickleweed
                                                                                                    habitat.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CONSERVATION                   305


GOAL 33: PROTECTED HABITAT
It is the goal of San Rafael to have enhanced habitat for native plants and animals,
and special protection for species that are listed as threatened or endangered.
San Rafael is rich in wildlife and native plant habitats, such as wetlands, creeks,
shorelines, oak woodlands and riparian areas, as well as wildlife corridors between
them, and these habitats are being protected or restored as necessary.
CON-1. Protection of Environmental Resources.
Protect or enhance environmental resources, such as ridgelines, wetlands, diked
baylands, creeks and drainageways, shorelines and habitat for threatened and
endangered species.
     CON-1a. Plans for Environmental Protection.
     Complete the implementation of Mahon Creek Final
     Conceptual Plan and the Shoreline Park Master Plan.
           Responsibility: Public Works
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Grants, Contributions
     See LU-2a (Development Review).
Wetlands
Wetlands are defined as: “Areas under the
jurisdiction of the US Army Corps of Engineers that
are inundated or saturated by surface or ground
water at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support a prevalence of vegetation that is typically adaptive for life in saturated soils              Marshlands are
conditions. Wetlands generally include but are not limited to seasonal wetlands, marshes,              valuable habitat
vernal pools and bogs.” Wetlands are fragile, natural resources subject to flooding,                   for many local
                                                                                                       and migratory
erosion, soil-bearing capacity limitations and other hazards. In addition they are resources           birds.
of special significance due to the modulation of flood waters, water quality and habitat
functions they perform, and resulting values identified by man such as control of flood
velocities, floodwater storage, floodwater passage, aquifer recharge, erosion control,
pollution control, wildlife habitat, education, scientific study, open space and recreation.
CON-2. Wetlands Preservation.
Require appropriate public and private wetlands preservation, restoration and/or
rehabilitation through compensatory mitigation in the development process for
unavoidable impacts. Support and promote acquisition of fee title and/or easements
from willing property owners.
     CON-2a. Wetlands Overlay District. Continue to implement wetlands policy through
     the Wetlands Overlay zoning district and development review.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees
     See also OS-1a (Open Space Inventory), OS-1b (Preservation Opportunities), and OS-1c
     (Cluster Development).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                    SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CONSERVATION          307

                              CON-3. Wetland Protection and Mitigation.
                              In order to protect and preserve valued wetlands, loss of wetlands due to filling shall
                              be avoided, unless it is not possible or practical. When it is demonstrated that it is
                              not possible or practical to avoid filling a wetland because of site constraints and
                              conditions such as the geographic location of the wetlands, site configuration and
                              size, require that the wetland be replaced on-site, and in-kind at a minimum ratio of
                              2:1 (e.g., 2 acres for each acre lost). If it is determined that on-site mitigation is not
                              possible or practical, off-site mitigation shall be required at a minimum replacement
                              ratio of 3:1. As assessed and determined on a case-by-case basis, the City may
                                                              waive this policy for fill of small wetlands (0.1 acre or
                                                              less in size), provided that: (1) the wetland is isolated
                                                              meaning that it is not within, a part of, directly
        W et l an d D ef in it io n s                         connected with or hydrologically-linked by natural flow
                                                              to a creek, drainageway, wetland or submerged
    Wetland Restoration – To bring a wetland                  tidlands; (2) it is demonstrated by a wetland expert that
    back into existence in an area where                      the preservation of the wetland is not practical as it
    wetlands had historically occurred, but were              would not result in a functioning, biological resource
    lost due to the actions of man or through                 because of its isolation; (3) the City has determined that
    natural process.                                          filling would result in a more appropriate and desirable
                                                              site plan for the project; and (4) the City consults with
    Wetland Enhancement – The modification                    and considers comments received from the appropriate
    of a natural or created wetland to enhance                resource agencies with wetland oversight (State of
    one or more functions. Enhancement of                     California Department of Fish and Game and/or the
    some wetland functions may negatively                     California Regional Water Quality Control Board).
    affect other functions.
                                                              a. Creation of Wetlands. The creation of wetlands
    Wetland Creation – To bring a wetland into                     shall be (1) of a similar habitat type to that of the
    existence, whether by accident or                              existing wetlands and (2) of at least equal
    intentionally, where none existed previously;                  functional quality. The wetlands should be created
    this includes the creation of wetlands for                     or restored on or adjacent to the site, where
    mitigation, habitat, and water quality                         possible. If on-site creation is infeasible due to
    purposes.                                                      technical constraints, compensatory habitat may be
                                                                   created off-site, preferably in the same drainage
    Mitigation – Actions taken to avoid, reduce,                   basin.  Restoration of former filled, drained or diked
    or compensate for the effects of human-                        wetland   habitat is preferred over creation of
    induced environmental damage.                                  wetlands on lands that were historically uplands.
                                                                   Plans for this habitat shall be prepared by a
                                                                   qualified wetland restoration ecologist in
                                                                   consultation with appropriate federal and state
                                   resource agencies. Mitigation plans shall require an annual monitoring for a
                                   period of time as specified by a qualified biologist to determine mitigation
                                   success. Contingency measures to deal with the potential for a lack of success
                                   should also be included in the plan.
                              b. Timing of Restoration or Creation. Restoration or creation of wetlands should
                                   be completed prior to construction of the development. Where construction
                                   activities would adversely impact wetland restoration or creation, wetlands
                                   restoration or creation may completed after construction of the development, as
                                   determined through development review.
                                   CON-3a. Project Mitigation. Continue the City’s practice of requiring mitigation for
                                   projects that would affect wetlands, in conjunction with recommendations of State and
                                   Federal agencies.
                                       Responsibility: Community Development
308                         SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CONSERVATION                                    Reprinted 04/28/2017

           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees
CON-4. Wetland Setbacks.
Maintain a minimum 50-foot development-free setback from wetlands, including, but
not limited to, paving or structures. Setbacks of greater than 50 feet may be required
on lots of two or more acres as determined
through development review. The City may
waive this requirement for minor                                       Di ke d Ba yl an d s
encroachments if it can be demonstrated that
the proposed setback adequately protects the             Diked baylands serve as a buffer between urban and
functions of the wetland to the maximum                  tidal areas and contribute to improved water quality
extent feasible and resulting values to the              in the Bay by trapping or removing pollutants from
satisfaction of the City after review by the             runoff and wastewater. They also act as interim
appropriate regulatory agencies.                         storage basins for stormwater runoff and flood
                                                         waters that coincide with high tides, buffer land areas
     See CON-2a (Wetlands Overlay District).             from storms, high tides and erosion; habitat areas for
                                                         threatened and endangered species; and can serve
CON-5. Diked Baylands.                                   as possible mitigation areas. Their partial or
Protect seasonal wetlands and associated                 complete flooding in the winter rainy season provides
upland habitat contained within undeveloped              needed shallow wetland habitat for many species
diked baylands, or restore to tidal action.              and flocks of migratory ducks and shorebirds.
Support and promote acquisition from willing
property owners.
     See LU-2a (Development Review).
CON-6. Creek and Drainageway
                                                            Cr e ek s       an d     Dr ain ag ew a ys
Setbacks.
Require development-free setbacks, except for            Creeks are perennial or intermittent watercourses
specific access points as approved per policy            that have defined bed and bank, i.e., the channel
CON-7 (Public Access to Creeks), from                    bed is incised into the substrate. Creeks are
existing creeks and drainageways that will               identified on Exhibit 36, based on the latest United
maintain the functions and resulting values of           States Geologic Survey (USGS) topographic maps.
these habitats. Appropriate erosion control and          Creeks, with a defined bed and bank and with an
roadway crossings may encroach into the                  unbroken riparian corridor of 50 feet or more not
development setback. In the absence of                   shown on the map are presumed to exist, and shall
vegetation, promote new growth of natural                be identified through project review and protected
habitat.                                                 under the policies of this plan.
a. Creek Setback. Maintain a minimum 25-
     foot development-free setback from the top          Drainageways are open drainage swales, or
     of creek banks for all new development              localized depressions that lack defined banks where
     (including, but not limited to, paving and          intermittent or ephemeral runoff may concentrate,
     structures), except for Miller Creek and its        and open improved drainage channels with stabilized
     tributaries, where a minimum 50-foot                or improved banks. Drainageways do not support
     setback shall be maintained. Setbacks up to         significant riparian habitat. Drainageways exist
     100 feet may be required on lots or                 throughout San Rafael. During the development
     development projects two or more acres in           review process, drainage capacity and habitat value
     size where development review determines            of any drainageways on a site shall be assessed,
     a wider setback is needed to maintain               and appropriate setbacks determined.
     functions and resulting habitat values and
     in areas where high quality riparian habitat
     exists.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                  SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CONSERVATION           309
          The City may waive this requirement for minor encroachments if it can be
          demonstrated that the proposed setback adequately protects the functions of the
          creek to the maximum extent feasible and resulting values to the satisfaction of
          the City after review by the appropriate regulatory agencies.
      b. Drainageway Setbacks. Drainageway setbacks shall be established through
          individual development review, taking into account existing habitat functions and
          resulting values.
          CON-6a. Municipal Code Compliance. Ensure that the San Rafael Municipal Code
          complies with local, state, and federal regulatory agencies requirements for erosion
          control.
               Responsibility: Community Development
               Timeframe: Ongoing
               Resources: Short Term
          See LU-2a (Development Review).
      CON-7. Public Access to Creeks.
      Provide pedestrian access to points along creeks throughout the City where such
      access will not adversely affect habitat values.
          CON-7a. Creek Access Points. Proactively identify and create desirable access points to
          creeks on public lands.
               Responsibility: Public Works
               Timeframe: Ongoing
               Resources: Staff Time
          CON-7b. Public Access. Through the development review process, identify and secure
          areas appropriate for access points to creeks.
               Responsibility: Community Development
               Timeframe: Ongoing
               Resources: Fees
          CON-7c. Website Publicity. Use the City’s website to publicize information about
          protecting and accessing San Rafael’s creeks and waterways.
               Responsibility: Community Development, Public Works
               Timeframe: Long Term
               Resources: Staff Time
          CON-7d. Creek Signage. Develop a program to provide attractive signage identifying
          creeks.
               Responsibility: Public Works
               Timeframe: Long Term
               Resources: Staff Time
          See LU-2a (Development Review).
310 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CONSERVATION                                    Reprinted 04/28/2017



CON-8. Enhancement of Creeks and Drainageways.
Explore enhancement of, and support continuous upgrades to, drainageways to serve
as wildlife habitat corridors for wildlife movement and to serve as flood control
facilities to accommodate storm drainage. Require creek enhancement and associated
riparian habitat restoration/creation for projects adjacent to creeks to maintain storm
flows, reduce erosion and maintenance and improve habitat values, where feasible.
     CON-8a. Creek Restoration. Encourage and support efforts by neighborhood
     associations, environmental organizations and other interested groups to fund creek
     enhancement, restoration and maintenance programs.
           Responsibility: Public Works
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     CON-8b. Tree Retention. Retain trees along creeks, where possible, for preservation of
     riparian habitat and to inhibit growth of algae.
           Responsibility: Public Works
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     See LU-2a (Development Review).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                     SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CONSERVATION 313
                                   Native Plants, Animals and Wildlife Habitat
                                   Vegetation, fish, and wildlife habitat are essential to the community of San Rafael. As
                                   development pressures grow, the need for preservation of the valuable diversity of
                                   species becomes increasingly important. The San Rafael Planning Area contains
                                   several habitat areas of major importance including oak woodlands, riparian, the open
                                   waters of the San Francisco Bay and wetlands. These communities support a
                                   complex diversity of fish and wildlife species. A number of sensitive plant and animal
                                   species have either been observed within the Planning Area, or are known to occur
                                   within the region.
                                   The City recognizes the ecological, scientific, aesthetic and cultural values of without
                                   undue disturbance. Protection of threatened and endangered species shall also
                                   extend to habitat that might reasonably be expected to support populations of those
                                   species, consistent with the requirements of state and federal law. The City
                                   recognizes the need to contribute to the protection of native plants and animals, and
                                   their habitats, before their populations are so low that they must be listed as
                                   threatened or endangered under the state and federal endangered species acts and
                                   will provide protection to special status species. Examples of the sensitive plant and
                                   animal species are: the California Black Rail, the California Clapper Rail, the Salt
                                   Marsh Harvest Mouse, the Central California Coast Steelhead and the Marin Western
                                   Flax.
                                                                CON-9. Native and/or Sensitive Habitats.
                                                                Protect habitats that are sensitive, rare, declining, unique or
                                                                represent a valuable biological resource.
                                                                CON-9a. Steelhead Habitat. Support efforts to restore, preserve
                                                                or enhance Central California Coast Steelhead habitat in Miller
                                                                Creek and other creeks.
                                                                         Responsibility: Public Works
                                                                         Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                                         Resources: Staff Time
                                                                CON-9b. Feral Cats. To protect habitats, especially for birds and
                                                                small animals, continue to fund programs of the Marin Humane
                                                                Society including those to reduce the population of feral cats.
                                                                         Responsibility: City Manager
                                                                         Timeframe: Ongoing
                                            Resources: Staff Time
Th e e n d a n g e r e d                See CON-15a (Invasive Plant Ordinance), OS-2b (Removal of Invasive Species), and LU-
Clapper Rail is a                       2a (Development Review).
s e c r e t i ve r e s i d e n t
of the Bay
marshes.
    314                          SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CONSERVATION                                   Reprinted 04/28/2017
CON-10. Impacts to Sensitive Habitats.
Minimize impacts to sensitive natural habitats through careful planning. Require
compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
     CON-10a. Oak Savanna/Woodland Habitat Protection. Require that proposed
     developments with potential impacts to oak savanna/woodland habitat to either avoid,
     minimize, or compensate for the loss of oak savanna/woodland habitat. Avoidance would
     be the preferred measure where feasible. If it is deemed that an impact is unavoidable,
     minimization of direct and indirect impacts or compensation through habitat restoration,
     creation, or enhancement would be required.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     See LU-2a (Development Review).
CON-11. Wildlife Corridors.
Preserve and protect areas that function as wildlife corridors, particularly those areas
that provide natural connections permitting wildlife movement between designated
sensitive habitats.
     See LU-2a (Development Review).
CON-12. Preservation of Hillsides.
Encourage preservation of hillsides, ridgelines and other open areas that serve as
habitat and erosion protection as well as visual backdrops to urban areas.
     CON-12a. Hillside Design Guidelines. Continue to implement the Hillside Design
     Guidelines.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees
     See CD-5a (Views) and CD-6a (Hillside Design Guidelines).
CON-13. Threatened and Endangered Species.
Preserve and protect threatened and endangered species of plants and animals formally
listed consistent with the state and federal endangered species acts including
protection of their habitat.
     CON-13a. List of Species. Maintain a current list of threatened and endangered and
     special status species.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees
     See LU-2a (Development Review).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                     SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CONSERVATION 315

CON-14. Special Status Species.
Preserve and protect special status plants and animals, including candidate species for
listing under the state and federal endangered species acts, California species of
special concern, California Native Plant Society List 1B plants, and other species
protected under provisions of California Fish and Game Code.
     CON-14a. Surveys. Require that vacant sites be surveyed for the presence or absence of
     relevant special status species prior to development approval.
           Responsibility: Community Development,
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     CON-14b. Minimization. Require that where impacts to special status species are deemed
     unavoidable, potential impacts to the identified species are minimized through design,
     construction, and operation of the project. Compensation measures could include on-site
     set asides or off-site acquisitions (e.g. conservation easements, deed restrictions, etc.) that
     would be required if project impacts result in direct loss or indirect impacts that cannot be
     mitigated in other ways. This might also involve species-specific enhancement restoration
     efforts for the mitigation lands.
           Responsibility: Community Development,
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     See LU-2a (Development Review).
CON-15. Invasive Non-Native Plant Species.
Remove and control selected undesirable invasive non-native plant species from City-
owned open space and road right of ways, and encourage the removal and control of
these invasive plant species from non-City owned ecologically-sensitive areas.
     CON-15a. Invasive Plant Ordinance. Consider the legality, feasibility and
     enforceability of an Invasive Plant Ordinance addressing the removal of invasive species
     on private and public properties. As part of the ordinance, evaluate the benefits and
     impacts of using herbicide on invasive species where there are no other feasible controls.
           Responsibility: City Attorney, Community Development,
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time
     CON-15b. Removal of Invasive Species on Public Property. Institute a program to
     remove invasive plant species on public properties. Consider the use of volunteers and
     private organizations to assist in this effort.
           Responsibility: Public Works, Fire
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time, Volunteers, Partnerships
     See LU-2a (Project Review) and OS-2b (Removal of Invasive Species).
CON-16. Landscape with Native Plant Species.
Encourage landscaping with native and compatible non-native plant species,
especially drought-resistant species.
     CON-16a. Distribution of Information. Distribute Marin Municipal Water District and
     other organizations’ educational materials about native plant landscaping.
            Responsibility: Community Development, Public Works
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                         SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CONSERVATION 317

      GOAL 34: RESOURCES USED
      WISELY. SECTION MOVED TO
      SUSTAINABILITY ELEMENT PER
      AMENDMENT ON 12/05/2016
      Resource Conservation Policies
      Resource conservation policies and programs sharing similar or complementary
      directions and objectives have been incorporated into the Sustainability Element.
      See SU-4e (Regional Energy Office), SU-4f (Zoning and Building Code Review), SU-
      4g (Clean Energy Production), SU-5b (Use of Alternative Building Materials), SU-5d
      (Water Efficiency Programs), SU-5e (Water Recycling), SU-6a (Site Design), SU-10e
      (Recycling), SU-10f (Recyclable Waste Receptacles), SU-10g (Reycling for
      Apartments and Nonresidential Buildings), SU-10h (Demolition Waste), SU-10i
      (Recycling Education), SU-12b (Marin County Green business Program), SU-14a
      (Alternative Transportation Options), SU-14b (Alternative Fuel for City Fleet), SU-14d
      (City Electricity), SU-14i (Civic Buildings), SU-14j (Green Business Certification), SU-
      14k (Regional Collaboration), SU-14l (Backup Energy Provision)
      CON-17. Resource-efficient Organizations and Businesses.
      (Moved to Sustainability per Amendment on 12/5/16)
           CON-17a. Regional Energy Office.
           CON 17b. Green Business Program.
      CON-18. Resource-Efficient Building Design.
           (Moved to Sustainability per Amendment on 12/5/16)
           CON-18a. Energy-efficient Homes.
           CON-18b. Zoning and Building Code Review.
           CON-18c. Use of Alternative Building Materials.
           CON-18d. Incentives for Solar and Clean Energy.
           CON-18e. LEED Program (Deleted per Amendment on 12/5/16)
           CON-18f. Civic Buildings.
      CON-19. Energy Resources. (Moved to Sustainability per
      Amendment on 12/5/16)
           CON-19a. Energy Production.
      CON-20. Water Conservation. (Moved to Sustainability per
      Amendment on 12/5/16)
318 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CONSERVATION                                Reprinted 04/28/2017
     CON-20a. Water Conserving Landscaping.
     CON-20b. Water Recycling.
CON-21. Waste Reduction/Recycling (Moved to
Sustainability per Amendment on 12/5/16)
     CON-21a. Recycling.
     CON-21b. Recyclable Waste Receptacles.
     CON-21c. Recycling for Apartments and Nonresidential Buildings.
     CON-21d. Demolition Waste.
     CON-21e. Recycling.
CON-22. Resource Efficiency in Site Development.
(Moved to Sustainability per Amendment on 12/5/16)
     CON-22a. Site Design.
CON-23. Energy-efficient Transportation Programs.
(Moved to Sustainability per Amendment on 12/5/16)
     CON-23a. City Carpool.
CON-24. Energy-, Water- and Resource–Efficiency in
Government. (Moved to Sustainability per Amendment on
12/5/16)
     CON-24a. Green Business Certification.
     CON-24b. Regional Collaboration.
     CON-24c. City Vehicle Fleet.
     CON-24d. Renewable Energy Sources in City Facilities.
CON-25. Energy Emergencies.
(Moved to Sustainability per
Amendment on 12/5/16)
     CON-25a. Backup Energy Provision.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                            SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CONSERVATION 319

                        This page intentionally left blank
320 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CONSERVATION                         Reprinted 04/28/2017
Air and Water Quality                                                                  Our Natural Resources
Introduction
Water and air are essential for humans as well as the animals and plants that inhabit
San Rafael. The Air and Water Quality Element is intended to ensure that high quality
air and water are available to all who reside, work, and play in the City.
Internal combustion engines damage both the air and water around us. Emissions
from gas-powered vehicles contribute fine particulate matter into the air that is
eventually carried away to waterways. The City seeks to mitigate the effects of
vehicular pollution by supporting policies that promote more environmentally friendly
forms of transport as well as promote land use design practices that are more
efficient.
Maintaining and improving water quality is essential to protect public health, wildlife,
and watersheds, and to ensure opportunities for public recreation and economic
development in San Rafael. Water pollution can be
dramatically curbed through proactive efforts of
residents and through City policies. San Rafael is a
member of the Marin County Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Program (MCSTOPPP), which is the leader
in stormwater management within the Bay Area.
MCSTOPPP’s programs encourage public
participation, education and appropriately designed
development to curb water pollution in the County. The
City encourages the use of practices that enable water
to percolate into the surrounding soil, instead of letting
sediment, metals, pesticides and chemicals runoff
directly into the Bay, creeks, or through the storm drain
system. Improving the water quality in San Rafael’s
creeks and canal is a priority. The City supports efforts
to clean up existing bodies of water and to prevent                                                 Volunteers help
further degradation.                                                                                clean up San
                                                                                                    Rafael creeks.
Through education, participation in ongoing programs, and innovative strategies, the
City seeks to provide clean air and water and, to the best of its ability, contribute to a
healthy region.
Potable, or drinking, water is covered in the Conservation Element and governed by
the Marin Municipal Water District and State standards.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                        SAN RAFAEL 2020 / AIR AND WATER QUALITY           321

                                GOAL 35: CLEAN AIR AND
                                WATERWAYS
                                It is the goal of San Rafael to have the residents of San Rafael breathe clean air
                                and have clean waterways. It is desirable that San Rafael meets all ambient air
                                quality standards and that San Rafael’s waterways are clean and healthy.
                                San Rafael Air Quality Policies
                                AW-1. State and Federal Standards.
                                Continue to comply and strive to exceed state and federal standards for air quality for
                                the benefit of the Bay Area.
                                                        AW-1a. Cooperation with Other Agencies. Cooperate with the Bay
                                                        Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD) and other agencies
     T o xic       Ai r     o r   O d o r               in their efforts to ensure compliance with existing air quality regulations.
                                                                  Responsibility: Community Development, Public Works
  Toxic air pollutants at sufficient                              Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                                  Resources: Staff Time
  concentrations and exposure are
  known or suspected to cause cancer
                                                        AW-2. Land Use Compatibility.
  or other serious health effects, such as
  reproductive or birth defects, or to
                                                        To ensure excellent air quality, promote land use compatibility for
  cause adverse environmental
                                                        new development by using buffering techniques such as
                                                        landscaping, setbacks, and screening in areas where different land
  consequences.
                                                        uses abut one another.
                                                        AW-2a. Sensitive Receptors. Through development review, ensure that
                                                        siting of any new sensitive receptors provides for adequate buffers from
                                                        existing sources of toxic air contaminants or odors. If development of a
                                                        sensitive receptor (a facility or land use that includes members of the
                                                        population sensitive to the effects of air pollutants, such as children, the
                                                        elderly and people with illnesses) is proposed within 500 feet of
  S en sit iv e           R ec ep t o r s               Highway 101 or I-580, an analysis of mobile source toxic air
                                                        contaminant health risks should be performed. Development review
  The Bay Area Air Quality Management                   should include an evaluation of the adequacy of the setback from the
  District (BAAQMD) defines sensitive                   highway and, if necessary, identify design mitigation measures to reduce
  receptors as facilities where sensitive               health risks to acceptable levels.
  receptor population groups (children,                           Responsibility: Community Development
  the elderly, the acutely ill, and the                           Timeframe: Ongoing
  chronically ill) are likely to be located.                      Resources: Fees
  These land uses include schools,
                                                        AW-2b. Buffers. Through development review, ensure that any
  retirement homes, convalescent                        proposed new sources of toxic air contaminants or odors provide
  homes, hospitals and medical clinics.                 adequate buffers to protect sensitive receptors and comply with existing
  Exhibit B-8 in the Background Report                  health standards.
  shows the locations of major sensitive                          Responsibility: Community Development
  receptors in San Rafael.                                        Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                                  Resources: Fees
322                          SAN RAFAEL 2020 / AIR AND WATER QUALITY                                Reprinted 04/28/2017

AW-3. Air Quality Planning with Other Processes.
Integrate air quality considerations with the land use and transportation processes by
mitigating air quality impacts through land use design measures, such as encouraging
project design that will foster walking and biking.
     AW-3a. Air Pollution Reduction Measures. Consider revisions to zoning regulations to
     require developers to implement strategies for air quality improvement described in the
     BAAQMD/ABAG’s guide “Design Strategies for Encouraging Alternatives to Auto Use
     Through Local Development Review” or subsequent standards.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Resources: Fees
     AW-3b. Smart Growth and Livable Communities Programs. Participate in and
     implement strategies of Metropolitan Transportation Commission’s regional “Smart
     Growth Initiative” and “Transportation for Livable Communities Program.”
           Responsibility: Community Development, Public Works
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time, Grants
AW-4. Particulate Matter Pollution
Reduction.                                                                   P art i cu l at e         M at t er
Promote the reduction of particulate matter pollution
from roads, parking lots, construction sites,                       Particulate matter is a toxic air pollutant.
agricultural lands and other activities.                            Particulate matter includes dust, soot and other
                                                                    tiny bits of solid materials that are released into
     AW-4a. Pollution Reduction. Through development                and move around in the air. Particulates are
     review, ensure that any proposed new sources of                produced by many sources, including burning of
     particulate matter use latest control technology (such         gas and diesel fuels by vehicles, incineration of
     as enclosures, paving unpaved areas, parking lot               garbage, mixing and application of fertilizers and
     sweeping and landscaping) and provide adequate
                                                                    pesticides, road construction, mining operations,
     buffer setbacks to protect existing or future sensitive
     receptors.                                                     fireplaces, and woodstoves. Particulate pollution
           Responsibility: Community Development                    can cause eye, nose and throat irritation and other
           Timeframe: Ongoing                                       health problems.
           Resources: Fees
     AW-4b. Fireplaces and Woodburning Stoves.
     (Deleted per Amendment on 12/5/16)
AW-5. Circulation Alternatives.
Promote circulation alternatives that reduce air pollution.
     See programs under C-10 (Alternative Transportation Mode Projects) through C-20
     (Intermodal Transit Hubs).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                              SAN RAFAEL 2020 / AIR AND WATER QUALITY               323

                             AW-6. Education and Outreach.
                             Support public education of regarding air pollution prevention and mitigation
                             programs.
                                  AW-6a. Air Quality Education Programs. Support and participate in the air quality
                                  education programs of the BAAQMD, such as “Spare the Air” days.
                                       Responsibility: Community Development, Public Work
                                       Timeframe: Ongoing
                                       Resources: Staff Time
                                  AW-6b. Benefits of Transit-Oriented Development. Assist in educating developers and
                                  the public on the benefits of pedestrian and transit-oriented development.
                                       Responsibility: Community Development, Public Works
                                       Timeframe: Ongoing
                                       Resources: Staff Time
                                  AW-6c. Landscaping. Continue to implement Zoning Guideline for landscaping in order
                                  to absorb pollutants.
                                       Responsibility: Community Development
                                       Timeframe: Ongoing
                                       Resources: Fees
                             San Rafael Water Quality Policies
                             AW-7. Local, State and Federal Standards.
                             Continue to comply with local, state and federal standards for water quality.
                                  AW-7a. Countywide Stormwater Program. Continue to participate in the countywide
                                  stormwater program and comply with its performance standards.
                                                               Responsibility: Public Works
                                                               Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                               Resources: Fees (Clean Water Program)
     No n - p o in t So u rc e
             Po llu t io n                           AW-7b. Stormwater Runoff Measures. Continue to incorporate
                                                     measures for stormwater runoff control and management in construction
  Nonpoint source (NPS) pollution,                   sites.
  unlike pollution from industrial and                         Responsibility: Public Works
  sewage treatment plants, comes from                          Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                               Resources: Fees (Clean Water Program)
  many diffuse sources. NPS pollution is
  caused by rainfall moving over and                 AW-7c. Water Quality Improvements in Canal and Other
  through the ground. As the runoff                  Waterways. Support water quality improvement efforts in the San
  moves, it picks up and carries away                Rafael Canal, creeks, and drainageways in accordance with standards of
  natural and human-made pollutants,                 the State Water Quality Control Board or any agencies with jurisdiction.
  finally depositing them into bodies of                       Responsibility: Public Works
  water.                                                       Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                               Resources: Fees (Clean Water Program)
324                       SAN RAFAEL 2020 / AIR AND WATER QUALITY                              Reprinted 04/28/2017

AW-8. Reduce Pollution from Urban Runoff.
Address non-point source pollution and protect receiving waters from pollutants
discharged to the storm drain system by requiring Best Management Practices quality.
• Support alternatives to impervious surfaces in new development,
     redevelopment, or public improvement projects to reduce urban
     runoff into storm drain system, creeks, and the Bay.
• Require that site designs work with the natural topography and                                        Be st
     drainages to the extent practicable to reduce the amount of grading                        M an ag e m e n t
                                                                                                   P ra ct ic e s
     necessary and limit disturbance to natural water bodies and natural
     drainage systems.                                                                     Best Management Practices are
• Where feasible, use vegetation to absorb and filter fertilizers,                         guidelines used to ensure that
     pesticides and other pollutants.                                                      project design, construction, and
                                                                                           maintenance are conducted so
     AW-8a. Proper Disposal of Pollutants. Continue to promote proper
     disposal of pollutants to the sanitary sewer or hazardous waste facilities            as to control urban runoff and to
     rather than to the storm drainage system.                                             minimize the impact on the
           Responsibility: Public Works                                                    surrounding environment.
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees (Clean Water Program)
     AW-8b. Compliance by Contractors. Continue to require contractors to comply with
     accepted stormwater pollution prevention planning practices for all projects subject to erosion
     potential. Also, continue to require the proper use, storage and disposal of on-site materials.
           Responsibility: Public Works, Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees (Clean Water Program)
     AW-8c. System Improvements. Improve storm drainage performance by constructing
     new system improvements. Evaluate stormwater volumes when replacing undersized or
     otherwise inadequate lines with larger or parallel lines.
           Responsibility: Public Works, Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees (Clean Water Program)
     AW-8d. Pesticide and Fertilizer Management. On City property, encourage the
     appropriate reduction of pesticides and fertilizers to the maximum extent feasible. Ensure
     that the application of pesticides on City property is accomplished in accordance with all
     applicable rules and regulations.
           Responsibility: Public Works
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     AW-8e. Public Water Management. Review areas where public water management
     procedures are used to convey stormwater to the stormdrain system, including streets,
     which also convey stormwater to the stormdrain system.
           Responsibility: Public Works
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees (Clean Water Program)
     See I-10a (Coordination of Services) and S-19a (Incremental Flood Control
     Improvements).
AW-9. Erosion and Sediment Control.
Establish development guidelines to protect areas that are particularly susceptible to
erosion and sediment loss.
     See S-22a (Erosion Control Programs) and S-22b (Grading During the Wet Season).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                               SAN RAFAEL 2020 / AIR AND WATER QUALITY               325

       AW-10. Canal and Bay Boating.
       Ensure responsible waste disposal maintenance and operations that affects water quality.
           AW-10a. Sanitation Facilities in Boats. Require inspection of sanitation facilities in
           boats berthed in the San Rafael Canal.
                Responsibility: Community Development
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time
           AW-10b. Sewage Pump Out Facilities. Support marina owners in providing on-site
           sewage pump-out facilities. Require marinas to install such facilities when major
           improvements are made.
                Responsibility: Community Development
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Grants, Staff Time
           AW-10c. Education of Boaters. Educate boaters about good sanitation practices.
                Responsibility: Community Development
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time
           See NH-29a (Dredging Program), NH-79b (Boating Sanitation and Dock Safety and NH-
           80a (Pump Out Facilities).
       AW-11. Education and Outreach.
       Continue to inform the public about the effects of water pollution in order to
       encourage participation in pollution prevention programs.
           AW-11a. Stenciling of Storm Drains. Continue the efforts to identify storm drain
           locations and stencil them accordingly so that people understand the consequences of
           pollutant runoff.
                Responsibility: Public Works
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Fees (Clean Water Program)
           AW-11b. Outreach. Continue to work with MCSTOPPP in educational outreach and
           public participation in water pollution reduction methods that, for example, address the
           impacts of indirect pollution sources such as fertilization, pesticides and pet waste.
                Responsibility: Public Works
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Fees (Clean Water Program)
           AW-11c. Water Pollution Education. Educate landscaping service employees and
           contractors about water pollution.
                Responsibility: Public Works
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Fees (Clean Water Program)
           AW-11d. Car Wash Facilities. Require the use of recycled water at new commercial car
           washing facilities.
                Responsibility: Public Works, Community Development
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Fees
326 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / AIR AND WATER QUALITY                             Reprinted 04/28/2017
Land Use                                                                                           Our Use of Land
Introduction
San Rafael is a highly desirable place to live, work,
                                                                    S an R af a el ’ s L and U s e
or own a business because of its natural beauty, its
                                                                   Ch a n g es a n d Su c ce s se s
central location in Marin County, and its proximity
to San Francisco. The city’s residential and                 San Rafael has undergone many changes over the
commercial areas represent a great variety in land           last several decades; here are some of the most
uses, from the intermingling of residential and              notable:
commercial uses Downtown, to the more prevalent
twentieth-century land use patterns separating               Our Vision of Downtown San Rafael led to the
residential and commercial uses. The City provides           revitalization of Downtown, including new high quality
many advantages of urban living, while at the same           buildings, redevelopment of underutilized and vacant
time maintaining a hometown feeling in its                   lands, entertainment venues, and the construction of
residential neighborhoods and a distinctive                  hundreds of new homes. San Rafael’s Transportation
downtown. Careful planning and community                     Center has become a major transit hub for buses and
involvement regarding development in the City and            other transportation in Marin County.
the surrounding area preserves important physical
features, such as ridgelines, hillsides and natural          Vision North San Rafael resulted in a planning guide
areas, while also providing for necessary services,          north of Puerto Suello for development of a
employment and housing opportunities.                        promenade for bicycles and pedestrians, a new
                                                             entryway on Freitas, neighborhood-serving
Land Use Benefits and Balance                                improvements at the Northgate shopping areas, and
                                                             new housing.
Land use decisions in San Rafael are shaped by
the community’s desire to preserve and protect its           Large retailers and auto dealers increased sales tax
natural resources, unique character, existing land           revenue for the City, and occupy prominent locations
use patterns, and quality of life. The nature and            along the Highway 101 corridor.
character of existing development and the desire
for a continued strong local economy as well as              Expansion of prominent land uses in San Rafael, such
existing and planned infrastructure capacity                 as the educational institutions of Dominican University
(including circulation, water, and energy) all               and Marin Academy; the Montecito shopping center,
influence planning for future land use. San Rafael's         Northgate Mall, and Northgate One benefited the
local planning efforts must also be responsive to            community.
regional and statewide planning agencies such as
the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG),              Improvements to many parks in San Rafael, including
the Marin County Congestion Management Agency                Jean and John Starkweather Shoreline Park along
and the California Department of Transportation              San Rafael Bay, which provides recreational uses
(Caltrans).                                                  along the waterfront and increases the number of
                                                             recreational opportunities for residents. Historic
The amount and type of urban areas in San Rafael             buildings have been identified and protected, including
will remain essentially the same in 2020 as they are         the Rafael Theatre, the Falkirk mansion, and the Frank
today. Very few vacant parcels remain; growth will
                                                             Lloyd Wright-designed Marin County Civic Center
occur principally through infill and redevelopment.
                                                             Administration building.
The community’s desire for less commercial
development, which will in turn require less
additional housing, has resulted in 527,000 fewer square feet of commercial growth
and 2.5 million fewer square feet of industrial/office development than projected under
the previous General Plan 2000.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                        SAN RAFAEL 2020 / LAND USE               11

   The policies of this Element guide future change to fit the desired character of San
   Rafael, preserve the City’s historic qualities and natural environment, serve
   community needs, sustain the local economy, and enhance the quality of life. San
   Rafael’s land use policies balance the different desires of San Rafael’s residents. The
   policies are based on the belief that clear direction will result in decisions and changes
   that carry on San Rafael’s sense of place – a place people are proud to call ‘home.’
   Relationship to Other General Plan Elements
   California law requires the Land Use Element to designate the proposed general
   distribution, location, and extent of various categories of private and public land uses,
   and to set building intensity and population density standards. Other General Plan
   elements ensure that infrastructure, utilities, and public facilities are available to
   accommodate planned land uses, and that the unique qualities of San Rafael are
   safeguarded and enhanced. For example, maps, policies and programs related to
   flooding are located in the Safety Element.
   In particular, this Element establishes development patterns and densities that support
   the Circulation Element's strategies for reducing reliance on the automobile,
   accommodating increased traffic from planned development, and promoting a wide
   variety of mixed uses and activities in the Downtown and other commercial areas. The
   Land Use Element includes a Land Use Map.
   Relationship of the Land Use Element to the Zoning Map
   and Zoning Ordinance
   The Land Use Map designates the land use pattern envisioned for the City. Zoning
   Map designations must be consistent with the General Plan in relationship to each
   land use category. The Zoning Ordinance sets forth regulations and standards for
   development to ensure that the policies, goals, and objectives of the General Plan are
   carried out. Rezoning can be initiated by the City Council, Planning Commission, or by
   an individual property owner.
                         General Plan 2020 Land Use Designations (acres)
                                                          Single-Family
                                                           Residential
                            Parks/Open                         35%
                              Space
                               43%
                                                                  Multifamily
                                                                  Residential
                                                                       5%
                                   Industrial/Light     Commercial
                                    Industrial and       and Office
                                    Public/Quasi-            4%
                                       Public
                                        13%
12 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / LAND USE                                             Reprinted 04/28/2017

GOAL 1: GROWTH TO ENHANCE
QUALITY OF LIFE
It is the goal of the City of San Rafael to have growth that serves community
needs and enhances the quality of life in San Rafael. San Rafael values its
historically significant and inspirational natural setting, with the widest variety of
cultural, residential, employment, and entertainment offerings in Marin County. While
the city will not grow significantly, it will be important to maintain and improve the
existing types and areas of development that make San Rafael such a desirable place.
Harmonizing change to serve community needs is of tremendous importance to San
Rafael residents. New development and other physical alterations must respect the
existing character and scale of the city. Change and development must be
accomplished in a fashion that enhances and blends with San Rafael's existing
qualities, both physical and social. In other words, development should respect the
existing social fabric as well as the natural and built environment.
General Plan 2020 leaves in place most current development and zoning standards.
The City’s zoning encourages housing and mixed-use development in Downtown and
along the city’s transit corridors. General Plan 2020 also calls for new development to
contribute to the provision of necessary public improvements to serve current and
future populations such as open space, transportation, and affordable housing.
Targeting the type and location of new growth allows for the enhancement of areas
that would benefit from improvement and adds needed jobs and housing without
intruding on neighborhood quality of life.
Affordable housing is a significant community need in San Rafael. Present and future
residents of San Rafael need housing that is affordable at various income levels.
Housing can be part of new buildings in areas of town which need to be improved, in
Downtown and other commercial areas and along transit corridors so that residents
can walk to work and shopping.
At the same time, traffic congestion continues to be a major issue. In 1988, the City
began a process called Priority Projects Procedure to allocate traffic capacity in
certain areas of town in order to ensure consistency between new development and
needed traffic improvements. In 2004, this program was replaced with a Project
Selection Process (PSP) that applied citywide and evaluated desired community
benefits of new development, while continuing to link new development with
necessary roadway mitigations. However, by 2011, the purpose and importance of
the PSP diminished because: a) the community is now largely built-out and there are
very few remaining land development opportunities: and b) the limited traffic capacity
has been used up or needed transportation improvements have been implemented.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                       SAN RAFAEL 2020 / LAND USE 13

14 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / LAND USE Reprinted 04/28/201
Reprinted 04/28/2017 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / LAND USE 1
     General Plan 2020 is based on the following growth assumptions:
     Exhibit 3: Growth Assumptions
                                            Existing (plus
                    Use                  approved projects)        Projected 2020         % Increase
           Housing (units)                       28,929                   32,423              12.0%
           Commercial (sq. ft.)               9,030,000                9,183,000               1.7%
           Office/Industrial (sq. ft.)        9,031,000                9,279,000               2.7%
           Lodging (rooms)                           464                      821             77.0%
           Entertainment (seats)                   3,010                    5,010            166.0%
     LU-1. Planning Area and Growth to 2020.
     Plan the circulation system and infrastructure to provide capacity for the total
     development expected by 2020.
         LU-1a. Five-Year Growth Assessment. As part of the five-year General Plan update,
         review San Rafael’s growth, traffic capacity, traffic mitigation list and traffic mitigation
         fee. Assess growth assumptions and modify land use and circulation policies as needed.
              Responsibility: Community Development, Public Works, Economic Development
              Timeframe: Ongoing
              Resources: Staff Time
         See LU-3a (Project Selection Process).
     LU-2. Development Timing.
     For health, safety and general welfare reasons, new development should only occur
     when adequate infrastructure is available consistent with the following findings:
     a. Project-related traffic will not cause the level of service established in the
         Circulation Element to be exceeded;
     b. Any circulation improvements needed to maintain the level of service standard
         established in the Circulation Element have been programmed and funding has
         been committed;
     c. Environmental review of needed circulation improvement projects has been
         completed;
     d. The time frame for completion of the needed circulation improvements will not
         cause the level of service in the Circulation Element to be exceeded, or the
         findings set forth in Policy C-5 have been made; and
     e. Sewer, water, and other infrastructure improvements will be available to serve
         new development by the time the development is constructed.
         LU-2a. Development Review. Through the development and environmental review
         processes, ensure that policy provisions are evaluated and implemented. The City may
         waive or modify any policy requirement contained herein if it determines that the effect of
         implementing the same in the issuance of a development condition or other approvals
         would be to preclude all economically viable use of a subject property.
              Responsibility: Community Development, Public Works, Fire, Police, City Attorney
              Timeframe: Ongoing
              Resources: Fees
         See also C-5 (Traffic Level of Service Standards).
16 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / LAND USE                                        Reprinted 04/28/2017

(LU-3 Deleted per Amendment on 7/18/11)
LU-4. Reasonable Interim Use of
Property.
Allow a landowner reasonable interim use of property in areas where development is
precluded pending needed traffic improvements. Structures should not be permanent,
and uses should be low- or off-peak traffic generators.
     LU-4a. Reasonable Interim Uses. In the zoning ordinance establish land uses that allow
     reasonable interim uses for properties that are in areas with limited traffic capacity for
     development. Examples include contractor’s yards, new car storage, modular office and
     storage, and outdoor recreation.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Resources: Staff Time
LU-5. Urban Service Area.                                                     Sp h e r e o f I n f l u en c e/
Oppose urban development in areas adjacent to San                              Ur b an S erv ic e Ar e a
Rafael's Urban Service Area boundary.
                                                                        A S p her e of Inf lu e nc e is t he
     LU-5a. Urban Service Area Review. Review and                       pr o b a bl e p h ys ic a l b o u nd ar i es a nd
     consider revisions to the City's Urban Service Area                s er v ic e a r e a of a l oc a l a g enc y.
     every five years as part of the General Plan Review, or            ( G o vt . C od e S ec ti o n 5 47 7 4) . I t is
     in conjunction with a LAFCO-initiated boundary review.             r ec o g n i ze d t ha t s om e ur b a n s er v ic es
           Responsibility: Community Development                        ar e pr o v i d ed b y s pec i a l d is tr ic ts .
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Resources: Staff Time                                        T he Ur b a n S er v ic e Ar e a is a n ar e a
                                                                        th at c an r e as o na b l y b e a nn ex ed a n d
     See also LU-7a (Development Adjacent to San Rafael).               pr o v i d ed wi th ur b a n s e r v ic es wi t h in
                                                                        a f i ve- ye a r p er io d, gi v en t h e am ou nt
                                                                        of p o te nt i a l d e ve l o pm ent wi th i n C it y
                                                                        l im its a nd l im ite d c ir c u l at i on a n d
                                                                        s e wa ge tr e atm en t p la n t c ap ac it y o r
                                                                        ot h er s er v ic e c ons tr ai nts .
                                                                        S an R af a e l ’s P la n n in g Ar e a i nc lu d es
                                                                        a ll t h e l an ds c ur r e nt l y wi t hi n t he
                                                                        S ph er e of I nf l u enc e s h o wn o n Ex h ib i t
                                                                        1 ex c ep t f or t h e S t. Vi nc e n t’s an d
                                                                        S i l vi er a R anc h pr o per t i es . Up o n
                                                                        L AFC O ap pr o v al t o r e m ove t he St .
                                                                        V inc e nt ’s a n d S i l v eir a Ra nc h
                                                                        pr o p er t i es f r om S an R af a el ’s Sp h er e
                                                                        of I nf l u enc e, t h e P l an n i ng Ar e a a n d
                                                                        th e S p her e of Inf lu e nc e s h al l b e t he
                                                                        s am e.
 Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                            SAN RAFAEL 2020 / LAND USE                   17

                                  LU-6. Annexation.
                                  Prior to urban development, areas that can reasonably be served through extension of
                                  the existing service area of the City should be annexed.
                                  a. Annexation of already developed unincorporated islands (Los Ranchitos, Country
                                      Club, Bayside Acres, California Park, Mt. Tamalpais Cemetery) and developed
                                      portions of the Marinwood/Lucas Valley neighborhoods should be dependent on
                                                                       resident interest, the cost/revenue implications of the
                                                                       provision of City services to the area, and the
                          L AF CO                                      availability of City services.
   Loc a l A g enc y F or m at i on C om m is s io n                   b.        Developed and undeveloped areas of Santa
   ( L AFC O ) c o or d i n at es l og ic a l a nd                     Venetia are not expected to be annexed to the City
   tim e l y c ha n g es i n l oc a l                                  within the time frame of the plan due to flood and
   go v er nm ent a l b o un d ar i es , i nc l ud i ng
                                                                       seismic hazards and urban service costs associated with
   an n ex a t io ns a n d d et ac hm ents of
   ter r i tor y, i nc or p or at i o n s of c it i es ,
                                                                       existing infrastructure conditions.
   f or m ati ons of s p ec ia l d is tr ic ts , a nd
   c ons o l id a ti o ns , m er g er s , an d                         LU-6a. LAFCO. Encourage LAFCO to adopt Urban
   d is s o l ut i ons of d is tr ic t s , as we l l as                Service Area and annexation policies for the San Rafael
   r e v ie wi n g wa ys to r eor ga n i ze ,                          Planning Area consistent with adopted General Plan
   s im pl if y, a n d s t r e am li n e                               policies. Consistent with Council Resolution not to annex
   go v er nm ent a l s tr uc t ur e. I n a dd i t io n,               or serve the St. Vincent’s and Silveira properties, work
   L AFC O is r es po ns i b le f or r e vi e wi n g                   with LAFCO to remove them from the City’s Sphere of
   c on tr ac t ua l s er vic e a g r eem e nts                        Influence.
   be t we en pr o p er t y o wn er s a nd                                       Responsibility: Community Development
   s er v ic e p r o v i de r s .                                                Timeframe: Short Term
                                                                                 Resources: Staff Time
                                  LU-7. Land Use Planning in Surrounding Jurisdictions.
                                  Continue to monitor and work with surrounding jurisdictions to ensure that land uses
                                  outside the community will have a positive effect on San Rafael.
                                      LU-7a. Development Adjacent to San Rafael. Work with the County and other local
                                      jurisdictions to review applications for development in areas adjacent to San Rafael’s city
                                      limits and within the Sphere of Influence.
                                           Responsibility: Community Development
                                           Timeframe: Short Term
                                           Resources: Staff Time
                                  LU-8. Density of Residential Development.
                                  Residential densities are shown in Exhibit 11, Land Use Categories. Maximum
                                  densities are not guaranteed but minimum densities are generally required. Density of
                                  residential development on any site shall respond to the following factors: site
                                  resources and constraints, potentially hazardous conditions, traffic and access,
                                  adequacy of infrastructure, City design policies and development patterns and
                                  prevailing densities of adjacent developed areas.
                                  When development is clustered to avoid sensitive areas of a site, density provided to
                                  the entire site may be transferred to the remaining portion of the site, providing all
                                  factors listed above can be met.
                                  Transfer of density among properties shall only be permitted when unique or special
                                  circumstances (e.g., preservation of wetlands or historic buildings) are found to exist
                                  which would cause significant environmental impacts if the transfer were not allowed.
18                            SAN RAFAEL 2020 / LAND USE                                           Reprinted 04/28/2017

     LU-8a. Residential Zoning. Implement Land
     Use Element densities by setting appropriate
     maximum allowed densities in the zoning
     ordinance.
           Responsibility: Community Development                         Po p u l at i o n           D e n si t y
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time                                  G r os s D ens i t y is us e d f or lo n g-r an g e
                                                                  p la n ni n g p ur p os es , a n d is t he num ber
     LU-8b. Transfer of Density. Continue to                      of d we l l i ng un i ts p er a c r e d e vo te d t o a
     implement zoning regulations governing the                   s it e p l us th e ar e a of s t ree ts s er v i ng
     transfer of density among properties.                        th os e s it es . G r os s d e n s it y i s
           Responsibility: Community Development                  ap pr ox im ate l y 2 0 - 30 per c e nt lo we r
           Timeframe: Ongoing                                     th a n ne t d ens i t y.
           Resources: Fees
                                                                  Ne t De ns it y i s us ed in th e Zo n in g
     See Housing H-14b (Efficient Use of Multifamily              O r d in a nc e t o d e ter m i n e pr oj ec t-
     Housing Sites), H-17a (State Density Bonus Law)              s pec if ic de ns it i es , an d is t h e n um ber
     and OS-1c (Cluster Development).                             of d we l l i ng un i ts p er a c r e of la n d
                                                                  de v o te d t o a s i te . Ne t de ns it y d o es
                                                                  no t i nc lu d e th e ar e a of s tr ee ts s er v i ng
LU-9. Intensity of Nonresidential
                                                                  th os e s it es , an d is ap p r ox im ate l y 2 0-
Development.                                                      30 per c e nt h i g her t h an gr os s d ens i t y.
Commercial and industrial areas have been
assigned floor area ratios (FARs) to identify                     In 2 0 00 , r es i de n ti a l ar eas ha v e b ee n
appropriate intensities (see Exhibits 4, 5 and 6).                as s ig n ed a p pr opr i at e de ns it i es ( s e e
Maximum allowable FARs are not guaranteed,                        Ex hi b it 11 , L an d Us e Ca te g or ies ) . I n
particularly in environmentally sensitive areas.                  S an R af a e l ’s P la n n in g Ar e a, t h er e
                                                                  wer e 2 .4 4 p e op l e p er ho us eh o l d
Intensity of commercial and industrial
                                                                  ( P PH ) . A B AG pr oj ec ts th at t h is
development on any site shall respond to the                      num be r wi l l i nc r e as e t o 2. 4 7 P P H b y
following factors: site resources and constraints,                20 1 0, a n d r e tur n t o 2. 44 P PH in 2 0 20 .
traffic and access, potentially hazardous
conditions, adequacy of infrastructure, and City
design policies.
a. Where the existing building is larger than the FAR limit and no intensification or
     change of use is proposed, the property may be redeveloped at the same size as the
     existing building if parking and design requirements in effect at the time of the new
     application can be met.
b. FAR transfers between or among sites shall not be permitted
     except where the City Council finds the following:
                                                                                              F lo o r Ar e a
     1. The development of the beneficiary parcel is consistent
                                                                                             Rat io ( F AR )
           with the General Plan 2020, except that FARs or
           maximum densities may be exceeded, and                                     FA R is t he t o ta l gr os s
     2. The proposed development will comply with all                                 bu i l d in g s q u ar e f o ot ag e
           applicable zoning and design parameters and criteria as                    d i vi d ed b y th e l a nd ar ea ,
           well as traffic requirements; and one or both of the                       ex c lus i v e of pu b l ic
           following:                                                                 s tr e ets . P ar k in g ar ea s ,
           i) Unique or special circumstances are found to exist                      c o ver e d or u nc o ver e d,
                 (e.g., preservation of wetlands or historic buildings)               an d n o n- le as ab l e
                 that would cause significant environmental impacts if                c o ver e d at r i um s ar e n ot
                                                                                      i nc l u de d i n c a lc u la t in g
                 the transfer is not allowed, and/or
                                                                                      FA Rs .
 Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                          SAN RAFAEL 2020 / LAND USE                  19

              ii) A significant public benefit will be provided, such as securing a new
                   public facility site (e.g. park, school, library, fire station, police station).
     c. Through Planned Development rezoning, consider allowing a higher floor area
         ratio at the shopping center sites located at the crossroads of Andersen Drive,
         Highway 101, and Francisco Blvd. West where it would facilitate redevelopment
         with improved parking, access, landscaping and building design.
         LU-9a. Nonresidential Zoning. Implement nonresidential levels of development and
         FAR transfer policies through allowed floor area ratios in zoning districts.
              Responsibility: Community Development
              Timeframe: Ongoing
              Resources: Staff Time
         See NH-104a (Development Review Process).
20 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / LAND USE                                        Reprinted 04/28/2017



                         LU-10. Planned Development Zoning.
                         Require Planned Development zoning for development on a lot larger than five acres
                         in size, except for the construction of a single-family residence.
                              LU-10a. Planned Development Zoning. Continue to maintain a Planned Development
                              zoning district.
                                  Responsibility: Community Development
                                  Timeframe: Ongoing
                                  Resources: Staff Time
                         LU-11. School Site Reuse or Redevelopment.
                         Where it is in the community's interest to retain public recreation facilities in
                         accordance with Parks and Recreation policies, and/or the childcare policy, cluster
                         development so that the public recreation or childcare use may be preserved. The
                         following uses are allowed on school sites retained by the districts: housing and public
                         and quasi-public uses, such as child care programs; adult day care programs;
                         education, recreation, cultural programs and activities; and churches and religious
                         institutions.
                              LU-11a. Zoning for School Sites. Continue to implement school site reuse and
                              redevelopment through zoning regulations and through the development review process.
                                  Responsibility: Community Development
                                  Timeframe: Ongoing
                                  Resources: Staff Time
                              See NH-12 (Schools).
                         LU-12. Building Heights.
                         Citywide height limits in San Rafael are described in Exhibits 7 and 8. For Downtown
                         height limits see Exhibit 9:
                         a. Height of buildings existing or approved as of January 1, 1987 shall be considered
                              conforming to zoning standards.
                         b. Hotels have a 54-foot height limit, except where a taller height is shown on
                              Exhibit 9 (Downtown Building Height Limits).
                         c. Height limits may be exceeded through granting of a zoning exception or
                              variance, or through a height bonus as described in LU-13 (Height Bonuses).
                                               See LU-2a (Development Review).
   Building Height
   The height of a building is
   determined by the methods in
   the latest edition of the
   Uniform Building Code
   adopted by the City, except
   for hillside homes, where
   height is determined by the
   methods in the Hillside Design
   Guidelines.
24                    SAN RAFAEL 2020 / LAND USE                                            Reprinted 04/28/2017



                    LU-13. Height Bonuses.
                    A height bonus may be granted with a use permit for a development that provides one
                    or more of the amenities listed in Exhibit 10, provided the building’s design is
                    consistent with Community Design policies and design guidelines. No more than one
                    height bonus may be granted for a project.
                    See LU-2a. (Development Review).
   E xh i b it     1 0:     H e ig h t    Bo n u s e s
                                           Maximum                              Amenity
              Location
                                        Height Bonus        (May provide one or more of the following)
                                                           Affordable housing
   Fourth Street Retail Core                               Public courtyards, plazas and/or passageways
                                             12 feet
   Zoning District                                         (consistent with Downtown Design Guidelines)
                                                           Public parking (not facing Fourth Street)
                                                           Park (privately maintained park with public
                                                           access, adjacent to Mahon Creek; an
   PG&E site in the Lindaro                                alternative is tennis courts tied to Albert Park.)
                                             24 feet
   Office land use district
                                                           Community facility (10,000 sq. ft. or more in
                                                           size)
                                                           Affordable housing
                                                           Public parking
   Second/Third Mixed Use East
                                             12 feet       Overhead crosswalks
   Zoning District
                                                           Mid-block passageways between Fourth
                                                           Street and parking on Third Street
   Second/Third Mixed Use
   West District, north of Third             18 feet       Public parking
   Street and east of C Street
                                                           Affordable housing
                                                           Public parking
   West End Village                            6 feet
                                                           Public passageways (consistent with
                                                           Downtown Design Guidelines)
   Lincoln Avenue between                                  Affordable Housing
   Hammondale and Mission                    12 feet
   Avenue                                                  See NH-120 (Lincoln Avenue)
   Marin Square                              12 feet       Affordable housing
   North San Rafael Town
                                             24 feet       Affordable housing
   Center
   Citywide where allowed by                                     (1)
                                             12 feet       Hotel
   zoning.
   (1) See policy LU-20 (Hotels, Motels and Inns)
28                           SAN RAFAEL 2020 / LAND USE                                 Reprinted 04/28/2017

GOAL 2: BALANCE AND DIVERSITY
It is the goal of the City of San Rafael to maintain balance and diversity in the
community. San Rafael reflects a mosaic of land use patterns that have changed over
time, creating a visual framework for the city that continues to evolve in response to
the community’s sense of balance and compatibility. Our desire to avoid
intensification must be balanced with the development required to provide jobs and
housing, and to sustain an evolving, vital community. We must also continue to
appreciate the importance and desirability of having neighborhoods of differing levels
of density and activity.
San Rafael's high quality cultural, business, entertainment and educational resources
directly benefit the City's residents and draw businesses, customers, visitors and
students from beyond the City's limits, to the benefit of all who live and work in the
City. These resources not only culturally enrich San Rafael residents, they enhance
San Rafael's regional position, improve San Rafael's business climate, and provide
revenue for City services and infrastructure.
To maintain our unique character and quality of life, the City must strive to maintain
the cultural, social, and economic diversity that is such an important aspect of our City
by taking steps to maintain an adequate supply of decent, affordable housing, a range
of jobs, and a variety of local goods and services. Other elements in the General Plan
address housing, economic vitality, open space, recreation, and cultural facilities; the
policies below focus on the nonresidential land uses that make up part of the balance
and diversity of San Rafael.
LU-14. Land Use Compatibility.
Design new development in mixed residential and commercial areas to minimize
potential nuisance effects and to enhance their surroundings.
     LU-14a. Land Use Compatibility. Evaluate the compatibility of proposed residential use
     in commercial areas through the development review process.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees
LU-15. Convenience Shopping.
Encourage the retention and improvement of existing retail stores and services in
residential neighborhoods that provide needed neighborhood services and reduce
traffic.
     LU-15a. Neighborhood Commercial. Evaluate the compatibility of proposed
     neighborhood commercial center use or upgrades through the development review
     process, and involve neighbors early in the development review.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees
     See NH-155a (Sun Valley Commercial Uses) and CD-3b (Development Standards).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                     SAN RAFAEL 2020 / LAND USE 29

                        LU-16. Building and Automotive Services.
                        Maintain availability of sites for building, automotive and service industries important
                        to San Rafael's economy and the convenience of its residents and businesses.
                             LU-16a. Building and Automotive Services. Continue to provide adequate sites for
                             building, automotive and service industries in the appropriate zoning districts. Sites with
                             industrial and light industrial zoning may be redesignated and rezoned to a different land
                             use with Council determination that the new use provides a substantial neighborhood or
                             citywide benefit.
                                 Responsibility: Community Development
                                 Timeframe: Ongoing
                                 Resources: Staff Time
                        LU-17. Limited Retail and Service Uses in Industrial and
                        Office Areas.
                        Allow limited retail and service uses that serve area businesses/workers to locate
                        throughout industrial/office and industrial areas.
                             LU-17a. Retail and Service Uses in Industrial and Office Areas. Continue to provide
                             adequate sites for small local-serving retail and service businesses in industrial and office
                             zoning districts.
                                 Responsibility: Community Development
                                 Timeframe: Ongoing
                                 Resources: Staff Time
                                                          LU-18. Lot Consolidation.
                                                          Commercial and higher density residential parcels less
                                                          than 6,000 square feet in size should be encouraged to be
                                                          combined to provide adequate parking and circulation,
                                                          minimize driveway cuts on busy streets, and maximize
                                                          development and design potential.
                                                          LU-18a. Lot Consolidation. Continue to encourage small lot
                                                          consolidation through zoning regulations.
                                                                   Responsibility: Community Development
                                                                   Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                                   Resources: Staff Time
                                                          LU-19. Childcare.
                                                          Plan for and encourage the development of new and the
                                                          retention of existing childcare centers to meet
                                                          neighborhood and citywide childcare needs. In
                                                          conjunction with the school districts, encourage
 Th e C o m m u n i t y                                   continuation of childcare programs at school sites because
 Services               of their suitability for such uses and convenient locations in residential neighborhoods.
 Department
 operates the largest        LU-19a. Zoning for Childcare Programs. Evaluate and revise if necessary zoning
 day care program in         requirements to allow childcare centers in all zoning districts except Hillside Resource
 M a r i n C o u n t y.
                             Residential, Hillside Residential and Water and Open Space Districts. The City may
                             waive FARs for childcare centers in nonresidential and mixed-use buildings.
                                 Responsibility: Community Development
                                 Timeframe: Short Term
                                 Resources: Staff Time
30                               SAN RAFAEL 2020 / LAND USE                                        Reprinted 04/28/2017
     LU-19b. Fees for Childcare Programs. Where possible, waive application and permit
     fees for childcare centers. Consider exempting childcare centers from traffic mitigation
     fees.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Resources: Staff Time
LU-20. Hotels, Motels and Inns.
Encourage redevelopment and upgrading of existing motels and hotels. Visitor
accommodations are a desired land use because they are a low traffic-generator and a
high tax-generator, and because they have identifiable benefits to the neighborhood
such as job training programs. With a Use Permit, allow hotels, motels and inns in
most commercial, multifamily and industrial zoning districts. With a Use Permit,
allow bed-and-breakfast inns in High Density, Medium Density and Large Lot
Residential Land Use Districts. Hotels are not subject to floor area ratio requirements.
The City Council may approve a height bonus per LU-13 (Height Bonuses) if it finds
that the hotel will be a significant community benefit and that the design is acceptable
and consistent with City design policies and guidelines.
     LU-20a. Hotel Zoning. Maintain zoning ordinance regulations allowing height bonus and
     exemption from FARs for hotels.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
LU-21. Ministorage and Storage.
Ministorage is allowed in light industrial/office and industrial districts. For lots facing
Highways 101 or 580 or the Bay, the ministorage use must be located at the rear of the
lot behind an active streetfront use. Ministorage may be permitted with an FAR of up
to 1.0 if the following findings can be made:
a. The facility is needed in the community;
b. The project is compatible with surrounding uses;
c. The project is designed so that it cannot be converted to other, more intensive
     uses; and,
d. The location is appropriate for this type of use.
In other land use districts, ministorage may be allowed in existing buildings, provided
that the ministorage is not located along the street frontage and complies with the FAR
limits allowable in the districts.
     LU-21a. Ministorage Zoning. Maintain zoning ordinance regulations for ministorage use
     allowance and location limitations.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
LU-22. Odor Impacts.
Consider odor impacts when evaluating land uses and development projects near
wastewater treatment plants, or treatment plant expansion projects.
     LU-22a. Project Evaluation. Evaluate odor impacts as part of development review.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                         SAN RAFAEL 2020 / LAND USE 31
   LU-23. Land Use Map and Categories.
   Land use categories are generalized groupings of land uses and titles that define a
   predominant land use type (See Exhibit 11). All proposed projects must meet density
   and FAR standards (See Exhibits 4, 5 and 6) for that type of use, and other applicable
   development standards. Some listed uses are conditional uses in the zoning ordinance
   and may be allowed only in limited areas or under limited circumstances. Maintain a
   Land Use Map that illustrates the distribution and location of land uses as envisioned
   by General Plan policies. (See Exhibit 11).
       LU-23a. Zoning Ordinance Amendments. Revise the zoning ordinance, including the
       zoning map, to implement General Plan land use designations, densities, intensities, and
       policies, and to meet requirements of State law and court decisions.
            Responsibility: Community Development, Economic Development
            Timeframe: Ongoing
            Resources: Staff Time
       LU-23b. Subdivision Ordinance Amendments. Revise the subdivision ordinance where
       necessary for conformance with General Plan land use designations, densities, intensities,
       and policies and include provisions for adequate enforcement of conditions of subdivision
       map approval.
            Responsibility: Community Development
            Timeframe: Ongoing
            Resources: Staff Time
       LU-23c. Live/work Regulations. Revise live/work zoning regulations to ensure that
       live/work units are appropriately designed and used for combined residential and business
       uses.
            Responsibility: Community Development
            Timeframe: Long Term
            Resources: Staff Time
       LU-23d. Industrial Zoning Districts. Reevaluate and modify as needed definitions and
       FARs for Industrial and Light Industrial/Office Zoning District.
            Responsibility: Community Development
            Timeframe: Short Term
            Resources: Staff Time
32          SAN RAFAEL 2020 / LAND USE                                      Reprinted 04/28/2017
      E xh i b it       1 1:   L a n d          U s e         C at e g o ri e s
                             Gross Density
              Land Use        Residential
              Categor y       U n i t s / Ac r e                                                          Land Uses
        Residential                                 Residential, open space/conservation, parks/playgrounds, schools,
                                                    churches, plant nurseries, group day care and large day care
                                                    facilities. In medium and high-density neighborhoods,
                                                    hotels/motels, clubs and similar uses may be allowed.
                                                    Public/quasi public uses, such as churches and schools, in
                                                    r e s i d e n t i a l z o n e s s h a l l n o t e xc e e d a 1 . 0 F A R a n d s h a l l m e e t C i t y
                                                    development standards including the zoning height and setback
                                                    requirements.
        Hillside Resource       0.1 - 0.5           Characterized by very steep slopes which have geologic and
        Residential                                 s e i s m i c c o n s t r a i n t s a n d wh i c h h a v e c o m m u n i t y v i s u a l s i g n i f i c a n c e
                                                    or which have been identified as having very limited potential
                                                    through prior development approvals. This designation is typical of
                                                    sensitive hillside areas in the Planning Area.
        Hillside                 0.5 - 2            Characterized by moderate to steep slopes; may have unstable
        Residential                                 geology and/or local visual significance. Typical of developed
                                                    hillside residential areas in the Planning Area.
        Large Lot                0.5 - 2
                                                    Flat or gently sloping single-family large lots/large lot subdivision.
        Residential
        Low Density              2 - 6.5
                                                    Typical of single-family areas.
        Residential
        Medium Densit y         6.5 - 15
                                                    Typical of duplex, garden apartment, and condominiums.
        Residential
        High Density             15 - 32
                                                    Typical of apartment densities.
        Residential
        Mixed Use
        Fifth/Mission            15 - 32            Residential uses and office uses are allowed. Ground floor retail
        Residential/Office                          and personal services uses are allowed from "C" Street east, on
                                                    cross streets between Fourth Street and Fifth Avenue.
        Fourth Street            32 - 62            Retail, service, entertainment, cultural, office, residential and
        Retail Core                                 l i v e / w o r k u s e s a r e a l l o we d . R e s i d e n t i a l u s e s a r e a l l o w e d o n t h e
                                                    rear ground floor, second floor and above. On Fourth Street, first
                                                    floor street frontage uses which encourage an active and healthy
                                                    r e t a i l c e n t e r a r e c h a r a c t e r i z e d b y a l l o f t h e f o l l o wi n g :
                                                    - high customer turnover,
                                                    - large volume of pedestrian traffic,
                                                    - w i n d o ws , s t o r e f r o n t d i s p l a y s a n d s i g n s , a n d
                                                    - merchandise or service likely to be obtained in a multiple stop
                                                         t r i p , o r s i m i l a r a c t i v i t y wh i c h d r a ws l a r g e n u m b e r o f p e o p l e
                                                         Downtown.
        General                 15 – 32             General retail and service uses, restaurants, automobile sales and
        Commercial                                  s e r v i c e u s e s , a n d h o t e l s / m o t e l s . O f f i c e s a s s e c o n d a r y u s e s e xc e p t
                                                    along Francisco Blvd. W est where retail redevelopment is strongly
                                                    encouraged
        Hetherton Office        32 – 62             Office use; and ground floor retail, personal service, food service
                                                    and live/work uses are allowed. Residential and live-work uses are
                                                    permitted on the upper floors on Fourth Street, and on the ground
                                                    floor and above elsewhere.
        Lindaro Mixed           6.5 - 15            Mot or vehicle service, cont ractor uses, light manufact uring;
        Use                                         distribution, warehousing and storage, and incidental employee-
                                                    serving retail/service allowed. Live/work use allowed.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                                                  SAN RAFAEL 2020 / LAND USE                                     33

                      Gross Density
        Land Use       Residential
        Categor y      U n i t s / Ac r e                                                      Land Uses
   Lindaro Office        15 – 32             Office, hotel, cultural or entertainment facility; or residential if
                                             feasible.
   Marine Related        6.5 – 15            Water dependent businesses such as boat building; boat repair,
                                             sales and service uses; marinas; and boat charter services. Other
                                             uses that draw people to the waterfront that may be allowed include
                                             shopping centers, restaurants, hotels/motels, retail, and parks.
                                             Residential use and non-marine related office use is allowed on the
                                             second floor and above.
   Neighborhood          6.5 - 15            Neighborhood-serving retail and service uses such as pharmacies,
   Commercial                                supermarkets and dry cleaners. Residential use allowed. Ancillary
                                             office uses allowed.
   Office                15 – 32             General offices, medical and professional offices, administrative or
                                             headquarters offices, and residential uses.
   Public/Quasi-           15-32             Government or quasi-public buildings or facilities; utility facilities
   Public                                    and similar facilities owned or operated by public/non-profit
                                             agencies; residential.
                                             An exemption to development standards may be granted if findings
                                             are made that a higher height or FAR is necessary for health or
                                             safety purposes.
   Residential/Office    15 – 32             Residential and office uses allowed. Limited retail or service uses
                                             may be permitted as conditional uses.
   Retail/Office         15 – 32             Retail and service uses, offices, and residential uses allowed.
   Second/Third           32 - 62            Office and office-support retail and service uses (such as copy
   Street Mixed-Use                          shops, food service and cleaners) are encouraged throughout the
                                             district. Residential uses and additional retail uses are allowed as
                                             f o l l o ws :
                                             - On Second and Third Streets east of "B" Street, limited auto-
                                                 serving retail (such as gas stations), and residential uses as part
                                                 of a mixed-use development are allowed.
                                             - O n S e c o n d a n d T h i r d S t r e e t s we s t o f “ B ” S t r e e t , r e t a i l u s u a l l y
                                                 accessed by car including daily needs retail (such as grocery and
                                                 drug stores), limited auto-serving retail (such as gas stations),
                                                 large item retail (such as furniture stores) and residential uses
                                                 are allowed.
                                             - On the cross streets, neighborhood serving and specialty retail
                                                 uses are encouraged in order to have an active pedestrian
                                                 environment. Residential use is also encouraged, especially
                                                 west of “B” Street.
   W est End Village      15 - 32            Retail uses, especially specialty and neighborhood serving retail
                                             and restaurants. Personal service, high customer-volume office
                                             and limited amounts of other office uses are also allowed.
                                             Residential and live-work uses are permitted on the upper floor of
                                             Fourth Street, and on the ground floor and above elsewhere.
   Nonresidential
   Industrial                   0            Mot or vehicle service, cont ractor uses and yards; manufacturing;
                                             s t o r a g e u s e s ; wh o l e s a l e ; i n c i d e n t a l e m p l o y e e - s e r v i n g r e t a i l / s e r v i c e
                                             u s e s ; s p e c i a l t y r e t a i l u s e s c o n s i s t e n t wi t h i n d u s t r i a l u s e s ; r o c k ,
                                             s a n d a n d g r a v e l p l a n t s ; s o l i d wa s t e m a n a g e m e n t a n d r e c y c l i n g
                                             facilities; trucking yards or terminals; ancillary offices and small
                                             offices.
   Light Industrial/            0            A l l o we d u s e s i n c l u d e : m o t o r v e h i c l e s e r v i c e , c o n t r a c t o r u s e s a n d
   Office                                    yards; light manufacturing; distribution; warehousing and storage,
                                             incidental employee-serving retail/service; office use; and region-
                                             serving specialty retail when contained in a building of 50,000
                                             square feet or greater in size and located on a site greater than 10
                                             acres. Other specialty retail uses may be allowed to occupy minor
                                             portions of the Light Industrial/Office districts provided that
                                             intensity and traffic standards are met and the integrity of the
                                             district is not threatened.
34                                  SAN RAFAEL 2020 / LAND USE                                                                  Reprinted 04/28/2017

                     Gross Density
      Land Use        Residential
      Categor y       U n i t s / Ac r e                                                     Land Uses
 Airport/                      0         Uses on this site are governed by a land use covenant agreed to by
 Recreation                              the City, the County, and the property owner. Recognize the unique
                                         and valuable recreational and environmental characteristics of the
                                         a i r p o r t s i t e . T h e f o l l o wi n g u s e s a r e a l l o w e d o n t h e p r o p e r t y :
                                          -    U s e s c o n s i s t e n t wi t h t h e 2 0 0 2 M a s t e r U s e P e r m i t , i n c l u d i n g t h e
                                               airport and ancillary airport services and light industrial uses.
                                          -    Private and public recreational uses.
                                          -    Public utility uses.
 Mineral                       0         Quarry and brick yard uses, which utilize mineral resources of
 Resources                               regional significance.
 Parks                         0         Parks
 Open Space                    0         Secured public and private open space.
 Conservation                  -         Areas identified as having visual or other natural resource
                                         significance that should be protected through the development
                                         review process. The conservation designation is applied to
                                         environmentally sensitive areas that are part of a larger site of
                                         c o n t i g u o u s p a r c e l s u n d e r c o m m o n o wn e r s h i p . A b s e n t e v i d e n c e t h a t
                                         some portion of the area is appropriate for development, no
                                         development of residential, industrial or commercial buildings shall
                                         b e a l l o w e d . T h e C i t y wi l l c o n s i d e r s o m e l e v e l o f i n t e n s i t y a n d
                                         density of development upon evidence that such use is appropriate.
                                         Upon evidence, the land use designation(s) may be revised through
                                         the General Plan amendment process.
 Water                         0         Major navigable bodies of water, applicable to the bay, and canal,
                                         e xc l u d i n g c r e e k s a n d d r a i n a g e w a y s . T h e W a t e r D i s t r i c t p r o v i d e s a n
                                         o p p o r t u n i t y f o r l i m i t e d w a t e r - d e p e n d e n t u s e s wh i c h r e q u i r e a c c e s s
                                         to the water as a central element of its basic function, and which
                                         contribute to the maritime character of the area
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                                          SAN RAFAEL 2020 / LAND USE                                    35
            This page intentionally left blank.
36 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / LAND USE                   Reprinted 04/28/2017
Exhibit 12, Land Use Map (available under separate cover)
Reprinted 04/28/2017                          SAN RAFAEL 2020 / LAND USE 37
                              This page intentionally left blank.
38 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / LAND USE                  Reprinted 04/28/2017
Housing Element
Resolution No. 13863
EIR Addendum
Resolution No. 13862
  City of San Rafael
  2015-2023 Housing Element
  Resolution No. 13863
  EIR Resolution No. 13862
Acknowledgements
City Council
Gary O. Phillips, Mayor
Andrew Cuyugan McCullough, Vice Mayor
Kate Colin
Maribeth Bushey
John Gamblin
Planning Commission
Jack Robertson, Chair
Barrett Schaefer, Vice Chair
Gerald Belletto
Mark Lubamersky
Larry Paul
Charles Pick
Viktoriya Wise
City Manager
Nancy Mackle
Community Development
Paul Jensen, AICP, Community Development Director
Raffi Boloyan, Planning Manager
Economic Development
Stephanie Lovette, Economic Development Manager
Consultants
Metropolitan Planning Group (M-Group)
Geoff I. Bradley, AICP, Principal
Dave Javid, AICP, LEED AP, Project Manager
Justin Shiu, Assistant Planner
Karen Warner Associates, Inc.
Karen Warner, AICP, Owner
Introduction to Policies and Program (2015-2023 Housing
Element)
In developing the 2015-2023 Housing Element, the City saw the opportunity to
consolidate, reorganize, and refine the Policies and Programs sections to more
effectively communicate the goals, aspirations, and direction of housing policies.
Using the 2009-2014 Housing Element Policies and Programs section as the basis for
the updated section, the policies and programs were evaluated on their
accomplishments, effectiveness, and appropriateness for the 2015-2023 Housing
Element. The City of San Rafael has taken this opportunity to organize this set of
policies and programs in a way that allows the City to keep building off of the
successes and accomplishments of the previous Housing Element.
The Policies and Programs section of the 2009-2014 Housing Element, was an
integrated part of the City’s General Plan. As such, this policy document is intended to
take the place of the previous Housing Element on pages 39-62 of the 2020 General
Plan.
Public Participation
Government Code Section 65583(c)(8) states that each Housing Element shall
“include a diligent effort by the local government to achieve public participation of all
economic segments of the community in the development of the Housing Element,
and the program shall describe this effort.” Through meetings that facilitated
discussion on housing needs and appropriate housing programs for San Rafael, the
City has provided opportunities for the community to become part of the process that
would set the framework for housing development.
The City provided notice of the Housing Element update to members of the
community and interested parties, in formats ranging in scale from public meetings to
smaller group presentations. Notification was provided in the newspaper and direct
notification was sent to over 100 interested groups and individuals, including nonprofit
organizations, advocacy groups, homeowners associations, local agencies, and other
interested parties. A list of parties that were on the noticing list is shown in Appendix
B.
The City solicited public input in two Planning Commission Study Session meetings.
The first meeting was held on April 29, 2014. Information from the completed Housing
Needs Assessment was presented, covering prominent housing issues that currently
affect the community and will be lasting concerns over the planning period. The
second meeting was held on August 12, 2014. A draft of the Housing Element, which
was available to the public in advance, was discussed at the meeting.
In addition, City staff met with groups representing diverse housing needs. A summary
of the housing needs assessment and draft Housing Element Update was given and
made accessible to neighborhood and homeowners associations, including the North
San Rafael Coalition and Federation of San Rafael Neighborhoods. Through
notifications or direct contact, the City reached out to advocacy groups and
organizations promoting quality housing for low income and special needs groups.
These organizations included EDEN Housing, Marin Environmental Housing
Collaborative, Fair Housing of Marin, Canal Alliance, and Habitat for Humanity. The
City held smaller informational focus group meetings with organizations for those that
requested them. The list in Appendix B-6 Public Participation shows the organizations
that received notifications.
Comments that arose from the meetings included the following:
     • Concern about the affordability of housing.
                                                                                          i

        •    Preservation of programs to help lower income and special needs
             households.
        •    Desire to promote second units and junior second units.
        •    Consideration of impact of development on the character of the city.
        •    Support provision of affordable housing through securing new funding sources
             and offering technical assistance for affordable housing development.
        •    Consideration of expanding incentives to promote affordable housing
             development.
   These comments have been considered and addressed by Planning Commissioners
   and City staff present at the meetings and reflected in the Housing Element. Programs
   under Policy H-7 Protection of Existing Housing Stock, Policy H-11 House Sharing
   and Policy H-16 Second Units cover strategies to preserve the affordable housing
   stock and increase alternative lower income housing options. Programs under Policy
   H-9 Special Needs aim to promote quality housing opportunities for special needs
   populations. The consideration of development impacts are addressed in programs
   under Policy H-2 Design that Fits into the Neighborhood Context. Within Policy H-6
   Funding for Affordable Housing, programs address objectives to secure funding
   sources. Programs under Policy H-14 Adequate Sites and Policy H-17 Regulatory
   Processes and Incentives for Affordable Housing discuss incentives that can be
   explored or offered for affordable housing.
   Upon completion of the draft Housing Element, the City circulates a Notice of
   Availability to a variety of interested organizations. The Notice defines a 60-day review
   and comment period.
   Relationship to Other General Plan Elements
   The General Plan serves as the ‘constitution’ for development in the city. It is a long-
   range planning document that describes goals, policies, and programs to guide
   decision making. Once the General Plan is adopted, all development-related decisions
   must be consistent with the plan. If a development proposal is not consistent with the
   plan, the proposal must be revised or the plan itself must be amended. State law
   requires a community’s General Plan to be internally consistent. This means that the
   Housing Element, although subject to special requirements and a different schedule of
   updates, must function as an integral part of the overall General Plan, with
   consistency between it and the other General Plan elements.
   Land use and development projections of the General Plan are also linked to planned
   facilities and infrastructure capacity. Specific issues addressed in other sections of the
   General Plan that are linked to and supported in the Housing Element, include: (1) the
   design of housing; (2) housing and circulation; (3) reduction of greenhouse gases; and
   (4) support services and infrastructure for the community.
   The City will ensure consistency between the Housing Element and the other General
   Plan elements so that policies introduced in one element are consistent with other
   elements. Whenever any element of the General Plan is amended in the future, the
   Housing Element will be reviewed and modified, if necessary, to ensure continued
   consistency between elements.
ii

Table of Contents
Introduction to Policies and Program (2015-2023 Housing Element) .................................. i
Public Participation .................................................................................................................... i
Relationship to Other General Plan Elements ....................................................................... ii
Introduction ............................................................................................................................. 39
Building Upon Past Successes ................................................................................................ 40
Housing Needs ........................................................................................................................ 41
Who Needs Housing? ............................................................................................................. 42
What Kind of Housing is Needed? ........................................................................................ 42
Overview of Key Recommendations .................................................................................... 43
GOAL 3: HOUSING NEEDS ............................................................................................. 45
   H-1. Housing Distribution. ..................................................................................................... 45
   H-2. Design That Fits into the Neighborhood Context. ................................................... 45
   H-3. Public Information and Participation. ......................................................................... 46
   H-4. Governmental and Community Collaboration........................................................... 47
   H-5. Fair Housing..................................................................................................................... 47
   H-6. Funding for Affordable Housing.................................................................................. 48
GOAL 4: A DIVERSE HOUSING SUPPLY..................................................................... 49
   H-7. Protection of the Existing Housing Stock. ................................................................. 49
   H-8. Housing Conditions and Maintenance. ....................................................................... 51
   H-9. Special Needs. .................................................................................................................. 52
   H-10. Innovative Housing Approaches. ............................................................................... 53
   H-11. House Sharing................................................................................................................ 53
   H-12. Residential Care Facilities and Emergency Shelters. ............................................... 54
   H-13. Senior Housing. ............................................................................................................. 55
   H-14. Adequate Sites................................................................................................................ 56
   H-15. Infill Near Transit. ........................................................................................................ 58
   H-16. Second Units. ................................................................................................................. 59
   H-17. Regulatory Processes and Incentives for Affordable Housing. ............................. 59
   H-18. Inclusionary Housing Requirements. ......................................................................... 60
   H-19. Energy Conservation and Sustainability .................................................................... 61
Summary of Quantified Objectives ....................................................................................... 62
                                                                                                                                              iii
i
 Housing                                                                                             Our Use of Land
 Introduction
                                                                                    Def in it io n s
 Nestled among hills on the edge of the San
 Francisco Bay, San Rafael is a wonderful place to              Abatement – The removal or legalization of a condition
 call home. San Rafael is a great place to grow up,             in violation of City regulations.
 work, raise a family, and retire. It has a broad-
                                                                Affordability – The generally accepted banking/
 based economy, a vibrant cultural life, and high               government standard for determining whether a person
 quality educational opportunities. The city has a              can afford housing is defined as spending no more
 broad mix of incomes, ages, and cultures.                      than 30 percent of one’s gross monthly household
                                                                income on housing costs, which for owner housing
 San Rafael is a city with a long history and many              would include principal, interest, utilities and insurance.
 neighborhoods that are distinctive and                         Below Market Rate Housing Programs – The term
 representative of that history. There are older                “below-market-rate” (BMR) housing is used to describe
 neighborhoods, from the days when San Rafael’s                 units offered at rents or sales prices below that which
 residences were a mix of large ornate homes for                they could command on the open market.
 wealthy merchants, summer retreats for San                     Co-Housing – A type of share housing arrangement.
 Francisco residents, and smaller simpler homes for             Co-housing developments have individual units with
 workers from other countries. Neighborhoods built              kitchens, combined with a common kitchen and
 before World War II were developed with narrow                 meeting rooms.
 tree-lined streets, neighborhood stores, and homes             Illegal Unit – A unit built without required permits
 with front porches. The larger suburbs built in the            (building, electrical, plumbing).
 1960s and 1970s, with three- and four- bedroom
                                                                Inclusionary Requirements – These programs require a
 homes, tend toward a similarity in design, such as
                                                                percentage of low and moderate income housing to be
 the Eichler-designed homes which strive to unify               provided in market-rate new residential developments.
 indoor spaces with the outdoors while maintaining
 privacy. More recently, attached housing, including            Mixed Use – Properties on which various uses, such
                                                                as office, commercial, institutional, and residential, are
 condominiums, apartments, and townhomes,
                                                                combined in a single building or on a single site in an
 ranging in size from single rooms to four-bedrooms,            integrated development project with significant
 has been located throughout the city.                          functional interrelationships and a coherent physical
                                                                design.
 According to the 2010 U.S. Census, almost half of
                                                                Second Unit - A self-contained living unit either
 the housing is renter-occupied, over one-quarter of
                                                                attached to or detached from, and in addition to, the
 the households are families with children, another             primary residential unit on a single lot. Sometimes
 quarter are senior households, and a third of the              called “granny flat” or a “mother-in-law” unit. Junior
 households are people living alone. Trends show                second units refer to repurposed existing space (under
 that today’s seniors are growing into their 80s and            500 sq ft) within a single-family home to create an
 beyond and there will be an increase in assisted               independent living unit.
 living needs. Baby boomers and empty nesters will              Single Room Occupancy (SRO) – One of the most
 be relocating to smaller homes. Young adults in                traditional forms of affordable private housing for single
 San Rafael, grown children of residents, new                   and elderly low-income people and for new arrivals to
 employees, and college graduates will want to set              an area. An SRO unit is usually small, between 80 and
 up their own households to stay close to their                 250 square feet. It typically has a sink and a closet but
 families or work.                                              shares a bathroom, shower, and kitchen with other
                                                                rooms.
 Consistent with the State of California’s goal to
 provide “decent housing and a suitable living
 environment for every California family,” and the
 City’s vision to “provide housing for people at all stages of life, at all income levels,”
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                            SAN RAFAEL 2020 / HOUSING                39

   policies and programs preserve existing housing and encourage new housing. With
   proactive City leadership, the activities of Community Development and Economic
   Development Departments, and a community-wide partnership to implement housing
   programs, San Rafael will continue to be a leader in providing a variety of housing
   types to meet the diverse needs of its residents.
   Building Upon Past Successes
   The city of San Rafael is sensitive to the many converging and competing interests,
   desires and views in the city relating to development of housing, preservation of the
   character of San Rafael’s neighborhoods, ease of getting around, and protection of
   environmentally sensitive areas.
   To encourage housing in the Downtown, General Plan incentives were adopted in
   1988 and 1996 that: (1) allow height and density bonuses for affordable housing; (2)
   encourage mixed-use development by modifying development potential calculations;
   (3) reduce the parking requirement for downtown units; (4) provide live/work
   opportunities; and (5) provide for single-room occupancy units. As a means of further
   encouraging mixed use in commercial areas outside the Downtown, General Plan
   2020 extends Downtown's modified development potential calculations throughout all
   commercial areas of the city.
   In addition, in 2001 the General Plan was amended to revise inclusionary
   requirements to better target new housing to very low- and low-income households.
   San Rafael supports the development and acquisition of affordable housing units by
   non-profit and for-profit developers. Since 1991, the former San Rafael
   Redevelopment Agency provided financial assistance that resulted in the long-term
   affordability of 840 affordable rental units. All of these units have ongoing affordability
   restrictions monitored by the City. Community Development and Economic
   Development staff works closely with housing advocates and developers to create
   financially viable projects. Financial support is available in a variety of forms, from
   loans and grants to tax credits and outright purchases.
   The Planning Commission and City Council have unanimously supported new housing
   development. Housing development in the past 25 years has provided a significant
   amount of affordable housing projects including Centertown, Maria B. Freitas Senior
   Housing, Lone Palm Apartments, Baypoint Lagoon and Ecology House. In addition,
   over these years many market rate residential projects have been developed that
   include a component of below-market rate units. These development projects include,
   among others, Redwood Village, Peacock Ridge, 33 North (San Pablo Avenue) and
   the Rafael Town Center. San Rafael’s Economic Development Department tracks the
   “below market rate” units and ensures that they are providing housing for households
   of the targeted incomes. The City’s inclusionary and density bonus policies, and the
   investment of the former Redevelopment Agency has resulted in over 1,400 affordable
   rental units and 113 ownership units representing about 25 percent of the new
   housing in San Rafael.
   In short, implementing San Rafael’s housing policies is a team effort, grounded by
   General Plan policies and empowered by a vision that affordable units are an
   essential part of San Rafael’s housing stock and maintaining its diverse population.
   The City continues to support a multi-faceted approach to housing that builds upon
   these successes, maximizes the chances for broad community consensus and fulfills
40    SAN RAFAEL 2020 / HOUSING                                             Reprinted 04/28/2017

     the State of California’s requirement that adequate housing potential exists to meet
     specified housing needs.
     Housing Needs
     The lack of affordable housing has long been a top issue in San Rafael, with the City’s
     existing and projected housing needs documented in the 2014 Housing Needs
     Assessment (refer to Appendix B-1). Both the 1974 and 1988 General Plans identified
     affordable (also known as workforce) housing as a vital community need. The topic
     was identified again as a top planning issue in the Trends Report (2000) and the
     Issues Report (2000) where community members ranked affordable housing as one of
     the top three issues facing San Rafael.
     High rents, employee recruitment and retention challenges, congestion on local
     highways and lengthening of commute time all result from a lack of affordable housing
     in San Rafael. A detailed examination of San Rafael’s housing need, housing supply,
     cost of housing, population, household characteristics and quantified objectives to
     meet those needs is provided in Appendix B.
     There are five levels of affordability discussed in the Housing Element:
     • Extremely low income households earn less than 30 percent of the median
       household income.
     • Very low income households earn less than 50 percent of the median household
       income.
     • Low income households earn between 50 and 80 percent of the median
       household income.
     • Moderate income households earn between 80 and 120 percent of the median
       household income.
     • Above moderate income households earn more than 120 percent of the median
       household income.
       Exhibit 13: Marin County Income Levels, 2014
   MARIN COUNTY INCOME LEVELS, 2014
             Extremely Low
                                                                                                          2014     2009
House              Income         Very Low Income            Low Income         Moderate Income
                                                                                                         Median   Median
-hold         (less than 30%        (less than 50%            (50 – 80%             (80 – 120%
                                                                                                         Income   Income
 Size       median income)         median income)          median income)        median income)
  1       $23,750 and below       $23,751- $39,600        $39,601 - $63,350     $63,351 - $88,500       $72,100  $67,750
  2       $27,150 and below       $27,151- $45,250        $45,251 - $72,400     $72,401 - $98,900       $82,400  $77,450
  3       $30,550 and below       $30,551- $50,900        $50,901 – $81,450    $81,451 - $111,250        $92,700  $87,100
  4       $33,950 and below       $33,951- $56,550        $56,551 – $90,500   $90,501 – $123,600        $103,000  $96,800
  5       $36,650 and below       $36,651- $61,050        $61,051 - $97,700   $97,701 - $133,500        $111,250 $104,550
  6       $39,400 and below       $39,401- $65,600       $65,601 - $104,950   $104,951 - $143,400       $119,500 $112,300
     Household incomes are described in terms of family size and are determined on an
     annual basis. The table above lists Marin County income levels for 2014, as
     determined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. For
     example, using the table above, a family of three with an income below $81,450 would
     be considered a low-income household. The final column of the table identifies the
     median income levels in 2009 as presented in San Rafael's last Housing Element, and
    Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                      SAN RAFAEL 2020 / HOUSING             41

   indicates a modest 6.4 percent increase in median incomes levels between 2009 and
   2014.
   Who Needs Housing?
   •    Low- and moderate-income families living in overcrowded housing where families
        double up, or larger families living in one and two-bedroom apartments.
   •    Seniors with very low and low incomes, living primarily off of SSI benefits, and
        perhaps some retirement savings. Many own their own house, some live alone.
        Not all have the resources to maintain their house, and some may need to live
        closer to services.
   •    Students at Dominican University and College of Marin, and young adults in local
        businesses.
   •    Employees in local businesses, commuting on Highway 101 or I-580. People who
        live in the community where they work do not have a lengthy commute.
   •    Very low income households, including those without a place to call home.
   •    People with disabilities who have specific design or service considerations, such as
        wheelchair-accessible apartments or group homes with semi-independent living.
   What Kind of Housing is Needed?
   •    Rental units, particularly Single Room Occupancy Units and studios affordable to
        those with low and very low incomes, and two or more bedroom units affordable to
        moderate and below income households.
   •    Ownership family units.
   •    Smaller and attached for-sale units affordable to very low, low, and moderate
        income households.
   •    Senior housing affordable to very low, low, and moderate income households.
   •    Second units and junior second units (repurposing existing space such as the
        conversion of a bedroom to a small, independent unit) which would encourage
        seniors to remain in their homes.
   •    Housing with a service component.
   •    Emergency Housing
   One unique aspect of the State’s Housing Element law is the assistance provided to
   local governments in quantifying housing needs. Under California law, every city and
   county has a legal obligation to respond to its fair share of the projected future
   housing needs in the region in which it is located. For San Rafael and other Bay Area
   jurisdictions, the regional housing need is determined by the Association of Bay Area
   Governments (ABAG), based upon an overall regional need number established by
   the State. The fair share numbers establish goals to guide local planning and
   development decision-making.
   Housing needs are described in terms of affordability to various household incomes.
   The ABAG Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) for San Rafael call for a
   demonstrated planning capacity total of 1,007 housing units between January 1, 2014
   and October 31, 2022 (see Exhibit 14). San Rafael must demonstrate that adequate
   provisions are made to support the development of housing at the various income
   levels to meet its fair share of the projected regional housing needs. San Rafael’s
   housing objective is based on the identified housing needs for San Rafael.
   Between January 2014 and July 2014, of projects that include 3 or more units, 19
   units have received planning entitlements or are under construction in San Rafael.
42    SAN RAFAEL 2020 / HOUSING                                           Reprinted 04/28/2017

 There are two perspectives from which to understand the ABAG housing needs and
 how they relate to San Rafael’s adequate sites analysis:
 • Are there adequate sites to meet the city’s total housing needs?
 • Are there adequate sites at sufficient densities to meet the city’s need for very
      low-, low- and moderate-income housing?
 Based on surveys of existing rents, second units and market rate apartments are
 generally affordable to moderate income households. The State assumes that a
 density of at least 30 units/acre is usually needed to create opportunities for very low-
 and low-income housing to be built. The density allows for savings in construction,
 long-term management and maintenance costs, as well as competitiveness for tax
 credit financing and land costs. Specific areas of San Rafael have been identified as
 potential housing opportunity sites (Appendix B).
 In addition to addressing the ABAG housing needs requirements, General Plan 2020
 looks at the housing for San Rafael in the longer-term.
 Overview of Key Recommendations
 San Rafael's housing strategies are to:
 • Preserve and strengthen San Rafael's neighborhoods so that they continue to
      improve over time.
 • Be proactive in new housing so that changes continue to enhance San Rafael,
      making it an ever-increasingly attractive place to live.
 • Target resources for effective partnerships involving property owners, developers,
      neighborhoods, businesses, civic and service organizations, and the County to
      address housing needs.
 • Foster land use patterns and densities which support lifestyles which rely less on
      carbon-based transportation.
 The City’s strong commitment to meeting the needs for affordable housing is
 demonstrated through permit streamlining, financial support, and community
 involvement. Housing policies are written so that affordable housing is targeted to a
 variety of economic levels, integrated into projects and dispersed throughout the
 community. Support is also provided by elected officials and members of the business
 community who understand the critical role affordable housing has in making San
 Rafael a balanced and healthy community.
 Because San Rafael has little remaining vacant land available for large-scale
 development, building on smaller or under-utilized sites scattered throughout the city
 will be important in meeting its housing needs. These “infill” sites must be developed
 in a way that best adds value to a neighborhood. Encouraging new housing
 development at appropriate densities, promoting mixed-uses where housing can be
 incorporated into areas of commercial-only or industrial-only uses, and supporting
 continued development of second units will help make better use of our land
 resources and to address San Rafael’s housing needs.
 Housing policies must be integrated with related issues such as land use, design,
 traffic capacity, economic development, and adequate infrastructure. For example,
 design policies for multifamily housing will try to ensure enhancement of neighborhood
 identity and sense of community by having new housing sensitively address scale and
 compatibility in design to the surrounding neighborhood. Linkages with land use
 strategies that encourage use of transit are also supported in housing policies.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                        SAN RAFAEL 2020 / HOUSING 43

          Exhibit 14: San Rafael’s Regional Housing Need
   San Rafael’s Regional Housing Need By
   Household Income, 2015 - 2023
                                                                                   Ab o ve
                     Ver y L o w                              M o d er at e     M o d er at e        A ver a ge
   Ho u si n g         In c o m e     Lo w In c o m e          In c o m e         In c o m e          Year l y
      N eed         Ho u seh o ld s   Ho u seh o ld s       Ho u seh o ld s   Ho u seh o ld s          Need
                         24 0
     1,0 07         E xtr e m ely           14 8                  18 1              43 8                12 5
                  lo w in co m e *:
                         12 0
   * Extremely low income household need is a subset of very low income household need.
        The major actions proposed are to:
        • Continue the City’s proactive role in protecting existing housing and assuring that
           new housing continues to enhance the city’s diversity, economy, and quality of life.
        • Broaden affordability requirements in new housing developments. Establish higher
           percentages of affordable units when traffic allocation and density bonuses are
           requested.
        • Require new nonresidential development to contribute to the production of
           affordable housing, such as providing housing on- or off-site, subsidizing
           mortgages and/or rents, and payment of in-lieu fees.
        • Support housing development either as redevelopment or infill to improve certain
           areas of town.
        • Encourage second units as a means of dispersing small, affordable units
           throughout the community by modifying zoning regulations and processing
           requirements. Promote creation of junior second units through the repurposing of
           existing space in single-family homes as independent rental units.
        • Require that illegal units are abated/removed or legalized.
        • Expand allowances for mixed-use and infill housing development in commercial
           areas in order to create housing near workplaces.
        • Encourage development at higher densities within easy walking distance to transit
           where reduced automobile usage and parking requirements are possible.
        • Continue to support housing for population groups who require special assistance,
           such as homeless persons, people living with disabilities, seniors, large families,
           and single-parent households.
44        SAN RAFAEL 2020 / HOUSING                                                   Reprinted 04/28/2017

 GOAL 3: HOUSING NEEDS
 It is the goal of San Rafael to have a strong sense of community and
 responsibility in meeting housing needs. Historically, San Rafael has provided
 housing of all types to meet the varied needs of its population in settings that enhance
 the feeling of community.
 It is important to enhance our sense of community by identifying responsibilities of all
 sectors within the community (neighborhoods, business, non-profits, government, etc.)
 to effectively address the city’s housing needs and to assure effective application of
 Fair Housing laws. The intent in this approach is to continue to be purposeful and
 creative in finding ways to increase local funding resources and/or financially
 equivalent incentives for lower income and special needs housing, and to take a
 proactive approach in creating and responding to opportunities to achieve San
 Rafael’s housing goals.
 New development must be compatible with and enhance existing community
 character. San Rafael residents at the 2020 Visioning session stated that maintaining
 community diversity is one of their highest priorities. The City’s policies encompass
 two approaches. The first is that the City and its neighborhoods share a responsibility
 in helping to meet housing needs; investment in new housing and improvements
 should be distributed throughout the city. Second, new housing development must
 recognize and enhance the design character of the surrounding neighborhood. In the
 end, future development is planned based on community wide needs, sound citywide
 policies, neighborhood involvement, capital improvements, and public facility and
 service capacity.
 H-1. Housing Distribution.
 Promote the distribution of new and affordable housing of quality construction
 throughout the city to meet local housing needs.
       H-1a. Annual Housing Element Review. Provide an annual Housing Element progress
       report for review by the public and City decision-makers. The Report will document:
            • San Rafael's annual residential building activity, including identification of any
                 deed restricted affordable units;
            • Progress towards the Regional Housing Needs Allocation since the start of the
                 planning period; and
            • Implementation status of Housing Element programs
            Responsibility: Community Development, Economic Development
            Timeframe: Annually
            Resources: Fees
 H-2. Design That Fits into the Neighborhood Context.
 Recognize that construction of new housing and improvements on existing properties
 can add to the appearance and value of the neighborhood if they fit into the established
 character of the area. Design new housing, remodels, and additions to be compatible to
 the surrounding neighborhood. Incorporate transitions in height and setbacks from
 adjacent properties to respect adjacent development character and privacy. Respect
 existing landforms and minimize effects on adjacent properties.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                             SAN RAFAEL 2020 / HOUSING 45

       H-2a. Design Concerns of Single-Family Homes. Examine and amend, as needed,
       zoning regulations and guidelines for single-family homes to address concerns about bulk,
       height, setbacks privacy, and other impacts of new homes and of additions to existing
       homes. Consider potential cost impacts on housing development when developing new
       regulations and guidelines.
            Responsibility: Community Development
            Timeframe: Mid Term (2017)
            Resources: Staff Time
       H-2b. Compatibility of Building Patterns. Adopt design guidelines to ensure
       compatibility of neighborhood building patterns. Guidelines may address setback patterns,
       garage and driveway patterns, and building scale. Further develop the character-defining
       elements of the neighborhood. Guidelines may address entries, roof design, windows,
       architectural style, materials, and detailing. Consider potential cost impacts on housing
       development when developing new regulations and guidelines. The City is currently
       operating under interim design guidelines adopted with the 2020 General Plan, which has
       been providing direction to the development community.
            Program Objective: Adopt Residential and Mixed Use Development Design
            Guidelines
            Responsibility: Community Development
            Timeframe: Mid Term (2017)
            Resources: Staff Time
       See LU-2a (Development Review) and CD-11a (Compatibility of Building Patterns).
   H-3. Public Information and Participation.
   Provide information on housing programs and related issues. Require and support
   public participation in the formulation and review of the City’s housing policy,
   including encouraging neighborhood involvement in development review. Work with
   community groups to advocate programs that will increase affordable housing supply
   and opportunities. Ensure appropriate and adequate involvement so that the design of
   new housing will strengthen the character and integrity of the neighborhood.
       H-3a. Neighborhood Meetings. Require neighborhood meetings, as provided for by the
       City Council resolution for Neighborhood Meeting Procedures, for larger housing
       development proposals and those that have potential to change neighborhood character. In
       larger projects, the City requests that developers participate in formal meetings with the
       community. The City facilitates outreach by helping applicants find information on the
       appropriate neighborhood groups to contact. City staff attends meetings as a staff resource
       and conducts noticing of meetings.
            Responsibility: Community Development
            Timeframe: Ongoing (as part of project review)
            Resources: Fees
       H-3b. Information and Outreach on Housing Issues. Continue to provide information
       to improve awareness of housing needs, issues and programs, and to collaborate with
       housing organizations to publicize in-service training, press releases, fair housing laws,
       contacts, and phone numbers. For example, provide links on the Community
       Development webpage to housing resources, such as the State Department of Housing and
       Community Development (HCD).
            Responsibility: City Manager, Community Development, Economic Development
            Timeframe: Annually
            Resources: Fees
       See also CD-15a (Notification and Information about Development Projects) and G-7a
       (Review of Facilities Proposed by Other Public Agencies).
46    SAN RAFAEL 2020 / HOUSING                                                 Reprinted 04/28/2017

 H-4. Governmental and Community Collaboration.
 Collaborate when possible with other jurisdictions in Marin County in addressing
 regional housing needs. Support community partnerships to assist in the development
 of needed housing and continue to provide technical assistance to owners, developers,
 and non-profits. Participate in local and regional housing assistance programs and
 establish relationships and coordinate with other public agencies, non-profit housing
 sponsors, and for-profit housing sponsors in the use of available programs and funding
 resources to provide lower-cost housing in San Rafael. Take leadership in attaining the
 goals of the Housing Element by coordinating with interested parties and carrying out
 prescribed actions in a timely manner.
      H-4a. Inter-Jurisdictional Housing Activities and Resources. Continue to implement
      shared responsibilities, common regulations, coordinated lobbying efforts and the housing
      data clearinghouse to efficiently and effectively respond to housing needs within the cities
      and county of Marin.
            Responsibility: Community Development
            Timeframe: Ongoing
            Resources: Fees
      H-4b. Community Collaboration. Encourage cooperative and joint ventures between
      owners, developers, and community non-profit groups in the provision of affordable
      housing. Give technical assistance to non-profit developers by providing information on
      other local sources of funding for affordable housing and introductions to other funders.
      As appropriate, write letters of support and serve as a co-applicant for project funding,
      such as for affordable housing funds available through California's cap-and-trade system.
      Work with businesses, public agencies, and local school districts to seek opportunities to
      help employees find local housing.
            Responsibility: Community Development, Economic Development
            Timeframe: Ongoing
            Resources: Fees, Staff Time
      See also H-6c (Funding Applications).
 H-5. Fair Housing
 Take action when necessary to prevent discrimination on the basis of race, religion,
 sex, marital status, ancestry, national origin, color, familial status or disability in San
 Rafael’s housing market.
      H-5a. Fair Housing Program. Designate the Community Development Director as the
      Equal Opportunity Coordinator in San Rafael. Ensure that written materials regarding fair
      housing law are provided at various public locations, and that information about fair
      housing agencies and phone numbers is posted in places such as the City’s website, at City
      Hall, the Public Library, and other public places. As part of the Cooperative Agreement
      with the County on CDBG funding, continue to require a portion of the City’s allocation
      be directed to Fair Housing of Marin and/or other fair housing organizations. Continue to
      refer discrimination and tenant/landlord complaints to Fair Housing of Marin, or the
      appropriate legal service, county, state, or federal agency.
             Responsibility: Community Development, Economic Development
             Timeframe: Ongoing
             Resources: Staff Time
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                                SAN RAFAEL 2020 / HOUSING 47

   H-6. Funding for Affordable Housing.
                                    Given the loss of Redevelopment funds, combined with
                                    reductions in federal housing funding, the City's ability
                                    to directly finance affordable housing is significantly
                                    diminished. San Rafael's primary tool to support the
                                    development of affordable housing is through its
                                    Affordable Housing Ordinance, which produces both
                                    affordable units and generates in-lieu fees. The City will
                                    continue to actively pursue outside funding sources to
                                    leverage local funds and maximize assistance. In
                                    addition to applying for those funds directly available to
                                    municipalities, the City plays an important role in
                                    supporting developers to secure outside funds.
      H-6a. In-Lieu Fees for Affordable Housing. Affordable Housing In-Lieu Fees generated
      from non-residential development and fees generated from residential developments
      pursuant to San Rafael Zoning Code Section 14.16.030 are placed in a citywide housing
      in-lieu fee fund to be used to increase the supply of housing affordable to very low, low,
      and moderate income households. As of the end of fiscal year 2013/14, San Rafael's
      Housing In-Lieu Fee Fund has a current balance of approximately $1.2 million, with an
      estimated $100,000 in additional fees which could be generated during the planning
      period. Given this relatively limited amount of funding, the City will focus these resources
      on projects which emphasize leverage with outside funds and maximize the number and
      affordability of units provided. Funded activities may include: acquisition and
      rehabilitation of existing housing through non-profits; new construction of affordable
      housing; and provision of rehabilitation funds to privately owned rental housing in
      exchange for affordability covenants. Pursuant to State Law, the City will dedicate a
      portion of these in lieu fees for housing for extremely low and very low income
      households.
           Program Objective: Contribute funding towards at least one affordable rental project
           for lower income households.
           Responsibility: Community Development, Economic Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Housing in-lieu fees
      H-6b. Funding Resources. Work with community and elected leaders to identify
      potential public and private funding resources for affordable housing funds.
           Program Objective: Seek to secure at least two new funding sources and a minimum
           of $200,000 in outside funds during the planning period.
           Responsibility: Economic Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
      H-6c. Funding Applications. As opportunities for funding become available, coordinate
      applications for State and Federal subsidies for affordable housing, and (1) provide technical
      assistance in public funding resources and local processing requirements, including
      community involvement; (2) consider project funding and timing needs in the processing and
      review of the application; and (3) work with applicants to identify appropriate submittal
      materials to enable a timely determination of application completeness.
           Responsibility: Community Development, Economic Development
           Timeframe: Annually
           Resources: Fees
48  SAN RAFAEL 2020 / HOUSING                                                 Reprinted 04/28/2017
 GOAL 4: A DIVERSE HOUSING
 SUPPLY
 It is the goal of San Rafael to have an adequate housing supply and mix that
 matches the needs of people of all ages, income levels, and special requirements.
 San Rafael has a wide range of housing types. People who work in San Rafael should
 be able to live here and there should be adequate housing for seniors and very low-
 income households.
 The present housing situation in San Rafael effectively limits the right to shelter to the
 well-to-do, and limits opportunities for seniors and young adults to remain in their
 community. It limits the ability of teachers and other public service employees, people
 who work in local businesses and people who provide childcare and elder care to find
 housing so that they can live in the community where they work.
 More housing choices can be created through mixed-use housing, shared housing,
 live-work units, higher density housing close to public transit and services, and
 sensitive development of unused or underutilized lands. Revisions made to California
 State law in 2003 make it easier for single-family property owners to add a second
 unit. At the same time, the City will continue to pursue abatement of illegal units –
 units built without required building permits. The City will assist property owners in
 legalizing units where feasible.
 Protection and Maintenance of Existing Housing
 H-7. Protection of the Existing Housing Stock.
 Continue to protect existing housing from conversion to nonresidential uses. Ensure
 that affordable housing provided through government subsidy programs, incentives,
 and deed restrictions remains affordable over the required time period, and intervene
 when possible to help preserve such housing.
      H-7a. Condominium Conversion Ordinance. As stated in the zoning ordinance, prohibit
      conversion of existing multifamily rental units to market rate condominium units unless
      the city’s rental vacancy rate is above 5.0 percent, as determined by the State of California
      Finance Department annual Population Estimates. Exceptions include limited equity
      cooperatives, co-housing, and other innovative housing proposals that are affordable to
      low- and moderate-income households.
            Responsibility: Community Development
            Timeframe: Ongoing (as part of project review)
            Resources: Staff Time
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                               SAN RAFAEL 2020 / HOUSING 49

    H-7b. Preserving Existing Rental Housing Affordable to Low Income Households At
    Risk of Conversion. Eight assisted rental projects in San Rafael (totaling 291 units) are
    technically at-risk of conversion to market rate prior to 2025. However, all eight projects
    are owned and managed by non-profit organizations with a public purpose to maintain
    affordable housing for low income and special needs populations. The majority of these
    developments receive Federal and State funding, rather than local funding, and therefore
    are not subject to the City’s rent and income monitoring requirements. The City will
    however monitor each project's potential affordability expiration, and contact the non-
    profit owners within one year of the expiration date to address any future loss of funding
    which may put these units at risk.
         Program Objective: Conservation of all 291 very low income rental units as
         affordable
         Responsibility: Economic Development, Community Development
         Timeframe: Contact non-profit owners within one year of potential affordability
         expiration.
         Resources: State funding, City in-lieu funds and Successor Agency affordable housing
         funds.
    H-7c. Preserving Existing Rental Housing Affordable to Low Income Households
    through Ongoing Affordability Restrictions. The City of San Rafael and the former
    Redevelopment Agency is responsible for the annual monitoring of over 1,400 units in
    forty one publicly and privately owned rental developments. In addition, City policies
    have resulted in the development of 115 affordable ownership units. All of these rental
    and ownership units have long term affordability covenants.
         Program Objective: For units owned by non- profit agencies, continue to monitor
         these units as required by the original funding source (State, Federal or
         Redevelopment Agency). For private units produced pursuant to City inclusionary
         requirements, continue to monitor through annual income and rent certificate from
         property owners.
         Responsibility: Economic Development
         Timeframe: Annual rent and income certification
         Resources: Annual reporting fees, City in-lieu funds and Successor Agency affordable
         housing funds
    See also H-17c (Waiver or Reduction of Fees).
    H-7d. BMR Resale Regulations. Continue to require resale controls on ownership Below
    Market Rate (BMR) units to assure that units remain affordable to very low, low, and
    moderate-income households. Continue to monitor database with Marin Housing.
         Responsibility: Economic Development
         Timeframe: Annually, affordable housing funds and City in-lieu fees
         Resources: Successor Agency Funds
    H-7e. Retention of Mobilehomes and Preservation of Existing Mobilehome Sites.
    Retain where possible this type of housing, which includes the 400-home Contempo Marin
    and the 30-home B-Bar-A mobilehome park, and its affordability by continuing to
    implement the Mobilehome Rent Stabilization Ordinance. Mobilehomes typically provide
    lower cost housing by the nature of their size and design.
         Responsibility: City Attorney
         Timeframe: Ongoing
         Resources: Staff Time
50 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / HOUSING                                                Reprinted 04/28/2017

 H-8. Housing Conditions and Maintenance.
 Protect and conserve the existing housing stock and existing residential areas. Protect
 residents and maintain the housing stock by enforcing the housing code for all types of
 residential units. Support good management practices and the long-term maintenance
 and improvement of existing housing.
      H-8a. Apartment Inspection Program. To assure safe living conditions, continue to
      enforce housing codes for all apartment projects, three units or larger in size.
            Responsibility: Community Development
            Timeframe: Inspect all apartment units in the city every 5 years
            Resources: Fees
      H-8b. Code Enforcement and Public Information Programs. Coordinate housing,
      building and fire code enforcement to ensure compliance with basic health and safety
      building standards and provide information about rehabilitation loan programs for use by
      qualifying property owners. Continue to investigate reported illegal units and abate or
      legalize where possible units built without permits or occupied in violation of San Rafael’s
      ordinances.
            Responsibility: Community Development
            Timeframe: Bi-weekly meetings of the Development Coordinating Committee
            Resources: Staff Time
      H-8c. Residential Rehabilitation Loan Program. As part of the Cooperative Agreement
      with the County on CDBG funding, continue to require a portion of the City’s allocation
      be directed to the Marin Housing Authority to provide property improvement loans and
      technical assistance to qualified very-low-income homeowners to make basic repairs and
      improvements, correct substandard conditions, and eliminate health and safety hazards.
      Continue to advertise the Rehabilitation Program on the City's website, and disseminate
      program brochures at City Hall.
            Program Objective: Rehabilitation assistance to 3 very low income households
            annually, subject to funding availability.
            Responsibility: Economic Development
            Timeframe: Annual through the CDBG funding allocation process
            Resources: Grants (Community Development Block Grant)
      H-8d. Relocation Assistance. Require applicants to provide certain limited relocation
      assistance, per Section 14.16.279, for low-income tenants displaced by new development
      or property improvements such as unit renovation or rehabilitation that results in the
      vacancy of the unit, including referring tenants to Marin Housing and providing cash
      compensation. Require notice of displacement to be distributed at least 60 days before the
      property is to be vacated.
            Responsibility: Community Development, Economic Development
            Timeframe: Ongoing (as part of project review)
            Resources: Staff Time
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                                SAN RAFAEL 2020 / HOUSING 51

   Variety of Housing Choices for a Diverse Population
   Many members of the community cannot occupy or afford traditional ownership and
   rental units. Alternative housing options are needed to maintain diversity and to
   provide safe shelter to all members of the community.
   H-9. Special Needs.
   Encourage a mix of housing unit types throughout San Rafael, including very low- and
   low-income housing for families with children, single parents, students, young
   families, lower income seniors, homeless and the disabled. Accessible units shall be
   provided in multi-family developments, consistent with State and Federal law.
       H-9a. Adaptive Housing. Ensure compliance with State and Federal requirements for
       accessible units. Conduct regular "coffee and codes" meetings with design and
       construction industry members to discuss requirements under the Americans with
       Disabilities (ADA) Act. An average of 2-3 meetings are held per year, consisting of
       simplified explanations of technical information and a range of topics aimed at clarifying
       development standards.
            Responsibility: Community Development
            Timeframe: Ongoing
            Resources: Fees
       H-9b. Reasonable Accommodation. Encourage and facilitate the provision of housing
       for persons with disabilities. Implement zoning regulations to provide individuals with
       disabilities reasonable accommodation in rules, policies, practices, and procedures that
       may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing.
            Responsibility: Community Development
            Timeframe: Ongoing
            Resources: Staff Time
       H-9c. Housing Opportunities for Persons Living with Disabilities: The Golden Gate
       Regional Center (GGRC) provides services and support for adults and children with
       developmental disabilities, including over 400 San Rafael residents. The GGRC reports
       that 60 percent of their adult clients with developmental disabilities live with their parents,
       and as these parents age and become frailer their adult disabled children will require
       alternative housing options. The City will coordinate with the GGRC to implement an
       outreach program informing San Rafael families of housing and services available for
       persons with developmental disabilities, including making information available on the
       City’s website.
            Program Objective: Disseminate information on resources available to persons with
            developmental disabilities.
            Responsibility: Community Development
            Timeframe: 2015
            Resources: Staff Time
       H-9d. Housing for Extremely Low Income Households. To meet the needs of extremely
       low income households, prioritize some housing fees for the development of housing
       affordable to extremely low-income households, to encourage the development of
       programs to assist age-in-place seniors, to increase the amount of senior housing, to
       increase the production of second units, and to facilitate the construction of multifamily
       and supportive housing.
            Responsibility: Community Development
            Timeframe: Annually
            Resources: City in-lieu funds and Successor Agency affordable housing funds
52   SAN RAFAEL 2020 / HOUSING                                                   Reprinted 04/28/2017

 H-10. Innovative Housing Approaches.
 Provide opportunities and facilitate innovative housing
 approaches in financing, design and construction of units to
 increase the availability of low- and moderate-income housing
 and especially for housing that meets the city’s housing needs.
 Examples include:
 a. Limited Equity Cooperatives. Encourage limited equity
 residential cooperatives and other non-profit enterprises such
 as self-help projects designed to provide affordable housing.
 b. Manufactured Housing (Modular, Mobile homes).
 Allow, consistent with state law, creative, quality
 manufactured housing as a means for providing affordable
 housing.
 c. Single Room Occupancy (SRO) Units. Encourage construction of new SRO units
 and protection of the existing SRO unit supply.
 d. Live/Work Housing. This type of housing is intended for a resident and their
 business, typically on different floors of the same unit, and well suited to San Rafael's
 downtown.
      H-10a. Co-Housing, Cooperatives, and Similar Collaborative Housing Development.
      Provide zoning flexibility through Planned Development District zoning to allow housing
      development that is based on co-housing and similar approaches that feature housing units
      clustered around a common area and shared kitchen, dining, laundry, and day care facilities.
            Responsibility: Community Development
            Timeframe: Ongoing (as part of project review)
            Resources: Fees
      See also LU-2a (Development Review).
      H-10b. Manufactured Housing. Continue to allow quality manufactured housing in all
      zoning districts which allow single-family residences.
            Responsibility: Community Development
            Timeframe: Ongoing (as part of project review)
            Resources: Staff Time
      H-10c. Single Room Occupancy (SRO) Units. Actively promote existing incentives for
      SRO apartments, such as no density regulations and lower parking standards, in
      multifamily and mixed use districts in recognition of their small size and low impacts.
      Where needed, encourage linkages to social services.
            Responsibility: Community Development
            Timeframe: Ongoing
            Resources: Fees, Staff Time
      H-10d. Zoning for Live/Work Opportunities. Continue to accommodate live/work
      quarters in commercial districts, and allow for flexibility in parking requirements as
      supported by a parking study.
            Responsibility: Community Development
            Timeframe: Ongoing
            Resources: Staff Time
 H-11. House Sharing.
 Support organizations that facilitate house sharing, linking seniors and small
 households with potential boarders to more efficiently use existing housing stock.
      H-11a. Homesharing and Tenant Matching Opportunities. Continue to support, and
      consider increased participation in, the Shared Housing Project in collaboration with
      community partners.
            Responsibility: Community Development, Nonprofit Housing Providers, Social
            Service Organizations
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                                SAN RAFAEL 2020 / HOUSING 53

              Timeframe: Ongoing
              Resources: Staff Time
         H-11b. Junior Second Units. Monitor the “Junior Second Unit” provisions adopted in
         2016 to support the creation of "Junior Second Units" of less than 500 square feet in size.
         Such units would be created through the repurposing of existing space within a single-
         family dwelling to create a semi-private living situation for a renter or caregiver in
         conjunction with the owner-occupied unit. Junior second units would be required to have
         exterior access, and meet the U.S. Census definition of a housing unit 1 to qualify for credit
         towards the City's Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA).
              Program Objective: Monitor standards adopted to facilitate junior second units. Seek
              to issue permits for at least 20 units during planning period.
              Responsibility: Community Development
              Timeframe: Ongoing, with initial two-year review by 2018
              Resources: Staff Time
              See also H-16a (Second Units)
   H-12. Residential Care Facilities and Emergency Shelters.
   Encourage a dispersion of residential care facilities and emergency shelters, and avoid
   an over concentration of residential care facilities and shelters for the homeless in any
   given area consistent with state and federal laws. Allow emergency shelter beds in
   appropriate zoning districts in order to accommodate San Rafael’s unsheltered
   homeless population. Recognize transitional and supportive housing units as
   residential units, and eliminate governmental constraints to the operation or
   construction of transitional, supportive, and emergency housing consistent with State
   law. Support the implementation of the San Rafael Homeless Action Plan.
         H-12a. Countywide Efforts to Address Homeless Needs. Work with other jurisdictions
         and agencies in Marin to provide emergency, transitional, and supportive housing and
         assistance throughout Marin, and continue City staff's role as the homeless coordinator for
         the County. Continue to support and allocate funds, as appropriate, for programs providing
         emergency, supportive, and/or transitional shelter and counseling services for families and
         individuals who are homeless or at-risk of homelessness. Implement strategies identified
         in the San Rafael 2013 Homeless Action Plan to prevent homelessness to those who are
         precariously housed and provide a path to stable housing for those who are homeless.
              Responsibility: Community Development, Economic Development, Nonprofit
              Housing Providers, Marin Housing, County of Marin (funding)
              Timeframe: Ongoing (as part of project review)
              Resources: Staff Time
         H-12b. Good Neighborhood Relations Involving Emergency Shelters and Residential
         Care Facilities. Where determined necessary during review of an application, encourage
         positive relations between neighborhoods and providers of emergency shelters and
         residential care facilities by requiring shelter outreach communication programs with the
         neighborhoods.
              Responsibility: Community Development
              Timeframe: As part of project review
              Resources: Staff Time
         H-12c. Residential Care Facilities. Regularly update zoning regulations that govern
         residential care facilities to conform to Federal and State laws and to encourage their
         location in areas that do not result in overconcentration of care facilities. Explore the
         feasibility of requiring affordable units in assisted living facilities, for example, reduced
         rate rentals with access to market-rate services.
   1 The 2010 U.S. Census defines a "housing unit" as a house, an apartment, a mobile home, a group of homes, or
    a single room that is occupied (of if vacant, is intended for occupancy) as separate living quarters. Separate
    living quarters are those in which the occupants live and eat separately from any other persons in the building
    and which have direct access from the outside of the building or through a common hall.
54     SAN RAFAEL 2020 / HOUSING                                                              Reprinted 04/28/2017

            Responsibility: Community Development
            Timeframe: Mid Term (2018)
            Resources: Staff Time
      H-12d. Emergency Shelters, Transitional and Supportive Housing. Implement Zoning
      Code Section 14.16.115 to allow emergency shelters as a permitted use in the General
      Commercial (GC) and Light Industrial (LI/O) zoning districts south of Bellam and east of
      Highway 580 and with appropriate performance standards as allowed by State law. Continue
      to allow emergency shelters with a use permit in areas zoned for office, commercial, light
      industrial and public/quasi-public use. Implement the City's Zoning Code (Zoning Code
      Chapter 14.03 - Definitions), consistent with State and Federal law, to recognize transitional
      and supportive housing as residential uses, subject to the same restrictions and standards of
      similar residential dwellings in the same zone.
      Based on input from State HCD, amend Zoning Code Section 14.16.115 to clarify
      requirements for staff and services to be provided to assist residents in obtaining permanent
      shelter and income are permissive, rather than mandatory. In addition, clarify that while a
      written Management Plan is required, it is not subject to discretionary approval.
            Responsibility: Community Development
            Timeframe: Amend the Zoning Code in 2015
            Resources: Staff Time
      See also H-5a (Fair Housing Program)
 H-13. Senior Housing.
 Encourage housing that meets the needs of San Rafael’s older population, particularly
 affordable units and affordable care facilities that foster aging within the community.
 Support development that provides housing options so that seniors can find suitable
 housing to rent or purchase.
      H-13a. Assisted Living. Evaluate current zoning regulations for new assisted living
      housing, and assess options to regulate as a residential, rather than a commercial use.
      Evaluate establishing inclusionary housing requirements for assisted living.
      Program Objective: Undertake study of zoning for assisted living, and amend zoning
            ordinance accordingly.
            Responsibility: Community Development, Economic Development
            Timeframe: Mid Term (2018)
            Resources: Staff Time
      H-13b. “Age-in-Place” Assistance. Continue to provide assistance to older residents who
      want to remain independent and in their homes for as long as possible, such as the Police
      Department’s “Are You OK?” program, the Fire Department’s “Safety Check” program,
      Code Enforcement’s continuing cooperation with the Marin County Social Services, and
      Community Services social activities offered through the Community Centers.
            Responsibility: Community Development, Police, Fire, Community Services
            Timeframe: Annually
            Resources: Staff Time, Grants, Partnerships with Community Partners
            See also H-11b (Junior Second Units) and H-16a (New Second Units)
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                                SAN RAFAEL 2020 / HOUSING 55

   Use Land Efficiently to Provide Affordable Housing
   San Rafael is a city with very little remaining vacant land, much of it in environmentally
   sensitive areas. The City of San Rafael has identified sites and areas as having the
   potential to provide housing to help meet local demand, as well as meet State law and
   regional need requirements. (See Housing Background, Appendix B.) This potential is
   based on the properties’ availability for development, land use designations, size and
   other physical characteristics, and relative lack of environmental constraints.
   Each site may have unique issues pertaining to its neighborhood context that will need
   to be addressed during review of any development proposal. These issues are
   identified in site-specific policies in the Neighborhoods Element.
   The city’s zoning capacity for housing is greater than the ‘total remaining need’ listed
   below. These lands zoned for housing are available for development and sufficient to
   accommodate San Rafael’s housing needs within the State’s planning timeframe.
   H-14. Adequate Sites.
   Maintain an adequate supply of land designated for all types of residential
   development to meet the housing needs of all economic segments in San Rafael.
   Within this total, the City shall also maintain a sufficient supply of land for
   multifamily housing to meet the quantified housing need of very low, low, and
   moderate income housing units. Encourage development of residential uses in
   commercial areas where the vitality of the area will not be adversely affected and the
   site or area will be enhanced by linking workers to jobs, and by providing shared use
   of the site or area.
        H-14a. Residential and Mixed Use Sites Inventory. Encourage residential development
        in areas appropriate and feasible for new housing. These areas are identified in Appendix
        B, Housing Element Background, Summary of Potential Housing Sites (available for view
        on the City’s website). Explore effective ways to share housing site information and
        developer and financing information to encourage development of underutilized
        institutional land. The City has employed different strategies to find the most effective
        way to deliver information about development. It is an ongoing and evolving process that
        has included practices such as preparing fact sheets for sites with multiple inquiries.
             Program Objective: Maintain a current inventory of suitable sites, and provide this
             information to interested developers along with information on incentives.
             Responsibility: Community Development, Economic Development
             Timeframe: Ongoing
             Resources: Staff Time
        H-14b. Efficient Use of Multifamily Housing Sites. Do not approve residential-only
        development below minimum designated General Plan densities unless physical or
        environmental constraints preclude its achievement. Residential-only projects should be
        approved at the mid- to high-range of the zoning density. If development on a site is to
        occur over time the applicant must show that the proposed development does not prevent
        subsequent development of the site to its minimum density and provide guarantees that the
        remaining phases will, in fact, be developed.
             Responsibility: Community Development
             Timeframe: Ongoing (as part of project review)
             Resources: Fees
56    SAN RAFAEL 2020 / HOUSING                                                  Reprinted 04/28/2017

      H-14c. Continue to Implement Zoning Provisions to Encourage Mixed Use. San
      Rafael has been effective in integrating both vertical mixed use and higher density
      residential development within its Downtown. As a means of further encouraging mixed
      use in commercial areas outside the Downtown, General Plan 2020 now allows site
      development capacities to encompass the aggregate of the maximum residential density
      PLUS the maximum FAR for the site, thereby increasing development potential on mixed
      use sites. The City will continue to review development standards to facilitate mixed use,
      including:
      a.    Encourage adaptive reuse of vacant buildings and underutilized sites with residential
            and mixed use development on retail, office, and appropriate industrial sites
      b.    Explore zoning regulation incentives to encourage lot consolidation where needed to
            facilitate housing.
      c.    Review zoning requirements for retail in a mixed use building or site, and amend the
            zoning ordinance as necessary to allow for residential-only buildings in appropriate
            mixed-use zoning districts.
            Responsibility: Community Development
            Timeframe: Mid Term (2017)
            Resources: Staff Time
      See also H-15a (Downtown Station Area Plan).
      H-14d. Air Rights Development. Take an active role in evaluating the feasibility of air
      rights development and consider possible zoning incentives for such development.
      Encourage developers of affordable housing to utilize air rights, such as above public
      parking lots or commercial uses Downtown.
            Responsibility: Community Development, Public Works, Parking Services
            Timeframe: Long Term (2020)
            Resources: Fees
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                               SAN RAFAEL 2020 / HOUSING 57
   H-15. Infill Near Transit.
   Encourage higher densities on sites adjacent to a transit hub, focusing on the Priority
   Development Area surrounding the San Rafael Transportation Center and future
   Downtown SMART station.
      H-15a. Downtown Station Area Plan. The
      coming of SMART rail service to Downtown
      San Rafael in 2016 is an opportunity to build
      on the work that the City has undertaken to
      revitalize the Downtown and to create a
      variety of transportation and housing options,
      economic stability, and vibrant community
      gathering places in the heart of San Rafael.
      General Plan 2020, adopted in 2004, allowed
      for higher residential densities and reduced
      residential parking standards to encourage
      housing development within the heart of
      Downtown that would support local
      businesses and allow people to live close to their place of work. The Downtown Station
      Area Plan, accepted by City Council in June 2012, establishes a series of implementing
      actions, the following of which specifically serve to facilitate higher density residential
      and mixed use infill in the area.
            Conduct parking study in Station Area to evaluate options to addressing small
                parcels and on-site parking constraints to development (study underway,
                complete in 2015).
            Evaluate relocation of existing Bettini Transit C enter, and potential reuse as
                mixed use site (study underway, complete in 2015).
            Evaluate additional height and FAR on certain blocks adjacent to US 101 (as
                defined in the Downtown Station Area Plan), facilitating redevelopment of the
                Transit Center into a vibrant, mixed use environment (long term).
            Evaluate allowing additional height and FAR increases in certain areas to match
                the adjacent height and FAR limits in exchange for community amenities. The
                blocks recommended for study are: A. West side of US 101 -Tamalpais Avenue
                to Hetherton Street between Mission Avenue and Second Streets, including the
                transit center; and B. On the east side of US 101 - The west side of Irwin Street
                between Fourth and Second Streets and the south side of Fourth Street between
                Irwin Street and Grand Avenue, and consider adopting a form based code instead
                of the current density and FAR requirement (long term).
            Review parking requirements and develop additional municipal parking resources
                to reduce onsite parking burden (long term).
      Program Objective: Complete Station Area parking study and Transit Center relocation
      analysis in 2015. Following the commencement of operation of SMART (2016), study
      other Station Area Plan recommendations to increase housing opportunities near transit,
      and implement through Zoning Code changes where appropriate. Build upon lessons
      learned from the Station Area parking analysis to re-evaluate parking standards on a
      citywide basis.
           Responsibility: Community Development and Parking Services
           Timeframe: One year after the start of SMART services in the city.
           Resources: Staff Time, PDA Funding
58   SAN RAFAEL 2020 / HOUSING                                                 Reprinted 04/28/2017

      H-15b. Civic Center Station Area Plan. The City completed the Civic Center Station
      Area Plan, which was accepted by the City Council in August 2012 and amended in 2013.
      Development around the station area will be guided by considerations for station access
      and transportation connections by various modes, as well as promotion of land uses that
      embrace the opportunities of a transit-oriented site and are compatible with the character
      of the surrounding area.
      Following the commencement of the operation of SMART (2016), study Station Area Plan
      recommendations to facilitate housing opportunities near transit, and implement through
      General Plan amendments and Zoning Code changes where appropriate.
            Responsibility: Community Development
            Timeframe: One year after the start of SMART operation in the city.
            Resources: Staff Time, PDA Funding
 H-16. Second Units.
 Second dwelling units offer several benefits. First, they typically rent for less than
 apartments of comparable size, and can offer affordable rental options for seniors and
 single persons. Second, the primary homeowner receives supplementary income by
 renting out the second unit, which can help many modest income and elderly
 homeowners afford to remain in their homes.
 San Rafael has continuously promoted second units as an affordable housing option.
 Efforts have included providing a comprehensive handout explaining the second-unit
 process, posting information about second units on the City’s website, promoting the
 second unit program through the San Rafael Focus City newsletter, offering staff
 consultation for adding or legalizing a second unit, holding workshops to educate
 homeowners about the process to add a second unit, and implementing an amnesty
 program for legalization of illegal second units. In addition, San Rafael staff worked
 with local utility agencies to reduce fees for water and sewer service for second units,
 and in 2012 the City adopted a Citywide Traffic mitigation fee amendment to waive
 the traffic mitigation fee for second units.
      H-16a. New Second Units. Continue to encourage the provision of second units to
      provide housing options for seniors, caregivers, and other lower and extremely low income
      households.
            Program Objectives: Based on past trends, support the production of an average of
            five second units annually, with the goal of achieving 40 units over the planning
            period.
            Responsibility: Community Development
            Timeframe: Ongoing
            Resources: Fees
      See also H-11b (Junior Second Units).
 H-17. Regulatory Processes and Incentives for Affordable
 Housing.
 San Rafael implements a variety of regulatory processes to address potential
 governmental constraints and incentivize the provision of affordable housing,
 including density bonuses, height bonuses, fee waivers, and reduced parking
 requirements. San Rafael's primary tool to support the development of affordable
 housing is through its Affordable Housing Ordinance which both produces affordable
 units and generates affordable housing in-lieu fees. San Rafael was one of the first
 cities in the State to adopt such an affordable housing requirement in the 1980’s. This
 policy has resulted in the construction of numerous affordable units within market rate
 developments and provided additional funding for 100% affordable developments.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                                SAN RAFAEL 2020 / HOUSING 59

       H-17a. State Density Bonus Law. Under Government Code section 65915-65918, for
       housing projects of at least five units cities must grant density bonuses ranging from 5% to
       35% (depending on the affordability provided by the housing project) when requested by
       the project sponsor, and provide up to three incentives or concessions unless specific
       findings can be made. San Rafael has integrated State density bonus requirements within
       its Affordable Housing Ordinance (Zoning Code Section 14.16.030), depicting the
       connection with the City's Inclusionary Housing requirements.
            Responsibility: Community Development
            Timeframe: Ongoing (as part of project review)
            Resources: Fees
       H-17b. Height Bonuses. Continue to offer height bonuses for projects that include
       affordable housing units as provided in Exhibit 10 of the Land Use Element. Provide early
       design review to assist with potential design issues. Height increases may be granted with
       a use permit. Evaluate utilizing height bonuses as a tool to incentivize lot consolidation.
            Responsibility: Community Development
            Timeframe: Evaluate lot consolidation incentives by 2016.
            Resources: Staff Time
       H-17c. Waiver or Reduction of Fees. Continue to offer fee waivers and reductions for
       applications including affordable units, consistent with Resolution 11025. Facilitate the
       production of second units through elimination of the traffic mitigation fee (adopted in
       2012), and coordination with local jurisdictions to lobby Las Gallinas Valley Sanitary
       District to reduce sewer connection fees for second units and affordable housing.
            Responsibility: Community Development
            Timeframe: Ongoing (as part of project review)
            Resources: General Fund
       H-17d. Efficient Project Review. San Rafael has fully implemented the provisions of the
       Permit Streamlining Act (AB 884), and provides concurrent processing through over-the-
       counter one-stop permitting. Planning staff continue to inform developers of density
       bonus incentives for affordable housing, and consistent with State requirements, any
       modified development standards provided as part of a density bonus incentives package
       are exempt from the variance process. The City utilizes allowable California
       Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) exemptions for qualified urban infill and other
       residential projects where site characteristics and an absence of potentially significant
       environmental impacts allow.
            Responsibility: Community Development, Economic Development
            Timeframe: Ongoing (as part of project review)
            Resources: Fees
   H-18. Inclusionary Housing Requirements.
   The City of San Rafael first adopted inclusionary requirements in the 1980’s. The City
   requires residential projects to provide a percentage of affordable units on site and/or
   pay in-lieu of fees for the development of affordable units in another location. The
   City’s program requires the units remain affordable for the longest feasible time, or at
   least 55 years. The City's primary intent is the construction of units on-site. The units
   should be of a similar mix and type to that of the development as a whole, and
   dispersed throughout the development. If this is not practical or not permitted by law,
   the City will consider other alternatives of equal value, such as in-lieu fees,
   construction of units off-site, donation of a portion of the property for future non-
   profit housing development, etc. Allow for flexibility in providing affordable units as
   long as the intent of this policy is met. Specific requirements are:
60    SAN RAFAEL 2020 / HOUSING                                                 Reprinted 04/28/2017

                 Exhibit 15-1: Inclusionary Requirement by Project and Size.
                          Project Size                                  % Af f o r d a b l e U n i t s R e q ' d
                2 – 10 Housing Units*                                                    10%
                11 – 20 Housing Units                                                    15%
                21+ Housing Units                                                        20%
                * E xe m p t i o n s f o r s m a l l e r p r o j e c t s u n i t s m a y b e p r o v i d e d f o r i n
                  the Zoning Ordinance.
 Rental Units. Provide, consistent with State law, a minimum of 50% of the BMR
 units affordable to very low-income households at below 50% of median income, with
 the remainder affordable to low income households at 50-80% of median income.
 Sale/Ownership Units. Provide a minimum of 50% of the BMR units affordable to
 low income households at 50-80% of median income, with the remainder affordable to
 moderate income households at 80-120% of median income.
 Calculation of In-lieu Fee. Continue to provide a calculation for in-lieu fees for affordable
 housing. For fractions of affordable units, if 0.5 or more of a unit, the developer shall construct
 the next higher whole number of affordable units, and if less than 0.5 of a unit, the developer
 shall provide an in-lieu fee.
      H-18a. Inclusionary Housing Nexus Study. Conduct an Inclusionary Housing Nexus
      Study and engage with the local development community and affordable housing
      advocates to evaluate the Inclusionary Housing Ordinance and in-lieu fee requirements for
      effectiveness in providing affordable housing under current market conditions. Amend the
      Inclusionary Housing Ordinance as appropriate, to enhance the Program's effectiveness
      and consistent with recent court decisions.
            Program Objective: Conduct affordable housing nexus study and amend the
            Inclusionary Housing Program as warranted.
            Responsibility: Community Development, Economic Development
            Timeframe: 2016
            Resources: Fees, Staff Time
 H-19. Energy Conservation and Sustainability
 The City of San Rafael promotes resource conservation and energy efficiency through
 the Sustainability Element of the General Plan. In implementing the policies and
 programs of the Sustainability Element, the City will also achieve its objectives for
 greater sustainability in residential projects.
      H-19a. Sustainability Policies and Programs. Refer to the Sustainability Element in the
      San Rafael General Plan to guide housing development and renovation. SU-4 Renewable
      Energy lays out programs to increase the supply of renewable energy. SU-5 Reduce Use of
      Non-Renewable Resources promotes efficiency in resource consumption.
            Responsibility: Community Development
            Timeframe: Ongoing
            Resources: Staff time
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                                                              SAN RAFAEL 2020 / HOUSING 61

   Summary of Quantified Objectives
   The following table summarizes the City’s quantified objectives for the 2015-2023
   Housing Element planning period. The objectives include the City’s new construction
   objectives to meet its Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA); rehabilitation
   objectives to reflect Marin Housing’s Rehabilitation Loan Program; and conservation
   objectives to reflect preservation of existing rent-restricted affordable housing at risk of
   conversion.
               Exhibit 15-2: Quantified Objectives
                                         New
                                    Construction           Rehabilitation               Conservation
        Income Level                Objectives**            Objectives***              Objectives****
     E xt r e m e l y L o w *
                                         120                         6
     (0% - 30% AMI)
                                                                                               291
     Very Low
                                         120                        18
     (31% - 50% AMI )
     Low
                                         148
     (51% - 80% AMI )
     Moderate
                                         181
     (81% - 120% AMI)
     Above Moderate
                                         438
     (>120% AMI )
               Totals                   1,007                       24                         291
   * Of San Rafael’s RHNA allocation for 240 very low income units, half is allocated to extremely low income
   households, and half to very low income households.
   ** New Construction objectives reflect RHNA for the 2015-2023 planning period.
   *** Rehabilitation objectives are based on a goal to assist three households annually through Marin
   Housing’s Rehabilitation Loan Program.
   **** Conservation objectives reflect preservation of 291 at-risk rent-restricted units in eight publicly-assisted
   projects owned by non-profits.
62     SAN RAFAEL 2020 / HOUSING                                                             Reprinted 04/28/2017

Neighborhoods                                                                                            Our Use of Land
     Introduction
San Rafael is a city of neighborhoods. Each neighborhood is one of the basic social
units and physical building blocks of San Rafael. Surrounded by great natural beauty,
San Rafael’s neighborhoods form a quilt of homes, shops, churches, schools and
parks that together create the distinct character of the overall city. With respect for the
legacy of each neighborhood, the policies and programs below are intended to
encourage safe neighborhoods, excellent schools, diverse and well-maintained
housing, friendly streets, investment in desired changes, convenient access to goods
and services, and protection of natural resources.
The City of San Rafael has been planning for and improving neighborhoods since the
1970s. The 1974 General Plan called for a neighborhood planning process in
response to changes in some of San Rafael’s neighborhoods during the 1960s. Plans
have been prepared for nine San Rafael neighborhoods.
This element merges the best parts of the existing neighborhood plans in order to
create general policies applicable to all San Rafael neighborhoods while at the same
time creating specific policies for each neighborhood. Existing neighborhood plans
include the following:
•    Gerstle Park (1979)
•    Neighborhood 13/14 [SunValley/Fairhills] (1980)
•    Peacock Gap (1980)                                                      Ne ig h b o r h o o d               P l an s
•    Northgate Activity Center (1982)
                                                                          A n e ig h bor h oo d p l a n i s a pr oc es s
•    East San Rafael (1991)
                                                                          wh er e th er e is a p l ac e a t th e t ab l e
•    Our Vision of Downtown (1993)
                                                                          f or e v er yo n e wi th a n i nt er es t i n t he
•    Montecito/Happy Valley (1996)                                        ar e a , i nc lu d in g r es i d e nts ( r en ter s
•    Canal Voice (1996)                                                   an d o wn er s ) , m er c h a n ts , a n d
•    Vision North San Rafael (1997)                                       pe o p le f r om th e n e i gh bor h o od
                                                                          i ns t it u ti o ns . T o g et her , p ar t ic i p an ts
Sources for Neighborhood Element policies include                         de v e l op s h ar e d v a lu es , dec i d e
neighborhood policies in General Plan 2000, policy                        wh at t o k ee p an d wha t t o c h an g e,
recommendations from General Plan Task Group work in                      an d d e v el o p a p l an t o s ha p e th e
2001, policies from individual neighborhood plans, policy                 ec o n om ic , s oc i al an d ph ys ic a l
statements and ideas from Vision North San Rafael and                     en v ir o nm ent in wh ic h t he y l i v e .
Canal Voice, and policy suggestions from neighborhood
organizations and the Chamber of Commerce.
Many of the issues in San Rafael’s neighborhoods are addressed in this element, yet
many concerns are citywide. For example, traffic and parking, design, and housing are
topics of interest throughout the city. To reduce the number of duplicated policies,
citywide concerns are addressed through policies in the appropriate element, such as
Circulation, Community Design, and Housing. However, where there is an issue
specific to a neighborhood and a current policy speaks to that issue, the
neighborhood-specific policy is included in this element.
The City has, as long-standing principle, believed that future residential development
should be harmoniously integrated within existing neighborhoods, and that existing
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                  SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                              63

      housing should be protected and conserved. San Rafael’s neighborhood policies are
      not intended to maintain the status quo, but to foster those actions that will make the
      neighborhoods more attractive and livable places. By choosing change for the better,
      the City can take advantage of opportunities to improve neighborhoods. In most
      neighborhoods, only a small amount of change is anticipated, in others residents
      expect some change to make the neighborhood a better place than it’s been, and in
      some areas, such as along the Canal and waterfront, residents expect significant
      improvements.
      In San Rafael, no neighborhood is an island. For example, the shops for one area
      may be in the neighborhood next door, the playing fields may be on the other side of
      the hill, or the class may be across town. In visiting a friend in another area, eating at
      a restaurant in a nearby neighborhood, or going to church in another part of town,
      each resident in San Rafael shares in the richness of city life. Simply, the livability of
      San Rafael as a whole depends on the vitality of each neighborhood.
      Policies applicable to neighborhoods throughout the city appear first in this element.
      Following the citywide policies are policies for Downtown, a neighborhood that
      belongs to all who live in San Rafael, and policies for neighborhoods in the rest of the
      City.
      Neighborhoods are included in alphabetical order. Each has a brief description about
      the neighborhood’s character and vision of the future. Many have policies addressing
      specific topics of interest to the neighborhood.
      Neighborhood policies are organized around four main topics. Because many of San
      Rafael’s neighborhoods are quite small, not all four topics are discussed for each
      neighborhood. The topic areas are:
             Neighborhood Homes includes policies for issues related to where families
             and friends gather, owners and renters live their lives, and residents display
             their identities.
             Neighborhood Circulation includes policies for streets, sidewalks, and
             pedestrian safety and activity.
             Neighborhood Economy and Culture includes policies for educational,
             religious and cultural places where community life is enhanced. Policies for
             commercial uses are also in this section.
             Neighborhood Design includes policies on public places and open spaces,
             parks, gardens and gathering places.
      Where neighborhood policies are not listed, citywide policies apply. Additional policies
      on housing, local businesses, environmental protection, traffic, and design found in
      other elements should be consulted as well.
64 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                                 Reprinted 04/28/2017


      GOAL 5: DISTINCTIVE
      NEIGHBORHOODS
      It is the goal for San Rafael to have neighborhoods of integrity and distinctive
      hometown character. San Rafael is a city of neighborhoods that support each other
      and provide a network of parks, gathering places and services. The unique identity,
      distinctive design and upkeep of each neighborhood will continue to be a source of
      pride.
      Each of San Rafael’s neighborhoods is unique in its character, design and physical
      amenities, and each contributes to the diversity and vitality of the city. This
      uniqueness should be celebrated and preserved, but opportunities should also be
      taken to enhance these qualities when possible. Only through active partnerships
      among residents, property owners and the City can effective neighborhood planning
      occur and common issues be addressed.
      NH-1. Neighborhood Planning.
      Engage neighborhood associations in preparing neighborhood plans for their area.
           NH-1a. Neighborhood Planning Process. Develop a neighborhood planning process
           where there is significant desire or need for a neighborhood plan. As of July, 2003,
           neighborhoods expressing a desire for a neighborhood plan are Bret Harte, Gerstle Park,
           Lincoln/San Rafael Hill, the Santa Margarita area in the Terra Linda neighborhood and the
           Canal.
               Responsibility: Community Development
               Timing: Short Term (priorities to be determined by Council)
               Resources: Staff Time, Partnerships
           Neighborhood Homes
      NH-2. New Development in Residential Neighborhoods.
      Preserve, enhance and maintain the residential character of neighborhoods to make
      them desirable places to live. New development should:
      • Enhance neighborhood image and quality of life,
      • Incorporate sensitive transitions in height and setbacks from adjacent properties to
           respect adjacent development character and privacy,
      • Preserve historic and architecturally significant structures,
      • Respect existing landforms and natural features,
      • Maintain or enhance infrastructure service levels, and
      • Provide adequate parking.
           NH-2a. Zoning Ordinance. Continue to implement and update the Zoning Ordinance as
           needed to include the criteria listed above.
               Responsibility: Community Development
               Timeframe: Short Term
               Resources: Fees, Staff Time
           See CD-3b (Development Standards), CA-13b (Preservation Ordinance), LU-14a (Land
           Use-Compatibility), I-1a (Capital Improvement Programming), H-2a (Design Concerns of
           Single-Family Homes), NH-8a (Restore Parking Spaces), NH-8b (Additional On-Site
           Parking), NH-8c (Permit Parking) and NH-8d (Zoning Ordinance Review).
66 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                                    Reprinted 04/28/2017

NH-3. Housing Mix.
Encourage a housing mix with a broad range of affordability, character, and sizes. In
areas with a predominance of rental housing, encourage ownership units to increase
the variety of housing types.
     See H-7e (Retention of Mobilehomes and Preservation of Existing Mobilehome Sites), H-
     10d (Zoning for Live/Work Opportunities), H-10c (Single Room Occupancy (SRO)
     Units), H-18a (Inclusionary Housing Nexus Study), H-14c (Continue to Implement
     Zoning Provisions to Encourage Mixed Use), H-16a (New Second Units) and LU-24a
     (Zoning Ordinance Amendments).
NH-4. Improve Property Maintenance.
Require owners to maintain their properties in good condition and appearance and to
eliminate unsafe and unhealthy conditions.
     NH-4a. Code Enforcement. Maintain an effective Code Enforcement program that
     engages with neighborhoods and business groups and works in partnerships with
     appropriate City staff to address nuisances and zoning code violations.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Time Frame: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time, Fines
     NH-4b. Design Review Conditions of Approval. Through development review, require
     that design review approval include language whereby owners maintain landscaping in
     good condition.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Time Frame: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees
     NH-4c. Property Maintenance Standards Ordinance. Consider adoption of a property
     maintenance standards ordinance to maintain minimum standards of the appearance of
     property, and to sustain property values in a neighborhood.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Time Frame: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time
     Neighborhood Circulation
NH-5. Safe Streets.
Provide neighborhood streets that are safe, pleasant, and attractive to walk, cycle and
drive along.
     See C-21a (Traffic Calming Program), I-8a (Street Tree Program) and I-8b (Street Trees
     for New Development).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                     SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS 67
      NH-6. Bicycle- and Pedestrian-Friendly Streets.
      Create bicycle-and pedestrian-friendly residential streets with large street trees,
      sidewalks and other appropriate amenities.
           NH-6a. Narrow Streets. In new streets, consider modifying street standards to allow
           narrower streets that promote bicycle and pedestrian activity and safety, while still
           providing for emergency and service access. Public streets must be designed to Caltrans
           and American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials standards.
                Responsibility: Public Works, Community Development, Fire, Police
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time, Fees.
           See also C-26a (Implementation), C-27a (Implementation), I-6c (Sidewalk Repair) and C-
           4b (Street Design Criteria to Support Alternative Modes).
      NH-7. Neighborhood Identity and Landmarks.
      Enhance neighborhood identity and sense of community by retaining and creating
      gateways, landmarks, and landscape improvements that help to define neighborhood
      entries and focal points.
           See CD-4a (Historic Resources Information), CD-4b (Adaptive Reuse), CD-5a (Views)
           and CD-8a (Gateways).
      NH-8. Parking.
      Maintain well-landscaped parking lots and front setbacks in commercial and
      institutional properties that are located in or adjacent to residential neighborhoods.
      Promote ways to encourage parking opportunities that are consistent with the design
      guidelines.
           NH-8a. Restore Parking Spaces. Continue Code Enforcement efforts to work with
           apartment owners to restore parking spaces being used for storage.
                Responsibility: Community Development
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time, Fines, Fees
           NH-8b. Additional On-Site Parking. In neighborhoods with excessive on-street parking,
           work with property owners to add on-site parking where feasible as part of review of
           expansion or remodels.
                Responsibility: Community Development
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Fees
           NH-8c. Permit Parking. In neighborhoods with excessive on-street parking, evaluate the
           benefits and drawbacks of a Permit Parking Program (i.e. to limit cars per unit and/or to
           limit nonresidential cars) where supported by a significant majority of neighborhood
           residents.
                Responsibility: Police, Public Works
                Timing: Long Term
                Resources: Staff Time
           NH-8d. Zoning Ordinance Review. Evaluate and amend as necessary zoning regulations
           to ensure adequate on-site parking, and sufficient screening of parking areas adjacent to
           residences.
                Responsibility: Community Development
                Timing: Short Term
                Resources: Staff Time
68 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                                    Reprinted 04/28/2017
NH-9. Nuisance Vehicles.
Minimize the number of abandoned vehicles, excessive signs on vehicles and vehicles
being used as homes, on streets and private property.
     NH-9a. Abandoned Vehicle Program. Continue the abandoned vehicle abatement
     program.
           Responsibility: Police
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     NH-9b. Vehicles as Residences. Continue to implement, and strengthen as necessary,
     City ordinances that prohibit overnight residential use of vehicles within the public right-
     of-way on public property, and on private property.
           Responsibility: Police
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Resources: Staff Time
     Neighborhood Economy and Culture
NH-10. Neighborhood Centers.
Support the vitality of attractive, viable neighborhood centers by using incentives to
encourage desired mixed-use, local-services and to create areas for the community to
gather. Assist these centers to adapt to changing community needs. Retain existing
neighborhood centers unless it can be clearly demonstrated that local-serving uses are
not economically feasible.
     See LU-2a (Development Review) and EV-13 (Business Areas).
NH-11. Needed Neighborhood Serving Uses.
Give priority to "needed neighborhood serving uses". Examples of needed
neighborhood serving uses are: supermarkets; craft stores; cafes; restaurants; drug
stores; neighborhood shopping centers which include uses such as dry cleaners, delis
and markets, video stores, etc.; health and medical facilities and services; as well as
improved public uses and services such as parks, schools, child care, and police
services. Other similar uses that serve primarily neighborhood residents and/or
employees and receive broad neighborhood support may also qualify.
     See LU-15 (Convenience Shopping).
NH-12. Schools.
Work with the school districts to use active school sites as neighborhood gathering
places and recreational amenities. Retain local schools where possible, but when reuse
is necessary, housing development at prevailing densities in the immediate area should
be the appropriate land use. Where it is in the community's interest to retain public
recreation, on-site density transfers will be allowed to the remaining school site
acreage, provided the resulting housing design is compatible with the neighborhood
character.
     See LU-11a (Zoning for School Sites) and PR-20b (School Site Recreational Facilities).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                      SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS 69
                                                                   NH-13. Religious Institutions,
                                                                   Educational Facilities, and
                                                                   other Community
                                                                   Organizations.
                                                                   Support community partnerships and
                                                                   communication between neighborhoods and
                                                                   schools, religious and other institutions to
                                                                   enhance mutual understanding and the
                                                                   benefits of collaboration.
                                                                   NH-13a.Community Partnerships. Through the
                                                                   development review process, encourage or
                                                                   require the establishment of committees which
                                                                   include both neighborhood and institutional
                                                                   representatives to address potential impacts and
                                                                   foster better communications.
                                                                            Responsibility: Community
                                                                   Development
Over 5,000 people                                                           Timeframe: Ongoing
enjoy the                                                                   Resources: Fees
D o wn t o w n
Farmers Market           See G-14a (Communication with the School Districts), G-15a (Joint Use of Educational
e a c h we e k .
                         Facilities) and G-16a (Internships).
                         Neighborhood Design
                     NH-14. Gathering Places and Events.
                     To spark social interaction and create a greater sense of community, encourage both
                     daytime and nighttime gathering places and events in appropriate locations, such as
                     cafes, restaurants, outdoor eating places, bookstores, shopping facilities, libraries,
                     schools, churches, parks, recreation facilities, community gardens, farmers’ markets,
                     transit stops, parks, recreation facilities, commercial facilities, cultural facilities, teen
                     facilities, and City-sanctioned street closures for festivals, parades, and block parties.
                     Improve parks and their facilities to include active recreation and passive social
                     interaction areas, and, where appropriate, incorporate areas that can accommodate
                     group activities such as social events, picnics and concerts in a manner respectful of
                     nearby residents.
                         NH-14a.Community Events. Explore supporting neighborhood and homeowner
                         associations by promoting community events on the City’s website.
                               Responsibility: City Manager, Community Services
                               Timeframe: Ongoing
                               Resources: Staff Time
                         NH-14b. Gathering Spaces. Through the Design Review process, consider opportunities
                         for public gathering places, where appropriate.
                               Responsibility: Community Development
                               Timeframe: Ongoing
                               Resources: Fees
                         See also NH-19a (Downtown Events), PR-6a (Community Center Improvements) and PR-
                         7a (Community Park Improvements).
70                SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                                     Reprinted 04/28/2017

GOAL 6: A VIBRANT DOWNTOWN
It is the goal for San Rafael to have a vibrant, active, and attractive Downtown.
San Rafael’s Downtown continues to maintain its role as the center of the City’s
business, cultural, and historical infrastructure by offering quality shopping, a wide
range of cultural and entertainment venues, a variety of restaurants, galleries,
professional and financial services, employment opportunities, office space, and
housing.
     DOWNTOWN
Downtown is a beloved part of San Rafael. It is the business, financial and retail
center for San Rafael and Marin County. A wide range of housing, shopping and
employment is provided. It has events, celebrations and festivals that attract the entire
community. It is the heart and soul of San Rafael, the focal point of the community.
NH-15. Downtown Vision.
Continue to implement Our Vision of Downtown
San Rafael.
     NH-15a. Downtown Vision. Base periodic review
     of Downtown policies on the Vision.
           Responsibility: Economic Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Economic Development
     Downtown Economy
NH-16. Economic Success.
Substantially expand Downtown’s economic
success and increase opportunities for retail, office
and residential development.
                                                                                                          Residents and
     NH-16a. Business Development Efforts. Support business development efforts                           visitors enjoy
     downtown to create a robust retail mix, reinforce a strong office market and promote                 t h e vi b r a n c y o f
                                                                                                          Fourth Street in
     evening activities, restaurants and entertainment. This includes encouraging cooperative
                                                                                                          D o wn t o w n .
     and coordinated programs to manage, recruit and market Downtown businesses.
           Responsibility: Economic Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Economic Development
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                      SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                          71

                          Our Vision of Downtown
   Our Vision of Downtown San Rafael was developed in the early 1990s through a broad-
   based collaborative community visioning process. Our Vision contains a narrative picture of
   what our community wants Downtown to feel and look like in 2020. The following is a brief
   summary of the most important images envisioned for Downtown San Rafael from Our
   Vision.
   Downtown, with its sense of nurturing community, remains the place where a person can
   rediscover one's roots and sense of history. Downtown San Rafael is our hometown. While
   safe, friendly, warm, welcoming, and a comfortable mix of old and new, Downtown is alive
   with the excitement of an urban community and multidimensional city. Downtown generates
   a climate of good cheer and companionship where people want to socialize, reside, or
   conduct business.
   Downtown is a healthy economic center. Thriving and profitable retail is a barometer of the
   health and vitality of Downtown. Shops provide that personal touch where customers are
   treated as neighbors and friends whether they are visitors, entrepreneurs who work in
   Downtown's new class "A" office buildings and in the restored and refurbished Victorians, or
   those who are attracted to the ambiance of local, personalized retailing.
   Downtown is a wonderful place to live. Downtown provides a plethora of housing
   opportunities at both affordable and market rates for those who choose the amenities and
   advantages of an urban community lifestyle. A young professional beginning a career, a
   single parent in need of nearby shopping, services, and transit, a senior couple wishing to
   downsize their suburban home, or a Downtown worker, can find the right living arrangement
   in one of the condominiums, apartments, duplexes, townhouses, single family homes, or
   single resident rooms in Downtown San Rafael.
   Downtown flourishes as our social, cultural, recreational and entertainment center. Many
   activities are concentrated here, from Falkirk Cultural Center to live theater at Belrose, to
   movies at the Rafael Film Center, forming the most interesting entertainment venue in the
   Northern Bay Area. City residents, visitors from neighboring towns, and tourists enjoy our
   cultural riches: the bookstores, the library, the Mission, art galleries, theater, museums,
   displays and performances at the community center, as well as street fairs and outdoor
   entertainment.
   Downtown puts the spotlight on life. Parades, festivals, fiestas, events, gatherings all
   happen Downtown: Italian Street Painting, Film Festival, Classic Cars Parade, Halloween
   Trick or Treat, Winter Lights, Easter Egg Roll, and the Downtown Farmers’ Market Festival.
   The sidewalks are bustling with people meeting friends for coffee at one of the outdoor cafes
   or restaurants, browsing at the popular farmers’ market and shopping in our specialty stores.
   Downtown celebrates diversity, accepting and valuing differences, creating new
   relationships among groups, peoples, and individuals of all cultures, economic status and
   interests. Children, teens, adults, seniors all feel welcome and find something to do.
   Families especially feel comfortable here and enjoy their Downtown outings.
   Downtown grows multicolored with the splendor of flowers in boxes and planting areas and
   streets lined with trees. Downtown is a beautiful place to stroll among a blend of buildings
   that reflect the area’s history and our dynamic times. Downtown is a park-like setting where
   the urban landscape is softened by the workings of nature and adorned with public art.
72                     SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                            Reprinted 04/28/2017

NH-17. Competing Concerns.
In reviewing and making decisions on projects, there are competing economic,
housing, environmental and design concerns that must be balanced. No one factor
should dominate; however, economic and housing development are high priorities to
the health of Downtown.
NH-18. Economic Center.
Strengthen Downtown’s position as a major business, financial and office center for
the city and the county by maintaining a diversified economic base reflecting a
mutually supportive combination of retail, office, service and government uses.
     NH-18a. Hotel/Cineplex. Support the development of a hotel to sustain the office market
     and a Cineplex to enhance the retail, restaurant and entertainment offerings in Downtown.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Resources: Economic Development
NH-19. Healthy Retail Sector.
Promote a healthy retail sector, essential to a successful and prosperous Downtown.
     See NH-15a (Downtown Vision).
NH-20. Event Center.
Expand Downtown's reputation as the event center for the city by encouraging
parades, festivals, celebrations, promotional sales and sports events. These activities
may occur throughout Downtown; in the streets, parking lots, sidewalks, lawn areas
and private property; and are sponsored by public, private and non-profit
organizations, individuals and businesses.
     NH-20a. Downtown Events. Continue to
     encourage high profile, signature events to
     bring people Downtown and to promote
     Downtown San Rafael. These events should
     include, but are not limited to, promotional
     events, youth and family entertainment, and the
     activities at Downtown cultural facilities.
           Responsibility: Economic Development,
           Community Development, Community
           Services
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees, Donations
     NH-20b. Entertainment Activities. Promote
     entertainment activities in Downtown.
           Responsibility: Economic Development,
           Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
                                                                                                         Th e C i t y P l a za i s
                                                                                                         home to local
                                                                                                         celebrations.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                     SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                           73

                       NH-21. Cultural and Entertainment Promotion.
                       Promote Downtown as the cultural and entertainment center of San Rafael and the
                       County to bring people Downtown and stimulate other business opportunities.
                           See NH-18a (Hotel/Cineplex) and NH-20a (Downtown Events)
                           Downtown Homes
                       NH-22. Housing Downtown.
                       Create a popular and attractive residential environment that contributes to the activity and
                       sense of community Downtown. This includes:
                       a. Preserving and upgrading existing units,
                       b. Providing incentives to encourage new private sector construction of housing,
                           particularly affordable housing, live/work units, and single room occupancy (SRO)
                           units,
                       c. Designing units that take advantage of Downtown's views, proximity to shopping and
                           services, and transit, and
                       d. Implementing zoning standards that reflect Downtown’s urban character.
                           See H-14c (Continue to Implement Zoning Provisions to Encourage Mixed Use)
                           Downtown Circulation
                       NH-23. Full Use of Street System.
                       To enable our desired uses and activities to happen Downtown, encourage full use of
                       streets and alleyways reflecting Downtown’s urban character.
                                                                 See C-3a (Transportation Technology), C-4a
                                                                 (Street Pattern and Traffic Flow), C-4b (Street
                                                                 Design Criteria to Support Alternative Modes, C-
                                                                 6a (Updated Proposed Circulation Improvements).
                                                                 NH-24. Full Range of
                                                                 Transportation Options.
                                                                 In addition to autos, encourage a variety of
                                                                 ways for people to travel to, in, and through
                                                                 Downtown, including:
                                                                 • Bicycle and walking paths to other
                                                                      neighborhoods, Boyd and Albert Parks,
                                                                      and along Mahon Creek,
                                                                 • Bike lanes where appropriate,
                                                                 • Efficient bus service,
                                                                 • A rail transitway, and
                                                                 • Shuttle buses.
The Mahon Creek            See C-10a. (Advocating Alternative Mode Projects) and C-11a (Car and Vanpooling) C-
Path is a recent           11b (Car Sharing), C-11c (Low-Impact Alternative Vehicles) and C-11d (Bike to Work
pedestrian/ bicycle        Day).
path and
environmental
enhancement .
 74                 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                                 Reprinted 04/28/2017

NH-25. Pedestrian Comfort and Safety.
Make Downtown's street systems more comfortable and safe for pedestrians by:
• Balancing between the needs of pedestrians and the desire for efficient traffic
     flow,
• Slowing traffic where necessary,
• Providing two-way traffic where feasible,
• Making pedestrian crossings direct and safe,
• Establishing pedestrian environments unique to each District,
• Improving and/or expanding sidewalks, street trees, landscaping and other
     sidewalk amenities,
• Increasing visibility to storefronts and businesses,
• Seeking innovative solutions and ideas.
     See C-27a (Implementation), C-27b (Prioritizing Pedestrian Improvements), C-27c (Bay
     Trail), C-27d (Pedestrian Safety Enforcement), C-27e (Pedestrian Safety) and C-28a
     (Urban Trail Network Project).
NH-26. Refine Look of Lincoln, Hetherton, Lindaro and
Andersen Drive.
Improve the look and function of these important streets by emphasizing safe and
efficient movement of pedestrians, cars and, where feasible, bicycles traveling into
and through Downtown.
     NH-26a. Pedestrian Lighting. Evaluate pedestrian lighting along Lincoln Avenue for
     safety.
           Responsibility: Public Works, Police
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Resources: Staff Time
     See C-4a (Street Pattern and Traffic Flow), C-4b (Street Design Criteria to Support
     Alternative Modes) and C-23a (Better Signage).
NH-27. Parking.
Continue to make parking convenient and easy to find by encouraging solutions that
address Downtown’s urban parking situation. Needed improvements include:
• Providing a range of long and short-term parking.
• Facilitating the joint use of parking areas where appropriate.
• Reducing the visual impacts of parking areas through design and landscaping.
• Improving pedestrian safety in parking lots and garages.
• Alleviating parking congestion where appropriate by converting underdeveloped
     open lots into public and private parking lots.
• Improving signage and visibility of public parking facilities.
     NH-27a.Downtown Parking Strategy. Continue to maintain a comprehensive parking
     strategy including the management of the operations (revenue, enforcement and
     maintenance).
           Responsibility: Management Services, Public Works
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Parking Services Fund
     See C-30a (Downtown Parking District).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                    SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS 75

                                       Downtown Urban Design
                                  NH-28. Special Place.
                                  Preserve Downtown’s reputation as a special place by developing a design strategy
                                  that capitalizes on Downtown’s existing strengths:
                                  • Unique urban characteristics and density,
                                  • Diversity in architectural design, and
                                  • Historic heritage and buildings.
                                       See NH-29a (Implement Downtown Design Guidelines).
                                  NH-29. Downtown Design.
                                  New and remodeled buildings must contribute to Downtown’s hometown feel. Design
                                  elements that enhance Downtown’s identity and complement the existing attractive
                                  environment are encouraged, and may be required for locations with high visibility or
                                  for compatibility with historic structures. Design considerations include:
                                  • Varied and distinctive building designs,
                                  • Sensitive treatment of historic resources,
                                  • Generous landscaping to accent buildings,
                                  • Appropriate materials and construction, and
                                  • Site design and streetscape continuity.
                                       NH-29a. Implement Downtown Design Guidelines. Implement the Downtown Design
                                       Guidelines through the design review process.
                                           Responsibility: Community Development
                                           Timeframe: Ongoing
                                           Resources: Staff Time
                                       NH-29b. Update Downtown Design Guidelines. Update the Downtown Design
                                       Guidelines and zoning regulations as needed.
                                           Responsibility: Community
                                           Development, Economic Development
                                           Timeframe: Ongoing
                                           Resources: Staff Time, General Fund
                                                                   NH-30. Pedestrian Environments.
                                                                   Enhance Downtown’s streets by establishing pedestrian
                                                                   environments appropriate to each District. These
                                                                   environments could include the following:
                                                                   • Well-designed window displays and views into retail
                                                                        stores,
                                                                   • Outdoor businesses and street vendors,
                                                                   • Signs that are easy for pedestrians to see and read,
                                                                   • Sun-filled outdoor courtyards, plazas and seating
                                                                        areas,
                                                                   • Attractive street furniture and lighting,
                                                                   • Information kiosks and public art.
                                                                   See NH-29a. (Implement Downtown Design Guidelines),
                                                                   NH-29b (Update Downtown Design Guidelines), EV-2e
                                                                   (Street Vendors).
S i d e wa l k d i n i n g i s
encouraged in the
d o wn t o wn .
76                             SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                               Reprinted 04/28/2017

NH-31. Ground Floor Designed for Pedestrians.
Ensure that all buildings, regardless of height, are comfortable for people at the street
level. This includes:
• Relating wall and window heights to the height of people,
• Use of architectural elements to create visual interest,
• Adding landscaping and insets and alcoves for pedestrian interest, and,
• Stepping upper stories back as building height increases.
     See NH-29a (Implement Downtown Design Guidelines), NH-29b (Update Downtown
     Design Guidelines).
NH-32. Historic Character.
Recognize and use the unique character of Downtown’s many attractive, well-liked,
historic buildings. Encourage new development on sites in the Downtown area to be
compatible with nearby historic buildings, the historic Downtown street pattern, and
the area’s historic, pedestrian-oriented character.
     See LU-2a (Development Review), CD-4a (Historic Resources Information), CD-4b
     (Adaptive Reuse), CA-13a (Inventory Update) and CA-13b (Preservation Ordinance).
NH-33. Downtown’s Neighbors.
Distinguish Downtown from adjoining neighborhood areas by:
• Establishing major entrances to Downtown with gateway treatments,
• Keeping all Downtown activities within the Downtown area, and
• Providing a gradual transition into adjacent residential neighborhoods in terms of
     building scale and intensity of use.
     See CD-1a (Gateway
     Enhancements) NH-29a
     (Implement Downtown
     Design Guidelines), and
     NH-29b (Update
     Downtown Design
     Guidelines).
     Downtown
     Districts
Downtown San Rafael is
a mosaic of six districts,
each of which has a
unique character. The
individual character of
each district is well
defined; the districts are
interconnected and
together make up our
whole Downtown. The
Districts are:                                                                                      Our Vision of
                                                                                                    Downtown
• Fourth Street Retail Core                                                                         describes six
• Hetherton Office District                                                                         d i s t r i c t s wi t h i n
• Lindaro Office District                                                                           t h e D o w n t o wn
                                                                                                    area.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                              77

                        •   Second/Third Mixed-Use District
                        •   West End Village
                        •   Fifth/Mission Residential/Office District
                        Vision districts have been translated into General Plan land use designations, which
                        closely follow the boundaries described in the Vision. Three districts are not expected
                        to change significantly: Fifth/Mission, the West End Village, and the Fourth Street
                        Retail Core. Other parts of Downtown are expected to have greater changes over
                        time, particularly the Lindaro Office District.
                            Fourth Street Retail Core
                        Fourth Street Retail Core: The heart of Downtown, the primary shopping area and the
                        center of entertainment, public events and social activities. This district encompasses
                        Fourth Street from Lincoln to E Street.
                                                                          NH-34. Fourth Street
                                                                          Retail Core.
                                                                          a. Mix of Uses. Make the Fourth Street
                                                                              Retail Core the center of San
                                                                              Rafael’s activities, with a diverse mix
                                                                              of uses including retail, service,
                                                                              entertainment, cultural, finance,
                                                                              office and housing. Housing and
                                                                              general office uses are encouraged on
                                                                              upper floors.
                                                                          b. Successful retail area. Develop
                                                                              Downtown San Rafael as one of the
                                                                              most interesting and popular
                                                                              shopping areas in the Bay Area by
                                                                              making it vibrant and alive all day
                                                                              and evening, full of people and
                                                                              activities and offering a wide variety
                                                                              of unique shops. With uses such as
Restored after the          restaurants, coffee houses and bookstores, Fourth Street and the cross streets will be
1989 earthquake, the        a vigorous and growing retail center highly valued by Marin County residents.
Rafael Film Center
features films from     c. “Alive-after-five.” Maintain a mix of businesses active at different times of the
around the world.
                            day and the week, especially to keep Fourth Street active and busy after 5 PM; by
                            encouraging existing businesses to remain open in the evenings; and by attracting
                            new businesses, that are open later in the day.
                        d. Entertainment Center. Encourage the location of additional entertainment venues
                            in the Fourth Street corridor, which will attract people from throughout the Bay
                            Area, and benefit Downtown businesses and the San Rafael community.
                            NH-34a. Downtown Management. Coordinate and encourage property and business
                            owners, the San Rafael Chamber of Commerce, city officials and the Business
                            Improvement District (BID) in efforts to market Downtown businesses.
                                 Responsibility: Economic Development
                                 Timeframe: Ongoing
                                 Resources: Economic Development
78                   SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                                 Reprinted 04/28/2017

     NH-34b. Fourth Street Staging Area. Use the Fourth Street Retail Core as the primary
     staging area for Downtown events and activities. Continue to accommodate enterprises
     ranging from the Downtown Farmers Market, parades, fiestas and sidewalk sales to
     outdoor cafes and vendors.
           Responsibility: Economic Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time, Partnerships
     See LU-2a (Development Review), NH-16a (Business Development Efforts), and NH-20a
     (Downtown Events).
NH-35. Fourth Street Retail Core
Design Considerations.
a. Heart of Downtown. Enhance the image of the
     San Rafael City Plaza as the Heart of
     Downtown, so it will be the area that first
     comes to mind when people think of
     Downtown. Promote Fourth Street as a lively
     area where people congregate before moving
     on to the Rafael Theater, shopping areas and
     evening activities.
b. Outdoor Gathering Places. Encourage a
     variety of inviting and safe public and private
     outdoor gathering places for community
     celebrations, people watching and recreation.
c. Fourth Street Core Improvements. Improve                                                               C i t y P l a za i n
     the appearance of Fourth Street through                                                              D o wn t o w n ,
     landscaping and additional trees, street and sidewalk enhancements, infilling                        created by closing
     undeveloped lots, discouraging curb cuts, and renovating building facades.                           part of Court
                                                                                                          Street, opened in
                                                                                                          2002.
d. Parking lot connections. Improve pedestrian connections between public parking
     lots and Fourth Street.
e. Heights. Heights of individual buildings will vary, ranging from two to four
     stories, with increased height permitted in some locations consistent with bonus
     height policies. Buildings on the south side of Fourth Street should limit the
     blockage of sunlight on the sidewalks on the north side of Fourth Street.
     NH-35a. Plaza Improvements. Consider improvements for the Plaza such as additional
     landscaping including shade trees, seating and public art, and retain its function as a
     community-gathering place.
           Responsibility: Public Works
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Capital Improvement
     See NH-29a (Implement Downtown Design Guidelines), NH-29b (Update Downtown
     Design Guidelines) and CD-17a (Street Furnishings).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                      SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                      79
           Hetherton Office District
      The major gateway to Downtown and center of our transportation system. This office
      district is adjacent to Highway 101.
      NH-36. Hetherton Office District.
      a. Office Center. Emphasize development related to the Transportation Center,
           especially office and professional service buildings, which could include limited
           areas for street-level retail uses. Residential is also strongly encouraged in this area.
      b. Transportation Hub. Use the Transportation Center to coordinate and facilitate
           the different ways people move to and around Downtown, including bus, rail,
           auto, bicycle and on foot. Include safe pedestrian and bicycle connections linking
           this area to the stores, services, cultural facilities, and recreational opportunities in
           other parts of Downtown. Expand connections from the Transportation Center to
           other parts of the City by:
           • Encouraging expanded bus transit,
           • Considering shuttle service to feasible locales when such service is warranted
                and can be funded,
           • Incorporating a rail station with the initiation of rail service;
           • Improving walking and biking facilities,
           • Providing a safe connection to Mahon Path,
           • Facilitating the movement of commuters to and from the neighborhoods, and
           • Creating safer pedestrian crossings on Second and Third Streets.
           NH-36a. Zoning Ordinance. Amend the Zoning Ordinance to allow more flexibility in
           uses in Hetherton Office zoning district.
                Responsibility: Community Development
                Timeframe: Short Term
                Resources: Staff Time
           NH-36b. Transit Service. Support efforts by Caltrans, the Golden Gate Bridge District,
           the Marin County Transit District, Sonoma-Marin Area Rail Transit (SMART) District
           and other transportation providers to increase transit service at the Transportation Center.
           Pursue the implementation of the Downtown Station Area Plan in coordination with transit
           services.
                Responsibility: Public Works, Community Development
                Timeframe: Short Term
                Resources: Staff Time
           See C-17a (SMART), C-20a (Transit Hubs) and LU-2a (Development Review).
      NH-37. Hetherton Office District Design Considerations.
      a. Downtown Gateway. Transform the Hetherton Office District into an elegant
           transition into Downtown San Rafael. Improve the entries to Downtown at Third
           Street, Fifth Street, Mission Avenue, Lincoln Avenue and the freeway ramps with
           entrance graphics, enhanced planting and lighting. Buildings should complement the
           district’s entryway treatment and provide an attractive facade along Hetherton Street.
      b. Fourth and Hetherton. Announce and mark this primary gateway to Downtown
           with a distinctive gateway treatment at Fourth Street and Hetherton, which is
           gracious and welcoming in character. Design issues to consider are:
           • Plaza or other open space areas both public and private,
80 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                                      Reprinted 04/28/2017

     •     Public art,
     •     Strong landscaping design, and
     •     Retail uses opening on to a plaza or other open space areas.
c. Hetherton Design. Encourage projects of high
     quality and varied design with landmark features
     that enhance the District's gateway image.
     Examples include:
     • Building design emphasizing the gateway
           character and complementing the district’s
           transitional treatment by incorporating accent
           elements, public art and other feature items,
     • Upper stories stepped back,
     • Ground floor areas have a pedestrian scale,
     • Retail uses opening onto public areas,
     • Useable outdoor spaces, courtyards and
           arcades that are landscaped, in sunny
           locations and protected from freeway noise.
d. Under Highway 101 Viaduct. Work with
                                                                                                       Th e S a n R a f a e l
     Caltrans to make the area under the freeway attractive and safe with, for example,                Corporate Center, a
     maintained landscaping, public art, creek enhancements or fencing.                                Class A office
                                                                                                       development, is a
e. Height. Building heights of three to five stories are allowed west of the rail                      r e d e ve l o p m e n t o f a
     transitway, and typically up to three stories east of the rail transitway.                        B r o wn f i e l d s i t e i n
                                                                                                       D o wn t o w n .
     NH-37a.Freeway Ramps. Work with Caltrans, civic organizations and neighborhood
     associations to beautify the freeway ramps with enhanced landscaping.
           Responsibility: Public Works
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     See NH-29a (Implement Downtown Design Guidelines), NH-29b (Update Downtown
     Design Guidelines).
     Lindaro Office District
At the southeast corner of Downtown, a major development area with office and some
retail uses.
NH-38. Lindaro Office District.
a. Strategically significant gateway. Continue the transformation of the Lindaro
     Office District into one of the most handsome urban places in Marin County by
     developing landmark, well-designed buildings. This District will be a special asset
     to the city and enhance Downtown's image as a high quality business center. The
     primary purpose of this district is to attract new people that would shop and use the
     rest of Downtown, particularly the Fourth Street Retail Core.
b. Mix of uses. Encourage an office complex that may include limited and incidental
     office-serving retail uses, a major hotel, cultural or entertainment facility, or
     residential, if feasible. Large community-serving (“big box”) retail and shopping
     centers are not allowed in this District. Any project must achieve the objectives
     described in (a) above.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                   SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                                81

      c. San Rafael Corporate Center. Encourage the completion of the development of
          the San Rafael Corporate Center as a distinctive, high quality office center, which
          can include a coordinated mix of uses as stated above complementing, not
          competing with other Downtown Districts, especially the Fourth Street Retail Core.
          This project’s superior design quality will be the major identifying characteristic of
          the District and must be a graceful addition to the views of Downtown from
          Highway 101.
          See LU-2a (Development Review), NH-16a (Business Development Efforts), NH-29a
          (Implement Downtown Design Guidelines), NH-29b (Update Downtown Design
          Guidelines).
      NH-39. Lindaro Office District Design Considerations.
      a. Building design and sense of place. Evoke a strong sense of place through site
          and building design that includes:
          • Buildings oriented to take advantage of the Creek frontage and views of Mt.
               Tamalpais,
          • Variety in architectural styles,
          • Varied setbacks on Second Street,
          • Arcades and courtyards,
          • Buildings that are inviting and attractive on all sides facing the street or
               pedestrian areas,
          • Reduced visual impact of parking areas through site design and landscaping,
          • Screened PG&E transformer area, and
          • Screened areas for service vehicles.
      b. Regional and neighborhood emphasis. Although the District should be
          architecturally distinctive and urban in character, appealing to the broader region,
          blend development carefully with neighborhoods to the south and with adjacent
          office development in the Second/Third Corridor and Hetherton Gateway Districts.
      c. Active ground floor. Enhance the pedestrians’ environment through active street
          frontages and buildings with a human scale at the ground level.
      d. Lindaro connections. Tie the different properties and developments in the area
          together through a wide variety of elements including:
          • Compatible uses and tenant mix,
          • A network of public spaces linked by pedestrian pathways, and
          • Enhanced appearances of Lincoln Avenue, Lindaro Street and Andersen Drive
               through continuity of streetscape features such as lighting, street trees and
               sidewalks.
      e. Links to other districts. Connect Lindaro to the rest of Downtown through site
          design and streetscape continuity with adjoining districts.
      f.  Mahon Creek improvements. Continue to improve access to Mahon Creek
          through useable recreation areas, landscaping, bike paths and walkways.
      g. Height. Provide a variety of heights in individual buildings: two to four stories,
          with a height bonus up to six stories.
82 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                               Reprinted 04/28/2017

     NH-39a. Mahon Creek. Complete the implementation of the adopted Mahon Creek Final
     Conceptual Plan.
           Responsibility: Public Works
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Grants, Donations, Capital Improvement
     See NH-29a (Implement Downtown Design Guidelines), NH-29b (Update Downtown
     Design Guidelines).
     Second/Third Mixed Use District
An attractive, safe and efficient transportation corridor along Second and Third
Streets.
NH-40. Second/Third Mixed-Use District.
a. Auto-oriented uses. Allow a vital, varied and compatible mix of offices, retail
     uses, and residential uses, where appropriate. Uses usually accessed by car should
     be concentrated along the west end of Second Street to take advantage of the high
     traffic volumes.
b. Enhance pedestrian character. Enhance the pedestrian character of the A and B
     cross streets by encouraging a variety of uses, including neighborhood serving and
     specialty retail uses, and residential uses.
c. PG&E office building site. This site offers a major redevelopment
     opportunity as an infill site that could accommodate a mix of land
     uses, including residential if feasible, that would take advantage of
     the site’s high visibility from Second and Third Streets, extend the
     uses on the San Rafael Corporate Center, or provide patrons for the
     Fourth Street Retail Core.
d. Transportation Corridor. Make Second and Third Streets a very
     attractive, safe and efficient transportation corridor that allows
     smooth travel through Downtown, provides easy access to the Fourth
     Street Core via the cross streets and is safe to walk along and cross.
     Substantially improve Second and Third Streets through:
     • Screening pedestrians from the perception of traffic noise and
          encouraging pedestrian use of other streets,
     • Improving pedestrian connections to Fourth Street,
     • Providing safe crosswalks at all intersections,
     • Reducing the number of driveways that interrupt sidewalks, and                                 Palm trees frame
                                                                                                      t h e vi e w u p A S t r e e t
     • Managing traffic flow for efficiency, not speed.                                               from Albert Park to
                                                                                                      St. Raphael’s
e. Improved parking. Develop attractive, screened and easy-to-find public and                         Church.
     private parking areas serving both the Fourth Street Retail Core and the
     Second/Third Street Corridor.
     NH-40a. Zoning Ordinance. Amend the Zoning Ordinance to allow more flexibility in
     uses in CSMU, 2/3 MUE, and MUW zoning districts.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Resources: Staff Time
     See LU-2a (Development Review), NH-18a (Hotel/Cineplex) and NH-29a (Implement
     Downtown Design Guidelines), NH-29b (Update Downtown Design Guidelines).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                  SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                          83

      NH-41. Second/Third Mixed Use District Design
      Considerations.
      a. An inviting appearance. Create an inviting appearance to people traveling Second
          and Third Streets. Encourage attractive, creative and varied architecture on Second
          and Third Streets, with design detail on all sides of buildings visible to the street or
          pedestrians.
      b. Unique character of cross streets. A, B, C and D Streets are important links from
          Fourth Street to neighborhoods south of Downtown. Strengthen the unique
          character of these cross streets by giving special treatment to:
          • A Street as an important visual and pedestrian connection between Mission San
               Rafael Arcangel and Albert Park and Andersen Drive,
          • B Street as an area of strong historic character, and
          • B, C and D Streets as major pedestrian connections between the Gerstle Park
               Neighborhood and the Fourth Street Retail Core.
      c. Height. Individual building heights will vary and typically range from two to four
          stories east of B Street, and from one to three stories generally west of B Street.
          See NH-29a (Implement Downtown Design Guidelines), NH-29b (Update Downtown
          Design Guidelines), LU-13 (Height Bonuses), Exhibit 9 (Building Height Limits in
          Downtown San Rafael).
          West End Village
      A mixed-use village with strong connections to the Retail Core. This district is located
      along Fourth Street west of E Street.
      NH-42. West End Village.
      a. Village within Downtown. Keep the West End Village a unique, friendly,
          desirable place to live and shop. Activities in this district help meet the needs of the
          surrounding neighborhoods. Encourage residential use on the upper floors of
          buildings.
      b. Unique shopping district. Continue to encourage development that makes the
          West End Village a unique place to shop. One-of-a-kind businesses, such as
          bakeries, restaurants, craft stores, art galleries and furniture stores; outdoor uses
          such as sidewalk cafes; and a major retail anchor use are all part of the West End’s
          special blend of retail.
      c. Retail anchor. Encourage upgrading the Yardbird's Center retail anchor by:
          • Integrating all the individual properties and parking lots into a well designed
               center,
          • Coordinating and connecting the shopping center with the other stores and
               services along the west end of Fourth Street,
          • Providing a wide variety of goods and services, and
          • Including outdoor restaurants, sales and activities.
84 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                                  Reprinted 04/28/2017

d. Improve parking. Upgrade existing parking and create new, easy to find parking
     areas by:
     • Requiring new development to provide adequate new parking areas,
     • Screening parking areas with landscaping, and
     • Locating parking lot entrances on side streets where possible.
e. Parking Lots on Fourth Street. Encourage the redevelopment of parking lot sites
     (such as car dealers and private, open parking lots) on Fourth Street west of
     Shaver Street.
     See LU-2a (Development Review), NH-29a (Implement Downtown Design Guidelines),
     NH-29b (Update Downtown Design Guidelines).
NH-43. West End Village Design Considerations.
a. Residential design. Blend new multifamily development on Second and Third
     Streets into the character and appearance of the Latham Street neighborhood. For
     example, new development should have elements similar to existing structures,
     entrances oriented toward the street, and driveways and garages that are recessed
     or under the buildings. Encourage lot consolidation for better site design.
b. Village identity. Create a distinct identity for the Village with, for example, a sign
     program or bench program unique to the District.
c. Historic neighborhood shopping district. Preserve the West End Village as a
     beautiful, inviting, relaxed place with a comfortable neighborhood character. Keep
     its historic appearance and small-scale buildings. West End Village design
     includes:
     • Retaining the small storefront pattern, and building to the sidewalk, and
     • Facade improvements and lighter and brighter building colors.
d. Attractive outdoor setting. Increase interest for pedestrians with:
     • Outdoor cafes and other activities,
     • Streetscape improvements, such as decorative banners, benches and public art,
     • Small staging areas for events in the Village and/or extend into the Core,
     • Sidewalk repairs,
     • Views to the creek where possible, and
     • Plentiful and colorful landscaping.
e. Fourth Street Retail Core connection. Visually connect the Village to the Core,
     for example, by installing street lighting and trees similar to those in the Core.
f.   Height. Respect the low scale development of buildings one to three stories in
     height with housing or office above ground floor retail.
     See NH-29a (Implement Downtown Design Guidelines), NH-29b (Update Downtown
     Design Guidelines), LU-13 (Height Bonuses), Exhibit 9 (Building Height Limits in
     Downtown San Rafael).
     Fifth/Mission Residential/Office District
Our civic center and cultural district, with residential and office uses. This district is
located along Fifth and Mission, west of Irwin Street.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                  SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS 85

      NH-44. Fifth/Mission Residential/Office District.
      a. San Rafael City Hall. Retain government services at San Rafael City Hall.
      b. Office and residential uses. Intermingle office and residential uses throughout
          the District. East of B Street is a comfortable blend of mid-sized office buildings
          and residential developments. Medical services, social service providers and non-
          profit organizations are concentrated in the attractive Victorian buildings west of
          E Street.
      c. Cultural district. Encourage a thriving cultural district, based on the many
          community-cultural activities at the theaters, schools, library, museum, churches
          and historic buildings.
          See LU-2a (Development Review) and CA-11a (Facility Needs).
      NH-45. Fifth/Mission Residential/Office District Design
      Considerations.
      a. Culturally-rich historic district. Reinforce the graceful, historic and cultural
          strengths of the District by showcasing resources, such as the Falkirk Cultural
          Center, the City Library building, the Boyd House and the many Victorian
          structures by, for example:
          • Retaining public spaces, such as the lawn area in front of Falkirk Cultural
               Center,
          • Opening the front of the Boyd House landscaping to the street and promoting
               adaptive reuse of the historic home and landscape,
          • Adding a historic museum in Boyd Park and creating a more identifiable and
               accessible entrance into Boyd Park,
          • Improving pedestrian safety along Mission Street, and
          • Connecting this area into the activities at Courthouse Square and the City
               Plaza.
      b. Fifth Avenue and A Street. Retain the open areas at the intersection of Fifth
          Avenue and A Street on the north side of Fifth Avenue in front of St. Raphael's
          Church, and along the Courthouse Square Building.
      c. Fifth/Mission design. Encourage an interesting diversity of building styles in the
          Fifth/Mission District ranging from historic Victorians to well-articulated new
          office buildings. On Fifth Avenue west of E Street and on the east and west ends
          of Mission Avenue:
          • Design infill office and residential development to be compatible with
               existing neighborhood qualities, and
          • Include landscaped front yards and historic building characteristics.
      d. Fifth/Mission pedestrian character. Enhance the pedestrian character by
          preserving mature landscaping, planting more street trees and by enhancing views
          down the cross streets. In addition, establish a strong visual and pedestrian access
          connection on B Street from Boyd Park to Albert Park, and stronger connections
          between the Fifth/Mission District and surrounding neighborhoods.
86 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                                Reprinted 04/28/2017

e. Height. Heights of individual buildings will vary, but be similar in scale to
     existing buildings west of E Street, and on the east end of Mission.
     Two to three story offices are anticipated east of B Street.
                                                                                            Vi s io n o f
     See NH-29a (Implement Downtown Design Guidelines), NH-29b (Update                 Ba ys id e Ac r e s
     Downtown Design Guidelines).
                                                                                   Bayside Acres, located in an
     BAYSIDE ACRES                                                                 unincorporated area of the
                                                                                   County, is one of San Rafael’s
                                                                                   less dense neighborhoods and
Bayside Acres is in an unincorporated portion of the City along Point
                                                                                   is not expected to change.
San Pedro Road primarily developed with large single-family homes on               However, annexation of more
hillside lots. Homes located west of Point San Pedro and along the Bay             properties into the City will
are developed on smaller lots. A few properties have been annexed into             remain a possibility.
San Rafael in recent years.
     BRET HARTE
Formerly a dairy farm, Bret Harte is a historical district developed after
World War II. Land use in this neighborhood is primarily residential with                   Vi s io n o f
                                                                                           Br et H a rt e
single-family homes and high-density apartments along Woodland
Avenue. Residents of Bret Harte travel through an adjacent industrial              New development in this
area to access their neighborhood, thus upgrades to Francisco                      neighborhood is expected to be
Boulevard West and Woodland Avenue are of great interest. Due to the               minimal, with development
smaller size of many of the homes, Bret Harte is considered a more                 limited to a few single-family
affordable housing area and attracts many young couples and families.              homes on hillside lots. This area
The Bret Harte Park is a central fixture of the neighborhood and is the            also needs to be protected from
setting for many community events and activities.                                  the potential impacts of nearby
                                                                                   industrial businesses.
NH-46. Bret Harte Neighborhood Plan.
Prepare a plan for the neighborhood to address neighborhood concerns.
     See NH-1a. (Neighborhood Planning Process).
     CALIFORNIA PARK
                                                                                            Vi s io n o f
California Park is an unincorporated area of the City, east of the Bret               Ca lif o r n i a P a r k
Harte neighborhood. The 103-acre neighborhood consists of single-
family homes and apartments. The undeveloped Scheutzen                             This neighborhood, located in an
Subdivision, located along Auburn Street, consists of very small lots              unincorporated area of the
within a wetland area.                                                             County, has some development
                                                                                   potential remaining on the
                                                                                   Scheutzen parcels. Any
NH-47. California Park.                                                            development of these parcels
Absent significant environmental constraints, a medium density                     will need to protect the on-site
residential General Plan amendment could be considered for the                     wetlands.
Scheutzen site due to the subdivision's proximity to the proposed
transitway and a potential transit station location. Future development
on the site shall protect all on-site wetland areas.
     See LU-7 (Land Use Planning in Surrounding Jurisdictions).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                  87

                                    CANAL NEIGHBORHOOD
                               The Canal Neighborhood encompasses the residential and nonresidential areas south
                               of the San Rafael Canal and east of Highway 101. The residential portion, including
                               the Canal, Spinnaker and Bay Point houses more people than any other part of San
                               Rafael. It is comprised of many large apartment buildings, condominium complexes,
                               townhomes and duplexes, as well as single-family homes along the Canalfront.
                               The nonresidential areas include an older industrial area north of Bellam Blvd. and
                               west of Belvedere Street, a newer light industrial/office area south of Bellam Blvd.,
                               and a light industrial/office and industrial area between I-580 and Highway 101.
                               Businesses within the neighborhood include industrial, commercial, car dealerships,
                               and office. The neighborhood has a major impact on the local economy comprising 15
                               percent of the City’s jobs.
                               The neighborhood also has outstanding natural features including the San Rafael
                                                                    Canal, a two-mile long Bay Shoreline Parkband
                                                                    featuring the Bay Trail, regionally important
            Vi s io n o f t h e Can a l                             wetlands, and the San Quentin Ridge hillside.
                                                                    Parks and schools include Pickleweed Park and
   There will not be much more development in the                   Bahia Vista Elementary School.
   area. Marin Square is the Southern Gateway to San
   Rafael. Potential land uses include a hotel (Gary
                                                                    Neighborhood Homes
   Place site), and mixed-use (neighborhood and region
   serving), with retail on the ground level and
   residential above or behind the street frontage.                 NH-48. New Residential Areas.
                                                                    Develop well-designed new residential areas at
   The Medway/Vivian Way area is the heart of the                   medium to high densities in the neighborhood.
   Canal neighborhood, and should be redeveloped                    Provide residential development opportunities close
   with neighborhood serving mixed-uses. Gathering                  to jobs, and support and enhance the existing
   places with pedestrian connections through the                   residential neighborhood.
   Medway-Vivian block should also be encouraged.
                                                                              See LU-14a (Land Use Compatibility).
   The corridor from Francisco Boulevard East along
   Medway Road to Canal Street is the major entryway                NH-49. Conflicting Uses.
   into the Canal neighborhood, a true gateway for                  Prevent the encroachment of new residential
   residents, business owners, students, and shoppers.              development into the Light Industrial/Office
   Sidewalks will be widened, lighting and landscaping              District to minimize conflicts. Businesses locating
   installed and amenities such as benches and                      adjacent to residential areas shall be designed to
   signage will be added. All of this will make the                 minimize nuisance impacts.
   corridor more inviting and safer by striking a balance
   between pedestrians and bicyclists and the                                 See LU-14a (Land Use Compatibility) and CD-
                                                                    12a       (Compatibility of Building Patterns).
   numerous cars, buses and trucks that drive through
   the corridor every day.
                                                                    NH-50. Canal Neighborhood Plan.
                                                                    Prepare a new Canal Neighborhood Plan. Building
   General commercial should be allowed along
                                                                    on the results of Canal Voice, create a vision for the
   Francisco Boulevard East, with neighborhood retail
                                                                    neighborhood that addresses the need for better
   and services uses such as a health center, police
                                                                    access, more shopping and services, and improved
   station, and childcare.
                                                                    housing.
                                                                              See NH-1a. (Neighborhood Planning).
88                          SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                                  Reprinted 04/28/2017

Neighborhood Economy and Culture
NH-51. Existing Business Areas.
Support and encourage the upgrading of existing business areas, consistent with
infrastructure needs. Encourage redevelopment and upgrading of existing sites.
     See EV-13a (Zoning Regulations).
NH-52. New Business Development.
Encourage and give priority to new business development that benefits the
neighborhood through provision of needed services, low traffic impacts, or
employment of a high percentage of neighborhood residents. Encourage opportunities
for local residents to own and operate businesses.
     See EV-2b (Infill and Reuse Opportunities) and LU-14a (Land Use Compatibility).
NH-53. Building and Automotive Services.
Maintain availability of sites for building, automotive and related service industries
important to San Rafael’s economy and needed for the convenience of its residents
and businesses.
     See LU-16a (Building and Automotive Services).
NH-54. Medway/Vivian Redevelopment.
Encourage the following in the Medway/Vivian Way area:
• Neighborhood serving-uses, such as a health center, neighborhood retail and
     services, and childcare;
• Community gathering places; and
• Pedestrian connections through the Medway/Vivian block.
     NH-54a. Expansion of the NC District. Maintain NC District zoning to encourage
     neighborhood-serving commercial uses and housing in the area.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
NH-55. Canalways.
Recognize the high resource value of the site's wetlands that provide habitat to many
species, which may include rare and endangered species. In addition, recognize that
this site is in an area affected by traffic congestion. With any development of this
property, buffer site wetlands from buildings and parking lots, and obtain trail
easements and improvements for the Jean and John Starkweather Shoreline Park.
Development shall be located along the western edge of the site and to the greatest
extent feasible in areas outside of delineated wetlands or areas determined as critical
upland habitat for endangered species.
     NH-55a. Wetlands Enhancement. Require a wetlands delineation and wetland habitat
     analysis to assist in identifying appropriate area for development.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Fees
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                     SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS 89

                                          NH-56. Windward Way (APN 009-330-01).
                                          Allow medium density residential use on the privately owned 2.5-acre parcel with
                                          development clustered at the south end to retain views of the park site from Windward
                                          Way. Avoid conflicts with overhead wires.
                                              See LU-2a. (Development Review) and PR-9 (New Parks).
                                          NH-57. City Lot at Southwest Corner of Bellam and Windward
                                          Way.
                                          Use this site, or proceeds from development of the site, to provide needed
                                          neighborhood services.
                                                   See LU-2a (Development Review).
                                          NH-58. Marin Square/Gary Place Redevelopment.
                                          Encourage joint planning for the Marin Square/Gary Place area, including improved
                                          access to Gary Place. With any future redevelopment of the Marin Square shopping
                                          center and Gary Place, emphasize the following land uses: mixed-use (retail on the
                                          ground level and residential above), and possibly a hotel.
                                                                                         NH-58a. Development Review Process. As
                                                                                         part of a development application, consider land
                                                                                         use changes to Gary Place to allow
                                                                                         redevelopment of the site.
                                                                                               Responsibility: Community Development
                                                                                               Timeframe: Long Term
                                                                                               Resources: Fees
                                                                                         See LU-2a (Development Review).
                                                                                         NH-59. Cal-Pox Site (East of
                                                                                         Home Depot).
                                                                                         Allow light industrial/office, specialty
                                                                                         retail, and region-serving specialty retail
                                                                                         uses. Traffic congestion in the area, prior
                                                                                         to needed roadway improvements, may
                                                                                         limit development on the site to low traffic-
                                                                                         generating uses. Hotel use may be
                                          considered for the site provided that environmental analysis demonstrates that
Marin Square could be                     potentially hazardous soils conditions are in compliance with State and Federal laws
redeveloped as a                          and that geo-seismic conditions and commercial use conflicts have been mitigated.
m i xe d - u s e c e n t e r , w i t h
housing and a hotel.
                                              NH-59a. Development Review Process. As part of a development application, consider
                                              land use changes to Cal-Pox Site to allow for redevelopment.
                                                   Responsibility: Community Development
                                                   Timeframe: Long Term
                                                   Resources: Fees
                                              See LU-2a (Development Review).
  90                                   SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                                   Reprinted 04/28/2017
NH-60. Marin Rod & Gun Club.
Should the club discontinue use of the site for recreational activities, allow high
density residential or hotel use and provide for public access.
     NH-60a. Development Review Process. As part of a development application, consider
     land use changes to the Marin Rod and Gun Club to allow for redevelopment.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Fees
     See LU-2a (Development Review).
     Neighborhood Design
NH-61. Public Plaza.
Encourage the creation of a public plaza to serve the Canal community.
     NH-61a. Public Plaza. Through development review process, encourage a public plaza
     area. If funding becomes available, identify a location and purchase land for a plaza.
           Responsibility: Community Development, Economic Development
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Grants, Donations, Staff Time
NH-62. Parks and Recreation.
Increase recreation opportunities and facilities to serve neighborhood residents and
employees. Complete planned Pickleweed Park and Starkweather Shoreline Park
improvements, enhance Beach Park, and plan and implement park improvements at
the Bellam/Windward Way site.
     See PR-5a (Needs Survey), PR-7a (Community Park Improvements), PR-8a
     (Neighborhood Park Improvements), PR-9 (Bellam/Windward Way site) and PR-13a
     (Commercial Recreation).
NH-63. Community Meeting Rooms.
Meet the need for affordable meeting/activity space, during prime times for the
community for resident serving programs and activities such as English as a Second
Language classes and other programs and activities, with priority given to
neighborhood residents.
     NH-63a. Community Use of Pickleweed Park. Continue to encourage neighborhood use
     of Pickleweed Community Center.
           Responsibility: Community Services
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time, Partnerships
NH-64. Schools.
Support efforts of the School District to provide adequate space for increasing student
enrollments. Encourage continued City/School dialogue on such issues.
     NH-64a. Schools. Continue to support School District efforts to provide to expand or
     replace the existing Bahia Vista School in the Canal neighborhoods.
           Responsibility: City Manager
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                    SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS 91
                                    NH-65. Library Services.
                                    Support expanded library services in the Canal Neighborhood.
                                         See CA-12a (Opportunities for Community-Based Libraries).
                                    NH-66. Childcare.
                                    Provide more affordable, quality, childcare facilities that support the community.
                                         See LU-19a (Zoning for Childcare Programs) and G-15a (Joint Use of Educational
                                         Facilities).
                                    NH-67. Community Classes and Programs.
                                    Provide more programming at Pickleweed, such as College of Marin bilingual classes,
                                    library services, Kids' Club, pre-school and after-school programs.
                                         See PR-27a (Recreational Programs) and PR-28a (Summer Programs).
                                    NH-68. Shoreline Embankments.
                                    Require riprap on the outside face of levees facing the Bay. After large storms, inspect
                                    existing riprap on levee faces. Repair and replace as necessary to provide adequate
                                    wave erosion protection.
                                                                       NH-68a. Riprap. When the levees are improved, require
                                                                       riprap of the type and size approved by the Public Works
                                                                       Department on the outside face of the levee.
                                                                                 Responsibility: Public Works
                                                                                 Timeframe: Long Term
                                                                                Resources: Staff Time
                                                                       See S-17a (Title 18 Flood Protection Standards).
                                                                       NH-69. San Quentin Ridge.
                                                                       Preserve San Quentin Ridge as open space through
                                                                       the development process due to its visual
                                                                       significance, importance as a community separator,
                                                                       slope stability problems and wildlife/endangered
                                                                       species habitat value. The exact delineation of
                                                                       "conservation" and "development" portions of the site
                                                                       on the land use map is schematic, with development
                                                                       to be limited to the lower, less steep portion of the
S t a r k we a t h e r                                                 site. Provide a public access trail.
Shoreline Park is a
beautiful setting to
                                         See OS-1b (Preservation Opportunities), OS-3a (Management of Private Open Space) and
e n j o y t h e b a yf r o n t .
                                         CON-12a (Hillside Design Guidelines).
                                    NH-70. Access to Open Space.
                                    Provide public access to open space areas when projects are approved, including
                                    access to and along the shoreline, portions of the Canalfront, and San Quentin Ridge.
                                    Minimize public access conflicts with sensitive habitat areas and with nearby
                                    development, including parking conflicts.
                                         See OS-4a (Access Points).
   92                            SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                                   Reprinted 04/28/2017
NH-71. Gathering Places.
Support efforts to provide places where neighbors can meet each other, such as at
Pickleweed Park, the Community Center, or a public plaza.
     NH-71a. Development Review Process. Through the development review process,
     encourage the provision of neighborhood gathering places.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Fees
     Neighborhood Circulation
NH-72. Neighborhood Design.
Improve neighborhood entry roads and landscaping, and retain views.
     NH-72a. Medway Improvements. Complete the design phase and construction of
     streetscape improvements of the Medway/Canal project funded in part by a grant from the
     Metropolitan Transportation Commission.
           Responsibility: Public Works
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Resources: Grants, Fees, Staff Time
     See CD-8a (Gateways) and CD-9a (Corridor Design Guidelines).
NH-73. I-580/101/Bellam Blvd. Interchange Improvements.
Pursue improvement of the I-580/101/Bellam Blvd. interchange.
     NH-73a. Caltrans. Work with Caltrans on an effective and attractive design for the
     Highway 101 and I-580 interchange.
           Responsibility: Public Works, Community
           Development
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: State and Federal Fund, Mitigation Fees                       Vi s io n o f t h e
                                                                                Can a l W at erf r o n t
     CANAL WATERFRONT                                                 Improved public access to and along the Canal,
                                                                      both visual and pedestrian, should be actively
The San Rafael Canal, stretching from Albert Park to the              promoted through redevelopment of properties
Bay, is an underutilized community asset. Existing uses               between Grand Avenue and Harbor Street. A
transition from single-family homes and apartments east               public promenade on either side of the Canal is a
of Harbor Street, and commercial uses from Harbor                     high priority. Water dependent industry will
                                                                      continue to be encouraged, but other pedestrian-
Street to Grand Avenue. Most of these commercial uses
                                                                      oriented services, such as restaurants and retail,
are marine-oriented, including four marinas, yacht                    will also be allowed on ground floors, and
brokerages, boat repair, fishing supplies and commercial              housing allowed above. Live-aboard boats will
fishing operations. Other commercial uses include                     continue to provide additional affordable housing,
restaurants, the Montecito Shopping Center, the Harbor                while adding to the marine character of the area.
Shopping Center, and limited office space. Existing public            Improved access to commercial businesses from
access to the Canal is limited. Beach Park was improved               the water for boaters will also be encouraged.
in conjunction with the renovations at the Seafood                    Maintenance of the Canal as a navigable
                                                                      waterway is essential and will require a local
Peddler restaurant, and Pickleweed Park has a pathway
                                                                      funding source for periodic dredging.
along the Canalfront. In addition, Montecito Shopping
Center and the Grand Landing Office building have
walkways along the waterway.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                   SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                   93
                              Neighborhood Economy and Culture
                          NH-74. Community-wide Asset.
                          Promote and improve the San Rafael Canal as a community-wide asset for public and
                          marine related uses, where public access, use and views of the water are maximized,
                          and sensitive wildlife habitat areas are protected. The San Rafael Canal shall be
                          maintained as a navigable waterway.
                              NH-74a. Design Plan and Vision for the Canalfront. Implement the Canalfront
                              Conceptual Design Plan, which was completed in 2010. This vision document includes a
                              list of recommendations to be studied and pursued. Improve circulation and access,
                              including widening the Grand Avenue bridge in order to improve pedestrian and bicycle
                              circulation.
                                    Responsibility: Community Development, Public Works
                                    Timeframe: Short Term
                                    Resources: Staff Time, State and Federal Grants
                              See NH-79a (Dredging Program).
                          NH-75. Canal Waterfront Uses.
                          Promote marine-related commercial uses west of Harbor Street to serve the
                          recreational and live-aboard boating community. Other commercial uses that
                          encourage pedestrian traffic, such as restaurant and retail uses, will also be allowed on
                          the ground floor. Residential and office uses are allowed above the ground floor. East
                          of Harbor Street, residential uses are to be retained.
                                                                         NH-75a. Zoning Ordinance. Maintain zoning
                                                                         provisions to allow non-marine-related and
                                                                         residential uses.
                                                                         Responsibility: Community Development
                                                                              Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                                              Resources: Staff Time
                                                                         NH-76. Recreational Boat
                                                                         Facilities.
                                                                         Existing recreational boat launch facilities
                                                                         along the canal shall not be reduced unless
                                                                         the demand for those facilities no longer
                                                                         exists or adequate substitute space can be
                                                                         provided. Encourage the addition of boat
                                                                         launch facilities, boat trailer parking, and
                                                                         sewage pump-out facilities where
                                                                         appropriate.
                              NH-76a. Maritime Service Demand. Evaluate the market demand for maritime service
Redevelopment along
the Canalfront to             uses in developing the Canal Waterfront Vision.
improve public access               Responsibility: Community Development, Economic Development, Management Services
is a major goal of the              Timeframe: Long Term
plan.                               Resources: Staff Time
                              NH-76b. Public Boat Launching Facilities. Promote the addition of public boat
                              launching facilities, for example for kayaks at Beach Park or behind Montecito Shopping
                              Center.
  94                   SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                                     Reprinted 04/28/2017
           Responsibility: Community Development, Community Services, Economic Development
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: State Lands Mitigation Funds, Property Owners, Partnerships,
           Concessionaires, Staff Time
NH-77. State Lands Commission Title Claims.
Continue to resolve public trust title claims with individual property owners and the
State Lands Commission in order to assist in the redevelopment of the affected
properties.
     NH-77a. State Lands Commission Title Claims. To assist in redevelopment of affected
     properties, resolve public trust title claims consistent with State Law Chapter 1742,
     Statutes of 1971, which allows the City to convey or exchange, subject to approval of the
     State Lands Commission, certain filled lands which are found to be no longer useful or
     susceptible to use for the public trust purposes of harbors, commerce, navigation, fisheries,
     or appurtenances thereto.
           Responsibility: Economic Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     Neighborhood Design
NH-78. Waterfront Design.
Require low scale buildings that provide public views of the water and which do not
dominate the Canal. Design factors important in reviewing specific development
proposals include pedestrian access, building setbacks from the water, height,
landscaping, Canal view protection and enhancement, wildlife habitat protection and
high quality architectural design. Until a design plan is prepared, new Canalfront
buildings and substantial reconstruction of existing buildings and structures should:
a. Be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the top of the bank or bulkhead along the
     Canal for creation of a public promenade,
b. Increase public access and public view opportunities,
c. Improve access from the water for boaters, where appropriate,
d. Locate new structures, or relocate existing structures where feasible, to retain or
     open up view corridors to the water and activities along the Canal,
e. Orient uses and buildings towards the Canal waterfront, including building entries
     where appropriate, and
f. Improve the appearance of the waterfront through excellent design quality.
     NH-78a. Canalfront Design Guidelines. Prepare, as part of the Canal Waterfront Vision,
     design guidelines in order to improve the appearance of buildings along the Canal
     Waterfront and incorporate opportunities for public access.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time, General Fund
     See program N-74a (Design Plan and Vision for the
Canalfront).
NH-79. Canal Maintenance.
Develop a plan for long-term maintenance of the Canal as a navigable waterway,
including regular dredging. Encourage the maintenance of docks and elimination of
refuse along the Canal.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                        SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS 95
          NH-79a. Dredging Program. Work with property owners to develop a funding program
          to dredge the Canal. Continue to aggressively pursue a maintenance assessment district,
          federal funding and other funding sources as available.
               Responsibility: Public Works, Management Services
               Timeframe: Long Term
               Resources: Assessment District, Grants, Federal Funding
          NH-79b. Boating Sanitation and Dock Safety. Implement the new Boating Sanitation
          and Dock Safety Ordinance, and encourage reporting of trash issues to Code Enforcement.
          Require adequate on-site refuse and recycling facilities.
               Responsibility: Community Development
               Timeframe: Ongoing
               Resources: Staff Time, Fines
          See AW-10a (Sanitation Facilities in Boats), AW-10b (Sewage Pump Out Facilities) and
          AW-10c (Education of Boaters).
      NH-80. Canal Water Quality.
      Improve the Canal’s water quality through regulation of boating discharges, improve-
      ment in the quality of storm water runoff, and elimination of refuse along the Canal.
          NH-80a. Pump-Out Facilities. Support and co-sponsor the provision of marine pump-out
          facilities. Consider the need for additional pump-out facilities in conjunction with
          remodeling of existing marinas.
               Responsibility: Community Development
               Timeframe: Long Term
               Resources: Staff Time, Partnerships
          See also NH-78a (Canalfront Design Guidelines), and AW-7a (Countywide Stormwater
          Program), AW-7b (Stormwater Runoff Measures) and AW-7c (Water Quality
          Improvements in Canal and Other Waterways).
      NH-81. Improvement of Existing Pump Station.
      Improve the appearance of or relocate the City’s pump station along West Francisco
      Boulevard near the San Rafael Yacht Harbor.
          NH-81a. Improved Appearance of Pump Station. Program funds to upgrade the
          appearance of the pump station at the yacht harbor on West Francisco Blvd.
               Responsibility: Public Works         Timeframe: Long Term
               Resources: Staff Time
      NH-82. Flood Control Improvements.
      Coordinate development and redevelopment of uses along the Canal with needed
      flood control improvements, including levee improvements.
          NH-82a. Flood Control. Work with the Army Corps of Engineers to prepare a cost-
          effective flood control program for the Canalfront area. Through development review
          process, require levee improvements as needed to protect existing and new development.
               Responsibility: Community Development
               Timeframe: Long Term
               Resources: Staff Time, Federal Funds
96 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                                    Reprinted 04/28/2017

     Neighborhood Circulation
NH-83. Canal Access.
Increase and improve public access to the Canal through creation of a public
promenade on either side of the waterfront between Grand Avenue and Harbor Street.
Provide an improved pedestrian crossing of the Canal at the Grand Avenue bridge.
Pursue a new pedestrian crossing to the east if a cost effective and practical design can
be achieved. Attempt to create pedestrian and bicycle access to the Mahon Creek path
in conjunction with future freeway modifications. Improve water-based access by
recreational boaters to Canalfront businesses.
     NH-83a. Circulation Improvements. Continue to seek funding opportunities for
     pedestrian and bicycle enhancements, and include in CIP as funding becomes available.
           Responsibility: Public Works
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time, Grants, Partnerships
     NH-83b. Boat docks. Encourage the provision of boat docks in new commercial
     development to allow access by boaters to Canal businesses.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees
     See C-24b (Canal Crossing), C-26 (Bicycle Plan Implementation), C-27 (Pedestrian Plan
     Implementation), NH-78a (Canalfront Design Guidelines), and CD-5a (Views).
     CHINA CAMP
                                                                                         Vi s io n o f
China Camp is in the unincorporated area of the San                      Ch in a       C am p S t at e       P ar k
Rafael Planning Area, located along the northern edge
                                                                    Future plans for the China Camp State Park, which
of Point San Pedro Road. The primary land use in this
                                                                    is located in an unincorporated area of the County,
neighborhood is the 1,640-acre China Camp State
                                                                    are consistent with State and local priority needs:
Park. China Camp State Park features an historic
                                                                    the park plan calls for continued restoration of the
fishing village, picnic facilities, hiking trails, campsites,
                                                                    fishing village and an addition of a Chinese Cultural
and shore fishing. Park rangers reside at the park.
                                                                    Center, biking, hiking and equestrian trails, and a
                                                                    small boat launch facility.
     Neighborhood Design
NH-84. Buck's Landing.
Support limited marine and recreational use on this unincorporated site, consistent
with Countywide Plan policy.
     See LU-7 (Land Use Planning in Surrounding Jurisdictions).
NH-85. China Camp State Park.
Support efforts to upgrade the recreational facilities at China Camp State Park.
Collaborate with County and State Park agencies to create, maintain, manage and
regulate a system of interconnective trails for pedestrian, equestrian and biking uses
between Barbier Park, county open space and China Camp State Park.
     NH-85a. China Camp State Park. Support efforts of the State to maintain and upgrade
     China Camp State Park.
           Responsibility: Public Works, Community Services, Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                    SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                   97
                                                                          CIVIC CENTER
                          Vi s io n o f t h e                             Home to the historic Marin County Civic Center complex
                           Civ i c C en t er                              designed by Frank Lloyd Wright, the neighborhood is
                                                                          developed with single-family homes, condominiums,
          The Civic Center Master Plan identifies                         apartments, offices and commercial uses, a hotel, a dog
          additional office space and more cultural and                   park, and a post office. The Civic Center complex
          entertainment facilities, including a museum. A                 includes county offices, courts, jail, exhibit hall,
          future transit station with parking is planned on               auditorium, and a lagoon park. The Marin County
          the vacant property located adjacent to Highway                 Farmer’s Market and Marin County Fair are also held on
          101, across from McInnis Parkway. The area                      Civic Center grounds.
          also provides an excellent opportunity for the
          construction of approximately 200 affordable                    Traffic congestion near the Civic Center was recently
          units. The salt marsh and riparian corridors                    improved with the construction of a new intersection at
          along branches of Gallinas Creek should be                      North San Pedro Road and Civic Center Road, featuring
          protected, improved, and include public viewing                 two left-turn lanes onto Civic Center Drive.
          areas where appropriate.
                                           Neighborhood Design
                                                                     NH-86. Design Considerations for Development
                                                                    in the Vicinity of the Civic Center.
                                                                    a. Require urban design analysis to assure compatibility of
                                                                         materials, color and building masses with Civic Center.
                                                                    b. Require functional inter-connection with Civic Center.
                                                                    c. Design to complement Civic Center architecture rather
                                                                         than compete.
                                                                    d. Site design should retain vistas where feasible to Mt.
                                                                         Tamalpais.
                                                                    e. Encourage retention of existing historic structures.
                                                                    f. Encourage the County to enhance the Civic Center Drive
                                                                         area with safe and pleasant walkways.
                                                                    g. Encourage the County to have proposals go through
                                                                         Design Review process, and involve North San Rafael
                                                                         community in evaluation of design, etc.
                                                                    h.        Implement the recommendations identified in the
Th e M a r i n C i vi c C e n t e r                                           Civic Center Station Area Plan completed in 2011.
is the only public
building designed by                       NH-86a. Civic Center Design. Monitor, review and comment on County development
F r a n k L l o yd W r i g h t t o         related to its properties surrounding and including the Civic Center. Encourage the
be built.                                  County to involve the North San Rafael community in the evaluation and review of
                                           proposed changes at the Civic Center. Request that the County provide sufficient
                                           opportunity for review of major development proposals at the Civic Center by the Design
                                           Review Board, Planning Commission and City Council. Implement the recommendations
                                           prescribed in the Civic Center Station Area Plan completed in 2011.
                                                Responsibility: Community Development
                                                Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                Resources: Staff Time
      98                            SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                                    Reprinted 04/28/2017

     Neighborhood Economy and Culture
NH-87. Civic Center Expansion.
Review and comment on plans for future Civic Center expansion projects, including
but not limited to, office space and residential units. Support renovations and additions
to cultural and entertainment facilities at the Civic Center.
     See NH-86a (Civic Center Design).
     Neighborhood Circulation
NH-88. Sonoma Marin Area Rail Transit (SMART) Station.
Support construction of a Civic Center SMART station. Encourage a plan that
provides high density housing, bus transit connections, a parking lot, and incorporates
pedestrian facilities and bicycle access (including bike storage facilities) consistent
with the San Rafael Bike and Pedestrian Master Plan.
     NH-88a. Transit-Oriented Development. Work with SMART, Marin County, Golden
     Gate Bridge Transit District and other transit providers to prepare a site-specific design for
     a transit-oriented development with housing in the vicinity of the rail station.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: General Fund, Grants
     NH-88b. Safe Walkways and Bikeways. Encourage the provision of lighting and
     sidewalks to ensure safe and attractive walkways and bikeways from the transit center, on
     both sides of Civic Center Drive, to the Northgate area.
           Responsibility: Public Works
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time
NH-89. Bicycle and Pedestrian Walkway.
 Provide a continuous walkway from the Civic Center to McInnis Park along the
 railroad, consistent with the San Rafael Bike and Pedestrian Master Plan.
 See C-24a (North San Rafael Promenade), C-27a (Implementation) and C-27b (Prioritizing
 Pedestrian Improvements).
NH-90. Bus Pads.
 Improve the safety for transit riders walking and biking to the bus pads on Highway
 101 at Freitas Interchange.
 NH-90a. Improved Pedestrian Safety at Bus Pads. Work with Golden Gate Transit to
 provide for safer bus pad locations and design.
   Responsibility: Public Works
   Timeframe: Long Term
   Resources: Staff Time
NH-91. Bike Path.
 Create a bike path between Dominican/Black Canyon and the Civic Center, from
 Villa Avenue to San Pablo Avenue, along Highway 101.
     See C-26 (Bicycle Plan Implementation), C-27 (Pedestrian Plan Improvements).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                      SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS 99
                                NH-92. North San Rafael Promenade.
                                Support construction of the terminus of the Promenade to Civic Center Drive as
                                described in the North San Rafael Vision Promenade Conceptual Plan.
                                    See C-27 (Pedestrian Plan Improvements), C-24a (North San Rafael Promenade).
                                                             COUNTRY CLUB
                   Vi s io n o f                             The Country Club Neighborhood is primarily an
              Co u n t r y Cl u b                            unincorporated area of the City featuring large single-family
                                                             homes on hillside lots. The incorporated portion of the
 Country Club, located in an unincorporated
                                                             neighborhood, located along the San Rafael Creek, is
 area of the County, is one of San Rafael’s
                                                             developed with single-family homes and condominiums.
 older neighborhoods, and is not expected to
 change much. Annexation of some properties
                                                             NH-93. Marin Yacht Club Tennis Courts
 into the City may occur consistent with LAFCO
 policies.                                                   Site.
                                                             Encourage the retention of needed recreation uses. Any
                                                             future reuse of the site should be residential, compatible
                                                             with the surrounding neighborhood.
                                                                 See LU-2a (Development Review).
                                                            DOMINICAN/BLACK CANYON
                     Vi s io n o f                          The Dominican-Black Canyon neighborhood is primarily
  Do m in i c an /B la ck C an yo n                         developed with single-family homes, a number of which are
                                                            historic and unique in character, as well as some duplexes
 Preserve and enhance the residential and
                                                            and condominiums. The neighborhood is defined by its
 historic character of the neighborhood and its
                                                            large and abundant trees, landscaped yards, and generally
 natural habitats. Little change is expected in
                                                            forested character. Residents of the neighborhood enjoy a
 the neighborhood. While the neighborhood is
                                                            pleasant residential setting and wealth of outdoor beauty.
 virtually built-out, new residential development
                                                            The Dominican hills and Barbier Park/Gold Hill, which form
 may occur primarily on the remaining vacant
                                                            the northern and eastern boundary of the neighborhood,
 or subdivided lots. Long-standing priorities for
                                                            feature native landscape and trails that provide spectacular
 the residents include developing a
                                                            views of the City and surrounding area. Creeks also provide
 neighborhood park and playground
                                                            important natural riparian habitats. Highway 101 and its
 opportunities; minimizing impacts of University
                                                            sound walls form the western boundary of the
 facilities, activities and events on surrounding
                                                            neighborhood.
 residential areas; and reducing the impact of
 the freeway on the neighborhood, including
                                                            Within the neighborhood, there are two long-standing
 installation of landscaping and sound
                                                            community institutions. The Convent of Dominican Sisters
 reduction material along the freeway sound
                                                            has been located here since 1889, and in 1915 the sisters
 wall.
                                                            opened what was later to become Dominican University.
                                                            Recent Master Use Permit approvals for the University have
 The Dominican University Master Use Permit
                                                            resulted in upgrades to existing facilities, including
 allows for the future construction of a chapel, a
                                                            landscape and parking lot improvements, and the
 science and technology building, parking
                                                            construction of student housing and a recreation center
 areas and a new soccer field. Additional
                                                            featuring a gym and a pool. The Marin Ballet, Marin Tennis
 student and staff housing may also be needed
                                                            Club, and Coleman School are also located within the
 in the future.
                                                            neighborhood boundaries.
100                          SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                                 Reprinted 04/28/2017

     Neighborhood Economy and Culture
NH-94. Dominican University.
Construction of new facilities at Dominican University should be consistent with the
approved Master Use Permit, including the Events Management Plan contained
therein and any subsequent approvals. Require a Use Permit Amendment for any new
housing units. Impacts of University facilities, activities and events on the residential
neighborhood should be minimized. Continue to foster a cooperative relationship
between the University’s students, faculty and visitors and neighborhood residents
through efforts such as the Dominican University Neighborhood Advisory Committee.
     NH-94a. Dominican University. Monitor compliance with the Master Use Permit and
     Events Management Plan, and amend as necessary. As needed, participate in the
     Neighborhood Advisory Committee process.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time, Fees
     NH-94b. University Housing. Amend the Zoning
     Ordinance to allow residential uses.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time
     Neighborhood Design
NH-95. Barbier Park/Gold Hill. (Deleted
per Amendment on 12/5/16)
NH-95a. Barbier Park/Gold Hill. (Deleted per Amendment
on 12/5/16)
NH-96. Dominican University Hillside
Area.
                                                                                                        Dominican
The largest undeveloped parcel in the neighborhood is the approximately 24 acres of                     University
hillside land owned by Dominican University (located east of the campus). This area                     opened in 1917.
is mostly very steep, is heavily wooded, contains a significant riparian area and
provides an important and heavily used fire road connection between the Country
Club neighborhood and the Gold Hill/Barbier Park open space. Any future University
use of this area should be planned through an amendment to the University’s Master
Use Permit. The permitted density should reflect the significant site constraints.
     NH-96a. Development Review Process. Through the development review process, apply
     the Hillside Design Guidelines to design of housing at the site. Involve the neighborhood
     in the planning and review process of proposed development.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time, Fees
NH-97. Park or Recreation Facilities.
Pursue opportunities to provide a neighborhood park and/or recreation facilities in
Dominican/Black Canyon.
     See PR-9a (New Parks).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                     SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                101

                             NH-98. Freeway Sound Wall.
                             Encourage Caltrans to maintain landscaping along the freeway sound wall and to
                             incorporate sound-deadening technology.
                                  NH-98a. Freeway Improvements. In reviewing plans for freeway projects, encourage
                                  adequate landscaping and use of sound-deadening materials on the sound wall and/or the
                                  roadway surface.
                                      Responsibility: Public Works
                                      Timeframe: Short Term
                                      Resources: Staff Time
                                  See N-6f (Widening of US 101 and 580).
                                  Neighborhood Circulation
                             NH-99. Dominican University Traffic and Parking.
                             Minimize traffic and on-street parking impacts of Dominican University activities and
                             events on surrounding residential areas and assure that appropriate on-campus parking
                             is provided.
                                  See NH-94a (Dominican University) and C-31 (Residential Area Parking).
                                                        FAIRHILLS
                                                        The Fairhills neighborhood, located in central San Rafael, is
       Vi s io n      o f  F a i r h il ls
                                                        primarily developed with large, single-family homes on hillside
    This neighborhood, essentially built-out,           lots. The Neighborhood 13/14 Plan was adopted for Fairhills
    may see the future development of                   and Sun Valley in 1980 and became the precursor for the
    single-family homes on the few vacant               City’s Hillside Design Guidelines that were adopted in 1991.
    hillside lots. Marin Academy will                   Other features of the neighborhood include the Red Rock
    continue to upgrade its facilities.                 Quarry, a visually significant topographic feature, and the
                                                        Marin Academy, a major and historic feature of the
                                                        neighborhood. Boyd Park provides recreational opportunities
                                                        for residents of the neighborhood.
                                  Neighborhood Homes
                             NH-100. New Development.
                             Retain the existing character of the neighborhood, including both historic homes and
                             the natural setting, by:
                             • Maintaining the authentic historic value and ambiance of the neighborhood’s older
                                  housing,
                             • Assuring that new development and significant remodeling respect and enhance
                                  the character of surrounding housing, and
                             • Protecting hillside areas by clustering new development where appropriate to
                                  maximize open space preservation and by carefully evaluating the location, size
                                  and height of new structures, road design and adequacy for safety vehicles,
                                  grading, structural foundations, surface and sub-soil drainage, excavation,
                                  earthfills, and other operations, in order to avoid buildings which are excessively
                                  visible or out of scale, soil erosion, scarring of the natural landscape, obstruction
                                  of scenic vistas from public vantage points, or loss of natural vegetation and
                                  wildlife habitat.
102                       SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                                  Reprinted 04/28/2017

     NH-100a. Development Review Process. Through the development review process,
     apply the Hillside Design Guidelines to the design of new housing.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees
     FRANCISCO BOULEVARD WEST
                                                                                        Vi s io n o f
                                                                           F r an ci sc o Blv d .             W e st
Since the early 1980s, the Francisco Boulevard West
commercial area has benefited from significant large-scale                Improving the appearance of the area as
development such as Toys R Us and Borders Books and                       an attractive entryway to the City and
Shamrock (CompUSA) retail centers, and Sonnen Motors.                     from surrounding neighborhoods will
These specialty retail uses are important because they are                continue to be a City priority in this area.
major sources of retail sales tax revenue for the City.                   The Highway 101 widening project has
Retention of the existing industrial areas (between                       resulted in acquiring and consolidating
Woodland and the freeway frontage parcels), given the lack                private properties along Francisco
of replacement industrial areas in San Rafael and the                     Boulevard, eliminating older buildings,
importance of such uses to San Rafael's economy and job                   and will offer opportunities for a sidewalk
base, has been, and will continue to be, an important                     and consistent landscape treatment
planning issue in this neighborhood. The Francisco                        along Francisco Boulevard.
Boulevard West area is predominantly developed with auto,
building related, specialty retail, and                                   Encourage preservation of existing
manufacturing/wholesale uses. The area is also the oldest                 industrial (including light industrial) uses,
industrial area in the City.                                              except along the Highway 101 frontage,
                                                                          where redevelopment of sites with high
Completed in 1998, the Andersen Drive Extension
                                                                          tax generating, specialty retail uses
improved the area’s accessibility and provided important
                                                                          need highway visibility. Retention of the
new links between East San Rafael, Francisco Boulevard
                                                                          auto and building related services will
West, and Downtown. The Francisco Boulevard West
                                                                          continue to be important because they
neighborhood is adjacent to the residential areas of Picnic
                                                                          are found primarily in the City’s
Valley, California Park and Bret Harte, along Woodland
                                                                          Francisco Boulevard West and the
Avenue.
                                                                          Canal neighborhoods. This industrial
                                                                          area is unique because the properties
     Neighborhood Economy and Culture                                     are medium sized, and are typically
                                                                          occupied with a single tenant in a
NH-101. Industrial Uses.                                                  building that cannot be duplicated under
Protect and concentrate building industry and automotive                  current development standards. Street
service industry land uses which are currently located in                 tree programs and project design review
this area due to the area's central Marin County location and             address the need to improve the
lack of alternate locations south of Puerto Suello Hill. The              appearance of industrial uses near
most appropriate locations for such uses are on both sides                neighborhoods and along major
of Andersen Drive south of Mahon Creek. Protect and                       transportation corridors.
maintain availability of sites for existing building industry
land uses important to San Rafael's economy and needed
for the convenience of its residents and businesses.
     See LU-9a (Nonresidential Zoning), LU-15a (Land Use Compatibility), LU-17a (Building
     and Automotive Services), LU-18a (Retail and Service Uses in Industrial and Office
     Areas), EV-2a (Business Retention) and EV-8a (Industrial Zoning).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                    SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                 103

                                    NH-102. Industrial Area and Design Improvement.
                                    Upgrade building design and landscaping as redevelopment or remodeling occurs.
                                    Evaluate the design of projects considering views from the Bret Harte neighborhood,
                                    the proposed rail transitway, and Andersen Drive, with particular attention paid to
                                    rooftop design and screening of mechanical equipment. New building facades facing
                                    Andersen Drive and the proposed rail transitway should be given design attention
                                    equal to that of any front façade.
                                        NH-102a. Development Review Process. Use the development review process to
                                        encourage design and use consistent with this policy.
                                             Responsibility: Community Development
                                             Timeframe: Long Term
                                             Resources: Fees
                                    NH-103. Specialty Retail Uses.
                                    Upgrade and redevelop portions of the Francisco Boulevard West area visible from
                                    Highway 101 with specialty retail commercial uses that can capitalize on the Highway
                                    101 frontage and visibility, while minimizing traffic impacts. Specialty retail uses
                                    include automobile sales, bulk retail sales, region-serving retail uses, and hotels.
                                    Encourage relocation of manufacturing and storage uses from highway frontage
                                    locations, and consolidation of parcels for greater design flexibility
                                                                         NH-103a. Development of Properties along Highway
                                                                         101. For properties visible from Highway 101 where
                                                                         significant redevelopment and upgrading is needed, assist
                                                                         cooperative development efforts among property owners to
                                                                         assemble individual parcels.
                                                                                   Responsibility: Community Development,
                                                                         Economic Development
                                                                                   Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                                                   Resources: Fees
                                                                         See LU-2a. (Development Review).
                                                                         NH-104. Existing Retail Centers
                                                                         Upgrade.
                                                                         Facilitate the upgrade of existing retail centers (Graham
                                                                         and Rice Centers) at the crossroads of Andersen Drive,
                                                                         Highway 101 and the future transitway with improved
Th e A n d e r s e n D r i v e      parking, access, landscaping and building design improvements (including rooftop
a n d F r a n c i s c o B l vd .    screening), in keeping with their key entryway location.
area is at the
crossroads of                           NH-104a. Development Review Process. Use the development review process to
h i g h wa y s 1 0 1 a n d
                                        encourage design and use consistent with this policy. Provide assistance in assembling
580.
                                        lots at shopping center sites located at the crossroads of Andersen Drive, Highway 101 and
                                        Francisco Blvd. West where these actions would result in substantial upgrading of the
                                        properties and redevelopment with desired uses.
                                             Responsibility: Community Development
                                             Timeframe: Long Term
                                             Resources: Fees
                                        See LU-9 (Intensity of Nonresidential Development).
104                              SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                                    Reprinted 04/28/2017

NH-105. Unused Portions of the SMART Right-of-Way.
Encourage use, while ensuring protection of any adjacent wetland habitat, of the
unused portions of the SMART right-of-way, including the section between
Downtown and the Larkspur ferry terminal, to facilitate desired redevelopment of
adjacent parcels and an easement for the North-South bikeway.
     NH-105a. Development Review Process. Use the development review process to
     encourage design and use consistent with this policy. Provide assistance in assembling
     lots where these actions would result in substantial upgrading of the properties and
     redevelopment with desired uses.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Fees
NH-106. Land Uses Near Residential Areas.
Design new or redeveloped properties facing Woodland Avenue to create a transition
between residential uses west of Woodland and heavier industrial uses in the area.
Encourage light industrial uses that minimize adverse impacts. Give special attention
to landscape screening of buildings and outdoor storage and to screening rooftop
equipment given rooftop visibility from higher elevations.
     NH-106a. Development Review Process. Use the development review process to
     encourage design and use consistent with this policy.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Fees
NH-107. Office Uses.
Discourage office uses except for existing small office uses and those that are
ancillary to retail or industrial uses. New office complexes shall not be allowed.
     See LU-2a (Development Review).
     Neighborhood Circulation
NH-108. Entries into Bret Harte Neighborhood.
Encourage better landscaping, pedestrian sidewalks and building façade upgrades on
major streets leading into the Bret Harte neighborhood, including Woodland Avenue,
Irwin Street, Lovell Avenue, Lindaro Avenue and DuBois Street.
     See LU-2a (Development Review).
NH-109. Andersen Drive Access.
Continue to minimize vehicular access points to Andersen Drive to maintain
maximum traffic flow.
     See LU-2a (Development Review).
NH-110. Highway 101 Widening Project.
Improve the appearance of the area as an entryway from Highway 101. Provide a
consistent landscape treatment along the frontage road, including large street trees and
landscape berms to screen parking areas.
     See LU-2a (Development Review).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                      SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS 105

                                                       GERSTLE PARK
                 Vi s io n o f
                                                       Gerstle Park developed as San Rafael’s first residential
            G e rst l e P ar k                                                                                    th
                                                       neighborhood in the 1800s. The neighborhood in the 19
  Gerstle Park is a unique, historic and               century included summer homes for wealthy San Franciscans
  walkable neighborhood in close                       who used these dwellings only a few months of the year. The
  proximity to Downtown. It is essentially             early 1900s saw the development of working class bungalows
  built-out and will remain a very diverse             and Arts and Crafts homes, many of which have survived.
  and active residential neighborhood with             Located south of, and adjacent to, San Rafael’s downtown
  relatively little change. Opportunities              business district, the neighborhood’s northern boundary is
  should be taken to visually upgrade or               formed by the transition of commercial to residential land use. A
  replace apartment buildings to be more               mix of housing including single-family, duplex and multifamily
  compatible with the historic                         units has been built on the flat portion of the neighborhood. The
  neighborhood design character,                       residential density and architectural character of the
  preserve historic structures and                     neighborhood was altered in the 1950s and 1960s when some
  architectural character, reduce impacts              of the older, historic homes were replaced by apartment
  of through-traffic on neighborhood                   buildings. However, the area still retains one of San Rafael’s
  streets, and restore adequate parking on             largest concentrations of Victorian and turn-of-the-century
  neighborhood streets.                                homes. The Gerstle Park neighborhood has one of the highest
                                                       residential housing densities in San Rafael. The neighborhood
                                                       includes the six-acre Gerstle Park, Short School Elementary
                                                       School and a mixture of residential architectural styles.
                               Neighborhood issues that need to be addressed are traffic problems such as lack of
                               parking, excessive speed and protection of neighborhood streets from the impacts of
                               through-traffic, adequate drainage, maintenance of streets and sidewalks, historic
                               preservation, and private property maintenance.
                                   Neighborhood Homes
                               NH-111. New Development.
                               Preserve and enhance the residential and historic character of the Gerstle Park
                               neighborhood by:
                               • Protecting the existing mixed residential area, strictly limiting rezoning to
                                   higher densities,
                               • Prohibiting additional nonresidential development in Gerstle Park except as
                                   allowed in zoning regulations,
                               • Protecting hillside ridges and the visual backdrop of the ridges fringing the
                                   neighborhood,
                               • Preserving historic homes by encouraging new development or significant
                                   remodels that enhance the historic architectural character of the neighborhood,
                               • Requiring that adjacent Downtown land use designations and developments are
                                   compatible with and do not negatively affect the neighborhood and that sensitive
                                   transitions occur where Downtown development abuts neighborhood residences.
                                   NH-111a. Development Review Process. Use the development review process to
                                   encourage design and use consistent with this policy.
                                        Responsibility: Community Development
                                        Timeframe: Long Term
                                        Resources: Fees
                               See NH-1a (Neighborhood Planning Process), CD-10b (Compatibility of Patterns), CA-13a
                               (Inventory Update) and CA-13b (Preservation Ordinance).
106                         SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                                  Reprinted 04/28/2017

     Neighborhood Design
NH-112. Architectural Design.
Preserve and enhance the distinctive design character of the
neighborhood, including historic design features.
     See Community Design and Historic Preservation programs.
NH-113. Albert Park.
Improve the street façade and entryway of Albert Park.
Consider the addition of a public pool.
     See PR-7a (Community Park Improvements) and PR-11b
     (Public Pool).
NH-114. Mahon Creek.
Preserve and enhance Mahon Creek.
     See CON-8a (Creek Restoration), CON-8b (Tree Retention)
     and LU-2a (Development Review).
     Neighborhood Circulation
NH-115. Pedestrian Linkages and
Landscaping.
Improve bicycle and pedestrian linkages and landscape treatment of major entry roads              Gerstle Park is
from the Downtown area, such as B, C, and D Streets.                                              k n o wn f o r i t s m a n y
                                                                                                  w e l l - p r e s e r ve d
     NH-115a. Pedestrian Improvements. Provide landscaping improvements along B, C                older homes.
     and D Streets.
           Responsibility: Public Works
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time
     See C-26a (Bicycle Plan Implementation).
     GLENWOOD
The Glenwood neighborhood, located along the Point
San Pedro Peninsula, is developed with single-family                  Vi s io n       o f  G l e n w o o d
homes. The open space hills above the housing
                                                                This neighborhood is a built-out community,
developments constitute about 50 percent of the
                                                                which will remain developed with single-family
neighborhood land area and are adjacent to China Camp
                                                                residences. Very little change is anticipated.
State Park. Most of the homes are part of the same
development so they share similar characteristics and
architectural style. Centers within the neighborhood
include Glenwood School and Victor Jones Park.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                             SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                             107

                                    Lincoln/San Rafael Hill
                               Lincoln Avenue, a transportation artery for San Rafael, bisects the neighborhood. The
                               street connects north and central San Rafael via Los Ranchitos Road over Puerto
                               Suello Hill. The mixed-use neighborhood, one of the oldest neighborhoods in San
                               Rafael, consists of single-family homes, apartments, condominiums, offices, hotels,
                               social services, and a neighborhood delicatessen. These uses serve a diverse
                               population. Many offices along Lincoln Avenue are converted single-family homes
                               from the 1980s. Buildings in the Lincoln Neighborhood have a variety of architectural
                               styles. Boyd Park provides recreational opportunities for the residents. Planning
                               issues in the neighborhood are traffic congestion, traffic speed and safety, parking on
                               hillside streets, and limited parking along Lincoln Avenue.
                                    Neighborhood Homes
                               NH-116. Lincoln Avenue.
                               Maintain low-density development in the hillside areas, consistent with the existing
                               density and environmental constraints. Allow higher density residential development
                               along Lincoln Avenue between Hammondale Court and Mission Avenue given its
                               good access to public transit. Promote lot consolidations to achieve higher densities
                                                            while providing adequate on-site parking and circulation
                                                            and minimizing ingress/egress to Lincoln Avenue;
                                                            minimize additional office conversions of residential sites;
                  Vi s io n o f
          L in co l n / S an R af a e l                     maintain 15-foot setbacks and street trees as corridor
                          Hi ll                             amenities to provide a landscaped streetscape. The
                                                            following are more specific policies for Lincoln Avenue:
    The future vision of the Lincoln-San Rafael               a. Promote high-density residential development along
    Hill neighborhood is a balanced approach                     Lincoln Avenue, consistent with its existing character
    to addressing the area’s unique issues.                      and good access to public transit. Encourage
    The neighborhood is zoned as a mixed-                        redevelopment of these sites for residential use,
    use area of single-family homes,                             consistent with the surrounding neighborhood.
    apartments, condominiums, offices,                           Encourage lot consolidations to achieve more efficient
    rehabilitation facilities and businesses. The                redevelopment project designs. Encourage
    area has a variety of architectural styles                   underground parking for any new or substantial
    and history with a relatively dense and                      redevelopment project along Lincoln Avenue.
    diverse population. Perspectives reflecting
                                                              b. Prohibit additional office conversions of residential
    the future of this Neighborhood have to
                                                                 units in residential/office areas except for mixed
                                                                 office/residential projects where the same or additional
    include the hillside areas of San Rafael Hill
                                                                 residential units are provided. Prohibit retail uses.
    with those along Lincoln Ave. This
                                                              c. Design all new projects and substantial remodels in
    neighborhood may also experience limited
                                                                 accordance with Noise Element policies.
    infill development along Lincoln Avenue
                                                              d. Require setbacks and other project design features that
    with the redevelopment of single-family
                                                                 visually reduce the wall effect along Lincoln Avenue.
    home lots, a nursery and existing motels.
                                                                 Encourage underground parking in new development
                                                                 to reduce building mass and height.
                                    See N-1a (Neighborhood Planning Process).
                               NH-117. Neighborhood Park. Pursue opportunities to provide a neighborhood park
                               in the Lincoln/San Rafael Hill neighborhood.
                                    See PR-9 (New Parks).
108                         SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                                  Reprinted 04/28/2017

     LOCH LOMOND
The Loch Lomond neighborhood is primarily developed with single-family homes on
hillside lots or lots along the Bay. The hills above the neighborhood provide hiking
trails and access to Harry A. Barbier Memorial Park.
The neighborhood is home to the Loch Lomond Marina
and Shopping Center. This extraordinary site includes                   Vi s io n       o f   L o c h   L o m o n d
neighborhood-serving shops and a market, but is
primarily a 550-slip marina. The long breakwater offers               The Loch Lomond Shopping Center and
unique pedestrian access along the bay front and striking             Marina may be redeveloped to feature
views of the San Francisco and San Rafael bays, San                   neighborhood-serving and marine-related retail
Rafael-Richmond Bridge, Mt. Tamalpais, and the Marin                  and service uses including a market,
Islands National Wildlife Refuge – artists are drawn to the           neighborhood serving offices, residential units,
site to capture the Bay vista. To the east and west of the            and a restaurant. The marina should continue
site are wetlands that support all manner of wildlife. The            to feature boat slips, a yacht club and a public
marina includes boat slips, a yacht club, a public boat               boat launching facility. Redevelopment of the
launching facility, boat storage, and a restaurant.                   site will protect the existing marsh and wetland
                                                                      areas and will be designed to be compatible
                                                                      with the surrounding residential uses.
     Neighborhood Design
NH-118. Loch Lomond Marina.
Retain the Loch Lomond Marina uses, and enhance recreational use of the marina
waterfront. Preserve and improve access to the marina and the water’s edge as a
welcoming place for the public to enjoy the boating activities and the waterfront. As the
focal point of the site, the marina shall continue to be a distinct, accessible area. If the
property owner proposes to redevelop the site, create a
beautiful waterfront development that maximizes the
site’s location facing San Francisco Bay, consistent with
the following guidelines and requirements:
a. Land Use. Encourage a mixed-use development that
     includes all of the following land uses:
     •     Marina and marina-support facilities, with boat
           berths, a public boat launch, day use boat trailer
           parking, a yacht club, boat retail and services,
           amenities for boaters, restaurant and shops, and
           parking. Sufficient dry boat storage to meet the
           needs of local residents should be retained.
     •     Waterfront-oriented recreation along the marina,
           spits and breakwater. Recreational activities
           include picnicking, kite flying, walking, biking,                                                Loch Lomond
                                                                                                            Marina could be
           fishing, bird watching, and enjoying the views. For example, bird-watching and                   i m p r o ve d t o
           fishing opportunities should be enhanced. Access for fishing should be provided                  p r o vi d e b e t t e r
           in a way that extends a welcome to visitors.                                                     community
     •     Neighborhood-serving commercial uses that meet the needs of residents and                        amenities.
           visitors in the area should be included for their convenience and for trip
           reduction.
     •     Residential, with a mix of housing types, that meets design and housing
           objectives. To increase the affordability of market-rate units, a majority of the
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                   SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                            109

                dwelling units on the property shall be attached housing and/or small single-
                family homes. The different types of housing should be integrated into one
                neighborhood, and should be designed to be compatible with the marina and
                recreational uses. Because of the limited area for marine uses on the site,
                residential use is not allowed in the Marine Related District. In order to
                accommodate the optimal site plan for the marina and housing, the land use
                district boundaries on the site shall be considered approximate and may be
                adjusted through the master plan for the Planned District zoning.
       b. Site Design. Achieve an extraordinary design in an innovative development that
           enhances the neighborhood, San Rafael, and the bayfront. New development should
           draw inspiration from the marina and waterfront, provide a community gathering
           place with neighborhood shopping and recreational opportunities, and include
           attractive housing, consistent with the following guidelines:
           1. Views of the marina and waterfront should draw people into the site and retain
                their value to the surrounding community.
                • The view to the waterfront down the entryway into the site at the Lochinvar
                      intersection is the major public view corridor. To enhance this corridor and to
                      achieve an open, welcoming and inviting entrance to the marina, this corridor
                      may include street right-of-way, open space and parking. Buildings adjacent
                      to the view corridor should be lower scale, or incorporate larger setbacks or
                      stepbacks of upper floors.
                • The frontage along Pt. San Pedro Road should be warm and welcoming,
                      encouraging access through the site’s principal entryway.
                • Buildings should be carefully sited and designed to enhance or minimize
                      impacts to views of the Bay, the Marin Islands, wetlands and the marina.
           2. Improved pedestrian and bicycle access through the site to the marina and
                breakwater should be part of the site’s design.
           3. A recreational area along the waterfront should be included to differentiate the
                marina functions from the new neighborhoods. This public area shall serve as a
                community-gathering place, and provide activities accessible to children and
                adults both in the immediate neighborhood and in the surrounding area. A play
                area with playground equipment suitable for preschool and elementary school
                ages, with a water play feature, is recommended, and an active recreational area
                such as a sports court (i.e., bocce ball or volleyball) is desired.
           4. The streets and alleyways should be designed for slow driving speeds, and there
                should be an enhanced transit stop on Pt. San Pedro Road.
           NH-118a. Project Design and Review.
           a. Require early conceptual design review by the Design Review Board and the Planning
                Commission. Encourage applicants to present alternative proposals for conceptual
                review in that design review.
           b. Prior to submitting a proposal, the property owner must confer with Federal, State and
                local agencies (such as Bay Conservation and Development Commission, Association
                of Bay Area Government’s Bay Trails Project, U.S. Fish and Wildlife) with
                responsibility for the Bay.
           c. The neighborhood residents and homeowner associations shall be informed and
                consulted on major design issues throughout the process.
           d. Require a mixed-use parking analysis to establish adequate parking requirements;
                require photomontage analyses as part of the evaluation of view impacts; and, require
                a wetlands delineation.
           e. Carry out the Village at Loch Lomond mixed-use development project approved in
                2007, which was designed to address the recommendations of this program.
                Responsibility: Community Development
                Timeframe: Short Term
                Resources: Fees
110 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                                   Reprinted 04/28/2017

     NH-118b. Common Area Maintenance. Continue to maintain
     publicly-accessible parks, shoreline areas and marina green through                       Vi s io n o f
     resources provided by development within the established Mello-Roos                  L u c a s V al le y
     (assessment) district. Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Short Term                                                     Apart from the County’s
           Resources: Fees                                                           approval of office space at the
                                                                                     Lucasfilm properties, this area,
     NH-118c. Bird-watching. Facilitate the implementation of approved               located in an unincorporated
     projects that include permanent open space areas and provide viewing            area of the County is not
     areas and signage for bird-watching.
                                                                                     expecting any major
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Short Term                                                     development projects during
           Resources: Fees                                                           the San Rafael 2020 planning
                                                                                     period.
     LUCAS VALLEY
This 1,629 acre unincorporated neighborhood is developed with single-
family homes on large lots and incidental retail. With more than 50
percent of the neighborhood located in an open space reserve, the                               Vi s io n o f
population density is low at 1.22 persons per acre. The Lucas Valley                        M arin I sl an d s
Open Space Preserve is located above the developed portions of the
neighborhood.                                                                              Preservation of the Marin
                                                                                           Islands is essential to the
                                                                                           community of San Rafael
     MARIN ISLANDS
                                                                                           and therefore will remain
The East and West Marin Islands in the San Rafael Bay both have land                       uninhabited.
use designations of Hillside Resource Residential but are uninhabited.
The Islands are noted for their visually pleasing appeal, especially during
the bird-breeding season. They are preserved for wildlife habitat
as the Marin Islands National Wildlife Refuge and State
Ecological Reserve.                                                              Vi s io n       o f    M a ri n w o o d
NH-119. Marin Islands.                                                          Marinwood is in an unincorporated area
Maintain islands as open space, except that activities necessary                of the County. The Daphne site, located
for monitoring or enhancement of the wildlife habitat and which                 west of Highway 101 next to the Lucas
does not degrade the habitat may be allowed. Encourage removal                  Valley off-ramp, is a property zoned for
of existing buildings.                                                          residential development. The City and
                                                                                County have entered into an agreement
     NH-119a. Rezone Marin Islands. (Deleted per Amendment on                   whereby the City will not seek to annex
     12/5/16)                                                                   the property and proposed development
                                                                                will occur within the County. This
                                                                                agreement seeks dedication of the right-
     MARINWOOD                                                                  of-way for completion of the freeway off-
                                                                                ramp and maintenance of the City’s
The Marinwood neighborhood is located in an unincorporated                      traffic standards.
portion of the San Rafael Planning Area. The neighborhood is a
single-family community with incidental retail. The Marinwood
Community Center and the adjacent Marinwood Open Space
provide recreational opportunities for residents of the neighborhood.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                    SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                   111

                                     Neighborhood Homes
                                NH-120. Daphne Property.
                                Development of the property should be at densities consistent with Hillside
                                Residential. Development shall be clustered to minimize impacts. Proposed
                                development shall provide noise setbacks consistent with City standards, retention of
                                community-wide visual resources, including preservation of hillside and ridgeline
                                views, and creek side setbacks. Consistent with prior agreements with the County,
                                annexation shall not be required, although development must receive approval of
                                traffic allocation from the City. Land needed for planned highway interchange
                                improvements should be acquired, ideally through the development review process.
                                See LU-7 (Land Use Planning in Surrounding Jurisdictions).
                                                                  MONTECITO/HAPPY VALLEY
          Vi s io n o f M o n t ec it o /
                 Hap p y Va ll e y                                The area known as Montecito/Happy Valley is one of
                                                                  San Rafael’s oldest neighborhoods. Today, most of
     In the year 2020, our distinct neighborhood                  the area is built out. There have been numerous
     is a beautiful and desirable place with                      upgrades, including a late 1980s remodel of the
     a diversity of architecture and
                                                                  Montecito Shopping Center with a new front facade
     a variety of uses
     within easy walking distance.                                and a walkway along the San Rafael Canal.
     There are central gathering places
     where people meet each other to visit                        The area offers a wide variety of housing, business
     and hold events.                                             opportunities and community services. The
     Our pleasant, tree shaded, narrow streets                    residential area contains many large historic homes
     are safe to walk and drive along                             (several of architectural significance), cottages,
     and we see fewer cars.                                       duplexes and diverse apartments, as well as being
     We are a community which                                     home to San Rafael High School. The
     works together
                                                                  neighborhood’s commercial anchor is Montecito
     to keep our neighborhood secure,
     clean and attractive,                                        Shopping Center, one of San Rafael’s larger centers,
     and to celebrate our diversity                               complete with a canalfront walkway. There are two
           (From Montecito/Happy Valley Neighborhood Plan)        community supermarkets on Third Street. Along Irwin
                                                                  Street, a gateway to San Rafael, several large office
Future land uses should be stabilized to keep the                 buildings offer businesses a high profile to
existing mix of uses, with zoning to protect the existing         commuters on Highway 101. Fourth Street provides
uses and to minimize additional development. There is             a commercial link to Downtown with a wide range of
satisfaction with the mix of retail, service, office and          office, service and retail uses. In addition, many
other uses in the commercial areas. The High School's             social service agencies make their home in
bus and maintenance yard site on Union Street may                 Montecito because of the easy accessibility to the
become housing, also meeting the neighborhood's                   rest of San Rafael.
goals for a new outdoor gathering place and improving
the appearance of Union Street while minimizing
adverse impacts to the neighborhood. There are
several opportunities for adding and improving
gathering places and for better recreational
opportunities, particularly at the High School.
 112                         SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                                Reprinted 04/28/2017

     Neighborhood Homes
NH-121. Mix of Housing.
Preserve the current mix of single family, duplex, medium and high density housing in
the residential areas.
     See LU-14a (Land Use Compatibility).
NH-122. San Rafael City School’s Corporation Yard on
Union Street.
Encourage the redevelopment of the School District's bus/maintenance yard with
attractive multifamily housing for seniors and/or school district staff. Neighborhood
childcare should be retained on the site. The project should also include a children’s
playground designed for use by the residents and the neighborhood. Development of this
site should improve and retain views from the end of Fourth Street to the façade of the
San Rafael High School building.
     See LU-2a (Development Review).
     Neighborhood Economy and Culture
NH-123. Commercial areas.
Retain existing mixed-use land categories and zoning districts in the commercial
areas. Consistent with these districts, encourage active ground floor and retail uses on
Fourth Street.
     See LU-2a (Development Review).
NH-124. Improved Recreation.
Create and improve neighborhood recreational opportunities and facilities.
     NH-124. Neighborhood Park. Provide a neighborhood park with appropriate play
     structures and activities for young children. Potential park site locations include the School
     District’s corporation yard and the San Rafael High School site, possibly at the south end
     of the football field along Third Street or by the tennis courts along Mission Avenue.
     Consistent with City recreation policies, should San Rafael High School ever be closed or
     sold, attempt to secure the continued public use of existing high school recreation
     facilities, and provide neighborhood park facilities.
           Responsibility: Community Services
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Park In-Lieu Fees, Grants, Dedications
     See PR-9a (New Parks).
     Neighborhood Design
NH-125. Design Blend.
Continue to provide a blend of architecture styles in the Montecito/Happy Valley
Neighborhood compatible with and retaining the character of attractive older
buildings. Newer buildings should be well designed, blend well with the existing
homes and provide a “pedestrian friendly” street front.
     See LU-2a (Development Review).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                        SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS 113

       Neighborhood Circulation
       NH-126. Traffic Control.
       Enhance and design streets to provide for appropriate traffic control.
           NH-126a. San Rafael High School Access. Work with the school district to improve
           safety and effectiveness of drop-off areas at San Rafael High School. Encourage continued
           communication and cooperation to address improvements to access.
                Responsibility: Public Works
                Timeframe: Short Term
                Resources: Staff Time
       NH-127. Fourth Street.
       Ensure that Fourth Street provides a “pedestrian-oriented” walking street connection
       to Downtown. The Fourth Street view of the High School should be reestablished and
       improved with landscaping and fencing.
           NH-127a. Fourth Street Enhancement. Through the development review process,
           encourage improvements that extend Fourth Street concrete benches/trash can/ landscape/
           elegant sign treatment to east end of Fourth Street.
                Responsibility: Community Development
                Timeframe: Long Term
                Resources: Staff Time
       NH-128. Sidewalk Improvements.
       Provide sidewalks that are safe and attractive to walk along.
           NH-128a. Sidewalk Improvements. Prepare a Pedestrian Plan, identifying pedestrian
           right-of-ways. Using information from the neighborhood, further develop a list of
           sidewalks and paths for parts of Park, Jewell, Belle, one side of Union, and along the
           perimeter of the High School. Add safe crosswalks and striping where needed for
           pedestrian safety, and posting of speed limits on streets such as Grand, Park and Union.
                Responsibility: Public Works
                Timeframe: Long Term
                Resources: Assessment District, Property Owners
       NH-129. Neighborhood Parking.
       Provide street parking that is convenient and does not dominate the neighborhood.
       Require that all new residential developments provide for attractive and adequate off-
       street parking.
           NH-129a. Neighborhood Parking. To improve parking in the neighborhood, conduct a
           parking survey to further evaluate specific parking problems and identify possible
           solutions that allow for street parking that does not dominate the neighborhood, such as:
           • Working with apartment owners to restore parking spaces being used for storage.
           • Working with property owners to add on-site parking where feasible.
           • Adding “no parking” signs where street clearance is too narrow for emergency
                vehicles to get through.
           • Evaluating the benefits and drawbacks of a Permit Parking Program, i.e., to limit cars
                per unit or to limit nonresident cars.
           • Considering time-limited parking areas.
                Responsibility: Public Works
                Timeframe: Long Term
                Resources: Staff Time, Assessment District
114 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                                    Reprinted 04/28/2017

NH-130. Commercial Parking.
Require well-landscaped commercial parking lots that are safe and convenient for
pedestrians.
     NH-130a. Commercial Public Parking in Montecito. If funding sources can
     be obtained, use the development review process to implement this policy. For                     Vi s io n o f
     example, encourage better use of the easternmost Montecito parking lot by                     M o n t M arin /
     designing better access from the lot to the shopping center, or requiring                 S an R af a el P a rk
     employees to park in this lot.
           Responsibility: Community Development
                                                                                               The Mont Marin/San Rafael
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Funding: Fees                                                                       Park Neighborhood is
                                                                                               essentially built-out with little
     See LU-2a (Development Review).                                                           change expected.
     MONT MARIN/SAN RAFAEL PARK
The Mont Marin/San Rafael Park Neighborhood is a suburban neighborhood located
in North San Rafael. Most of the homes in this neighborhood are owner-occupied. A
significant open space ridge is located along the eastern boundary of the
neighborhood. Jerry Russom Memorial Park is
located along the western boundary of the
neighborhood, providing access to the Terra                                              Vi s io n o f
Linda/Sleepy Hollow Divide Open Space                                         N   o  r t h S an R af ae l
                                                                             Co m m e r ci al C en t er
Preserve. The Mont Marin/San Rafael Park
neighborhood experiences Highway 101 bypass
                                                              One of the key concepts in Vision North San Rafael is the
traffic, which has decreased since Las Gallinas
                                                              development of a “town center” in the heart of the
Avenue was narrowed to one lane each way to
                                                              Northgate commercial area.
accommodate new bike lanes.
                                                              As described in the Vision:
     NORTH SAN RAFAEL                                            A “town center” is a focal point where the values and
                                                                 history of the community are expressed and supported,
     COMMERCIAL CENTER                                           where community identity is strengthened and
                                                                 neighborhood cohesion is fostered. It is a place where
The North San Rafael Commercial Center                           residents and workers can gather—formally and
includes the Northgate “Town Center” area, the                   informally—to share community life. The Town Center will
Northgate Business Park, and the offices and                     have public art, a wide variety of unique shops, many
YMCA located on Los Gamos Road. The Town                         places to eat, and a number of entertainment options.
Center area includes the Northgate One                           Our town center will be a major destination point on the
shopping center, the Northgate Mall, and the                     promenade, a place where everyone feels welcome,
Northgate Three Shopping Center. This area is                    something is always happening, and strolling is a
                                                                 pleasure. It will also include one of North San Rafael’s
developed predominantly with retail and office
                                                                 principal gathering places—in the form of a town square!
uses. The Northgate Business Park, located east
                                                                 Over time, the Town Center would change, expand and
of Highway 101, is developed with a mix of office                evolve to become the heart of the North San Rafael
and industrial uses, providing spaces suited to                  community.
small businesses and startup companies that                   The priority actions for the Town Center are to create a sense of
comprise an important part of San Rafael’s                    enclosure, pedestrian-scale and easy accessibility and to
economy.                                                      provide high quality retail stores for local residents as well as the
                                                              broader community.
This area also includes a variety of housing
including “starter” condominiums, apartments,
medical facilities and senior residential care facilities. The largest vacant property in
this neighborhood is the former Fairchild Semiconductor site, approved for an
industrial/office project. The Merrydale Overcrossing and Freitas Parkway provide
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                       SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                          115

       pedestrian, vehicle, and bike connections between the two sections of the
       neighborhood. The north fork of Gallinas Creek flows through this area from along
       Freitas Parkway to the wetlands bordering McInnis Park.
           Neighborhood Economy and Culture
                                      NH-131. North San Rafael Town
                                      Center.
                                      Create an attractive, thriving heart for the North San
                                      Rafael community: a centerpiece of commerce and
                                      activity with a diversity and synergy of activities for all
                                      ages.
                                      See LU-2a (Development Review).
                                      NH-132. Town Center Activities.
                                      Create a Town Center with high quality retail stores for
                                      local residents as well as the broader community.
                                      Broaden the appeal of the Town Center area by
                                      improving pedestrian traffic, increasing the number of
                                      local shoppers, and attracting a mix of high quality stores,
       entertainment, and services.
       a. Encourage a distinctive commercial niche for the Town Center consistent with the
           area’s characteristics.
       b. Encourage a variety of stores and services to foster local patronage. Examples
           include a library; restaurants; a produce market; and music, book, family clothing,
           housewares, and variety stores.
       c. Encourage upgrading of anchor stores and specialty stores.
       d. Support an additional high quality retail anchor store if necessary for economic
           vitality, consistent with traffic circulation.
       e. Support nightlife activities, such as a late-night restaurant, diner or coffee shops
           that harmonize with existing theaters and cultural activities.
           See LU-2a (Development Review).
       NH-133. Northgate Mall.
       Revitalize the economic health of the Northgate Mall and surrounding business areas.
       Encourage efforts to revitalize and expand Northgate Mall, including improving the
       mix of activities and the quality of shops, and upgrading the appearance of the
       buildings and landscaping, while maintaining a scale consistent with the surrounding
       community and not exceeding infrastructure capacity. Allow the addition of
       residences, maximize the potential for affordable housing, and incorporate promenade
       improvements as described in the North San Rafael Promenade Conceptual Plan in
       any substantial rehabilitation or expansion of the mall.
           See LU-2a (Development Review) and C-24a (North San Rafael Promenade).
       NH-134. Outdoor Gathering Places.
       Encourage outdoor public places that support activities and facilities that will
       encourage people to gather (such as outdoor cafes with music, entertainment for
       children as families dine and shop, and periodic cultural and arts events), promote a
       public plaza, a small music venue, and/or a children’s feature, and provide outdoor
       cafes, sidewalk restaurants, or other uses that provide outdoor seating.
116 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                                 Reprinted 04/28/2017

     See LU-2a (Development Review).
NH-135. Incentives.
Provide planning incentives for uses that will enhance the Town Center, including
retail, office, housing, and community services. Allow a height bonus of two stories
for affordable housing.
     NH-135a. Development Review Process. Through the development review process,
     encourage improvements consistent with this policy. For example, encourage flexibility in
     design of retail to incorporate features, such as plazas, pedestrian walkways,
     entertainment, cultural events, and other community services. Foster partnership among
     property owners, business owners, community residents, and government agencies to plan
     and implement future development and changes.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time
     See LU-13 (Height Bonuses).
NH-136. Design Excellence.
Assure quality of design by supporting
policies that encourage harmonious and
aesthetically pleasing design for new and
existing development. Upgrade and
coordinate landscaping, signage, and
building design in the Town Center area, as
well as improving building and
landscaping maintenance.
     See LU-2a (Development Review).
NH-137. Northgate Business
Park.
Protect and maintain existing industrial
uses and industrial sites that are important
to San Rafael’s economy and needed for
the convenience of its residents and
businesses. Allow uses such as delis and
copy shops that serve businesses and
employees in the area.
                                                                                                           Las Gallinas
     See LU-2a (Development Review).                                                                       Avenue could be
                                                                                                           ‘main street’ for
                                                                                                           North San
     Neighborhood Design                                                                                   Rafael.
NH-138. Industrial Uses and Design Improvement.
Upgrade building design and landscaping with new construction and remodeling
projects, particularly along Redwood Highway. Evaluate the design of projects
considering the views from Highway 101, with particular attention paid to rooftop
equipment and screening of mechanical equipment.
     See also I-4 (Utility Undergrounding) and LU-2a (Development Review).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                       SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                   117

           Neighborhood Circulation
       NH-139. Pedestrian and Bicycle Safety and Accessibility.
       Improve access and bicycle/pedestrian connections between Northgate One, the Mall
       at Northgate and Northgate Three.
           NH-139a. Promenade and Other Improvements. Through the development review
           process, encourage improvements consistent with this policy. Considerations include:
           1. Support routing of the North San Rafael Promenade in the Town Center area to
                include safer and more convenient pedestrian and bike crossings from the Civic
                Center to Northgate Three, Northgate Mall, Northgate One, and along Freitas
                Parkway.
           2. Support routing of Marin County north-south bicycle route along Northgate Drive,
                and increased availability of bicycle racks at the Town Center.
           3. Support increased public transit to and from the Town Center.
           4. Align crosswalks with bus stops.
           5. Encourage shuttle service within the Town Center area during holiday season.
           6. Implement traffic calming as needed on roadways in parking lots and redesign traffic
                flow to minimize conflict between vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians.
           7. Encourage design for additional stores and parking structures to maximize pedestrian
                access and minimize traffic conflicts.
           8. Improve pedestrian safety along Redwood Highway with improved sidewalks and
                parking lot landscaping.
                Responsibility: Community Development
                Timeframe: Long Term
                Resources: Donations, Grants, Staff Time
           See C-24a (North San Rafael Promenade).
       NH-140. Pedestrian Scale.
       Create a sense of enclosure, pedestrian-scale and easy accessibility by improving the
       pedestrian “feel” of the Town Center area. Examples include welcoming, pedestrian-
       friendly entrances to the shopping areas; pleasant, landscaped walkways between the
       shopping areas as part of the North San Rafael Promenade; and a focal point at a
       public plaza.
           See LU-2a (Development Review).
       NH-141. Mall Entrance.
       Consider ways to improve the entrance into the mall.
           NH-140a. Improved Entrance to the Mall. Support redesign of traffic flow and
           intersection improvements along Las Gallinas, Northgate Drive, Del Presidio, and
           Merrydale to expedite traffic to and from the shopping areas and to improve safety for
           pedestrians and bicycles. Support realignment of driveways along Las Gallinas to form
           safer intersections and pedestrian crossing.
                Responsibility: Public Works
                Timeframe: Long Term
                Resources: Fees
       NH-142. Redwood Highway Improvements.
       Upgrade and unify the architecture, signage and landscaping along Redwood Highway
       on the east side of Highway 101.
118 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                                    Reprinted 04/28/2017

     See LU-2a (Development Review).
     PEACOCK GAP
This neighborhood is developed with single-family homes,
condominiums, and the Peacock Gap Golf and Country Club.
The private country club has an 18-hole golf course, driving
range, clubhouse, and pro shop. Architectural styles vary                                Vi s io n    o f
                                                                                    P ea co c k       G ap
depending on the age of the single-family home and
condominium developments in the neighborhood. The hills                   Little change is expected in the residential
located above the developed area of the neighborhood                      portion of the neighborhood. Should
provide an important visual backdrop, as well as trails and               closure of the San Rafael Rock Quarry
access to the adjacent China Camp State Park. The San                     occur, the property may be annexed to the
Rafael Rock Quarry and McNear Brickworks are located in                   City as part of the land use entitlement
the southern portion of the neighborhood, along the Point San             process. A Reclamation Plan is under
Pedro Peninsula.                                                          review by the County, with opportunities
                                                                          for involvement by area residents and the
     Neighborhood Economy and Culture                                     City.
NH-143. San Rafael Rock Quarry and
McNear Brickworks.
The San Rafael Rock Quarry is currently operational, but its future is unclear at this
time. The property owner has expressed an interest in continuing operations, but
approval of an updated Reclamation Plan has not yet been obtained from the County.
If operations cease during the timeframe of this plan, consider annexation and allow
redevelopment of the San Rafael Rock Quarry and McNear Brickworks, taking into
account the following factors:
a. Consider the County’s approved reclamation plan in future land use
     considerations. The current reclamation plan indicates a mixture of single-family
     and townhouse units, a marina, commercial recreation or hospitality and
     neighborhood-serving commercial uses. A revised reclamation plan is anticipated
     during the timeframe of this General Plan.
b. Consider redevelopment of the site only if traffic capacity is available and can
     meet the City’s level of service standards, including all intersections to and from
     the Downtown and freeway on- and off-ramps. Expand Pt. San Pedro Road past
     Riviera Drive to four lanes if needed for traffic capacity.
c. Create a public use park band along the shoreline, at least 100 feet in width,
     linking McNears Beach Park with the public walkway along Pt. San Pedro Road.
d. Reopen the saltwater marsh to tidal action. Protect the freshwater marsh.
e. Protect freshwater ponds.
f. Preserve the site’s woodland areas and incorporate some of the historic brick
     works into the project design.
g. Consider redevelopment of the site at one time to eliminate incompatibilities
     between the existing operation and redevelopment uses, except for the
     development of a possible high-speed waterway transit stop.
     NH-143a. Rock Quarry Plan. Participate in preparation of a new reclamation plan and
     environmental impact report through the County of Marin, which should form the basis of
     future land uses and possible annexation.
           Responsibility: Community Development, Public Works
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                  SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                  119

                                      NH-144. San Rafael Rock Quarry Impacts.
                                      While recognizing the jurisdiction of Marin County over this property, persist in efforts
                                      to minimize impacts of the existing quarry operations on surrounding residents, such as
                                      noise, air quality, vibrations, street maintenance and truck traffic.
                                          NH-144a. Rock Quarry Impacts. Seek to have input into County code enforcement
                                          activities, land use entitlements or negotiations with the quarry operator that might reduce
                                          impacts on affected properties in the City of San Rafael and on City infrastructure.
                                               Responsibility: Community Development, Public Works
                                               Timeframe: Ongoing
                                               Resources: Staff Time
                                          See LU-2a (Development Review).
                                          Neighborhood Streets
                                      NH-145. Pt. San Pedro Road Widening.
                                      Develop Pt. San Pedro Road as a four lane arterial from its intersection with Riviera to
                                      the main entrance of the San Rafael Rock Quarry property and as an improved two
                                      lane arterial from there to Biscayne Drive, including bicycle lanes consistent with the
                                      Bicycle/Pedestrian Master Plan.
                                          See LU-2a (Development Review).
                                          Neighborhood Design
                                      NH-146. San Rafael Rock Quarry Shoreline Use.
                                      Develop the San Rafael Rock Quarry shoreline as a public use park band linked to
                                      McNears Beach Park and Pt. San Pedro Road upon eventual redevelopment of the
                                      Quarry to another use. Develop the park band with a 100-foot wide width, with
                                      adjustment to include significant features, such as beaches, within the park band.
                                          NH-146a. Rock Quarry Park. Through the development review process, establish a bay
                                          frontage park linked to McNear’s Beach and the existing walkway on Point San Pedro
                                          Road.
                                                                                   Responsibility: Community Development
                                                                                   Timeframe: Long Term
                                                                   Resources: Staff Time
              Vi s io n o f
          Pi cn i c V al le y                           PICNIC VALLEY
Ne w r es i de nt i a l d e ve l o pm ent               The Picnic Valley Neighborhood, one of the older neighborhoods in
wi l l b e l im it e d to a f e w v ac a nt
h il ls i de lo ts wi t h i n th e                      San Rafael, is located east of Gerstle Park. The neighborhood is
ne i g hb or ho o d b ou n dar y. I n- f i l l          developed with a mix of residential uses, featuring apartments and
r ed e v e lo pm en t pr oj ec t s ar e                 condominiums in the area near Davidson School, and single-family
a ls o p os s i bl e i n t h e ar ea ne ar              homes and some duplex units in the hillside areas. Access to the
Da v i ds o n Sc h o ol .
                                                        hillside homes is provided by very narrow streets, alleyways or
                                                        pedestrian-only “walks.” This is a unique feature within this
                                                        neighborhood.
  120                              SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                                     Reprinted 04/28/2017

The hillside area of the neighborhood, Southern Heights, was formerly farmland. This
area experiences “through” traffic as motorists use Wolfe Grade to access the adjacent
industrial area and downtown.
NH-147. Residential Use by Davidson Middle School.
Encourage improvements in the area around Davidson Middle School
through redevelopment that includes live/work uses.
     NH-147a. Lindaro Live/Work. Revise the Zoning Regulations to                              Vi s io n o f
     include a zoning district that allows live/work uses in the Light                 Raf a el M ead o w s/
     Industrial/Office and Industrial area surrounding Davidson Middle                    L o s R an ch it o s
     School.
           Responsibility: Community Development                                    Rafael Meadow is located in the
           Timeframe: Long Term                                                     City of San Rafael; Los Ranchitos
           Resources: Staff Time                                                    is a neighborhood in an
                                                                                    unincorporated area of the County.
     RAFAEL MEADOWS/LOS RANCHITOS                                                   Some of the properties along
                                                                                    Merrydale Road may redevelop in
Rafael Meadows is a residential area located behind and along the                   the future with more housing. The
west side of Merrydale Road. This area is developed primarily with                  newest development is Redwood
small older, one- and two-story single-family homes. Apartments and                 Village consisting of 133
condominiums are located along Merrydale Road. Two churches are                     townhomes and single-family
                                                                                    residences.
also located in the neighborhood.
The unincorporated Los Ranchitos area features single-family homes
on larger lots. Most lots are over an acre in size and some residents
house horses on their property.
NH-148. Residential Use at the End of Merrydale Road.
Evaluate amending the General Plan and Zoning Ordinance to promote residential
uses at the end of Merrydale Road.
     NH-148a. Zoning Change. Consider amending the General Plan and                          Vi s io n o f
     Zoning Ordinance to allow housing at the end of Merrydale Road.                   S an t a V en et i a
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Long Term                                                  This unincorporated area of the
           Resources: Staff Time                                                 County is anticipated to remain
                                                                                 essentially a residential area with a
     SANTA VENETIA                                                               neighborhood school and other
                                                                                 community institutions.
The unincorporated Santa Venetia neighborhood is primarily
developed with single family homes, condominiums and
apartments, which are located near the China Camp neighborhood
boundary. A neighborhood shopping center, Gallinas School, the Jewish Community
Center and three small parks are also located within the boundary of this
neighborhood. It includes Santa Margarita Island, Santa Venetia Marsh and San Pedro
Ridge Open Space Preserves.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                   SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                 121

                                                       SMITH RANCH
               Vi s io n o f
            Sm it h R an ch                            This neighborhood, located south of the St. Vincent’s/Silveira
                                                       properties, consists of John F. McInnis County Park, the San
    Properties in this neighborhood are
                                                       Rafael Airport, Contempo Marin Mobile Home Park, the
    essentially built-out, including the San
                                                       Century Theatres, Regency Center office buildings, and a
    Rafael Airport, which is limited to
    additional plane hangar space                      mixed-use area located north of Smith Ranch Road, including
    construction and landscape                         the Smith Ranch Homes senior residential project, a nursing
    improvements in the future. Plans for a            home, apartment complexes, a deli, dry cleaner, and restaurant.
    skate park at John F. McInnis Park                 The San Rafael Airport is privately owned and is limited to
    have been approved by the County of                based-aircraft only. Commercial flight activity, flight training
    Marin. The habitat value of the                    and use by helicopters are prohibited. McInnis Park, 450 acres
    wetlands adjacent to McInnis Park,                 in size, is developed with softball fields, soccer fields, tennis
    Marin Ranch Airport, and the riparian              courts, a canoe launch, a golf driving range, restaurant, 9-hole
    corridors along branches of Gallinas
                                                       golf course, miniature golf, batting cages, and nature trails.
    Creek will be enhanced and protected,
                                                       Architectural styles in the neighborhood vary due to the mix of
    with public viewing areas located
    where feasible and appropriate.                    old and new developments.
                                                       Neighborhood Economy and Culture
                              NH-149. San Rafael Airport.
                              Designate the site as Airport/Recreation consistent with the land use covenant agreed
                              to by the City, the County, and the property owner. Recognize the unique and
                              valuable recreational and environmental characteristics of the airport site. The
                              following uses are allowed on the property:
                              • Uses consistent with the 2002 Master Use Permit, including the airport and
                                   ancillary airport services and light industrial uses.
                              • Private and public recreational uses.
                              • Public utility uses as approved by the appropriate government agencies, including
                                   flood control, sanitary sewer, gas, and electric, and public safety facilities.
                              • Open space including wetlands.
                                   NH-149a. San Rafael Airport. Through the development review process, require, as
                                   needed, improvements consistent with this policy.
                                       Responsibility: Community Development
                                       Timeframe: Long Term
                                       Resources: Fees
                                   Neighborhood Design
                              NH-150. Smith Ranch Pond.
                              Enhance the habitat values of Smith Ranch Pond. Include a public observation station
                              if possible.
                                   NH-150a. Smith Ranch Pond Maintenance. Initiate pond dredging and removal
                                   of exotic plants, as provided for in the Smith Ranch Pond Maintenance Plan.
                                   Through the development review process, require, as needed, improvements
                                   consistent with this policy. Since 2010, there has been a collaborative effort to
                                   study and implement pond restoration by local environmental organizations in
                                   coordination with the City. Efforts include reviewing restoration options that may
122                        SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                                  Reprinted 04/28/2017

     require amending the Pond Restoration and Maintenance Plan adopted in the
     1990’s.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Adjacent Property Owners
     SUN VALLEY
The primary land use in the neighborhood is single-family
residential. The neighborhood also has some duplexes and small                          Vi s io n o f
apartments. Commercial land uses are limited to the neighborhood                      Su n V all e y
shopping center at the corner of Fifth and California, the West End
                                                                             The scale, diversity, and residential
Nursery, and the monument sales office near the Mt. Tamalpais
                                                                             character of the neighborhood
Cemetery at the end of Fifth Avenue. Sun Valley Park and Sun
                                                                             need to be maintained, including
Valley School provide recreational opportunities to residents of the         the existing affordable housing
neighborhood.                                                                stock. Housing shall continue to be
                                                                             the dominant land use in the
The diverse character of neighborhood housing is significant                 neighborhood. New commercial
because homes were developed with the changing architectural                 uses will only be allowed if they
styles over the past century. The oldest area of the neighborhood            benefit the neighborhood and will
was subdivided between 1882 and 1916, the Sun Valley                         not impair the dominant residential
subdivision was built after World War II, and the hillside homes             character. There is a desire for
were constructed in the 1960s and 1970s. Major topographic                   infrastructure improvements,
                                                                             including better storm drainage and
features such as the Sun Valley slope and the upper slopes of the
                                                                             sidewalks.
Red Rock Quarry are significant parts of the neighborhood.
The 1980 Neighborhood Plan was adopted, in part, to establish
development standards for eight undeveloped parcels, totaling 170 acres. The
Camgros and Ducca properties are the only vacant parcels remaining in Sun Valley
today for development.
     Neighborhood Homes
NH-151. New Development.
New development and significant remodels should retain the existing neighborhood
character, particularly in areas of smaller or historic homes.
     See LU-2a (Development Review).
NH-152. Camgros/Ducca Properties.
Develop these properties at densities and a scale consistent with that of the
surrounding neighborhood. Seek annexation of these properties when they are
developed. Development should comply with the City’s Hillside Guidelines and
should include enhancements along the riparian corridor.
     See LU-2a (Development Review) and LU-6a (LAFCO).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                               SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                 123

                                    Neighborhood Circulation
                                NH-153. Circulation.
                                Upgrade walkways to sidewalks as a means of safe access to Sun Valley School and
                                the neighborhood commercial center.
                                    See LU-2a (Development Review).
                                    Neighborhood Design
                                NH-154. Annexation of Mt. Tamalpais Cemetery.
                                Consider annexation of the Mt. Tamalpais Cemetery, which constitutes an important
                                element in the visual backdrop of the neighborhood.
                                    See LU-2a (Development Review) and LU-6a (LAFCO).
                                    Neighborhood Economy and Culture
                                                          NH-155. Commercial Uses.
          T err a L i n d a a n d                         Prohibit commercial uses in Sun Valley unless such uses would
 Vi s io n No rt h S an R af a el                         be of primary benefit to the neighborhood and would not disturb
                                                          or impair its dominant residential character. Encourage retention
In November 1997, the City Council received               of the existing neighborhood commercial services at Fifth and
Vision North San Rafael. The Vision is the                California Avenues and at West End Nursery, allowing
result of a community-wide effort to describe             acceptable alternative uses only if it can be clearly demonstrated
the future of the northern half of San Rafael. In         that local serving uses are not economically viable.
addition to goals and actions, the document
includes a list of implementation strategies to           NH-155a. Sun Valley Commercial Uses. Through the
make the vision a reality. Terra Linda is a               development review process, encourage improvements consistent
neighborhood in north San Rafael, and covers              with this policy.
much of the area of the Vision.                                     Responsibility: Community Development
                                                                    Timeframe: Long Term
The Vision identifies needed improvements to                        Resources: Fees
the Terra Linda Shopping Center and
encourages the construction of the North San
Rafael Promenade, both located within the                 TERRA LINDA
neighborhood boundary. The Vision
establishes top priorities and goals for                  Terra Linda, one of the larger neighborhoods in San Rafael,
residential neighborhoods in the Design,                  is developed primarily with single-family homes.
Beautification and Maintenance, Homes for a               Condominiums and apartments are located at the end of
Variety of People, Community Services, and                Freitas Parkway and along Nova Albion and Los Gamos
Gathering Places sections of the document.                Road. Architectural styles vary throughout the neighborhood,
Implementation of the Vision will continue to be          primarily developed with Eichler, Kenny, or “ranch” style
a requirement for all new development projects
                                                          homes. There are three senior housing facilities: Villa Marin,
in the North San Rafael neighborhoods.
                                                          Maria B. Freitas and the Nazareth House.
                                                          The Terra Linda Recreation Center, Santa Margarita and
                                Freitas Parks, and sports fields and playgrounds at private and public schools offer
                                recreational opportunities for residents. Kaiser Hospital and Terra Linda Shopping
                                Center are also located within the neighborhood. Traffic in the area is generated by
                                the hospital, the schools, and by Highway 101 diversions. The Terra Linda/Sleepy
                                Hollow Open Space Preserve, located in a semi-circle around the Santa Margarita
                                Valley, provides a community separator between San Rafael, San Anselmo and Lucas
                                Valley. “Pocket” parks are located along Freitas Parkway.
  124                       SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                                 Reprinted 04/28/2017

     Neighborhood Homes
NH-156 Eichler Homes.
Preserve the design character of Eichler homes.
     NH-156a. Eichler Homes. Consider preparation of design guidelines and/or zoning
     regulations to preserve Eichler Homes.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time
NH-157. Hillside Parcels, East of Los Gamos Drive.
These steep, highly visible parcels above the YMCA and office building have limited
access. Development shall be clustered to retain community-wide visible hillside
resources. Access to the northern parcel is very difficult and should be considered
through the adjacent southern parcel.
     See LU-2a (Development Review).
NH-158. Santa Margarita Neighborhood Plan.
Prepare a neighborhood plan for Santa Margarita to address neighborhood concerns.
     See NH-1a (Neighborhood Planning Process).
     Neighborhood Circulation
NH-159. North San Rafael Promenade.
Support implementation of the North San Rafael Promenade.
     See C-24a (North San Rafael Promenade).
NH-160. Freitas Parkway Overhead Utilities.
Support and seek funding to underground utilities along Freitas Parkway.
     See I-4a (Funding Undergrounding Utilities) and I-4b (Neighborhood Efforts).
     Neighborhood Economy and Culture
NH-161. Terra Linda Shopping Center.
Encourage improvements to Terra Linda Shopping Center. Incorporate improvements
for the North San Rafael Promenade into upgrades at the shopping center. Examples
include:
• Coordinated design and colors at the Terra Linda Shopping Center.
• Tenant identification signs for Terra Linda Shopping Center consistent with the
     center’s appearance.
• Pedestrian friendly plaza in front of Scotty’s Market and entry signage at Freitas
     and Del Ganado.
• Housing when possible, thereby adding to the vitality of this area and facilitating
     the use of public transit.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS 125

                                    See LU-2a (Development Review) and C-24a (North San Rafael Promenade).
                                    Neighborhood Economy and Culture
                                NH-162. Kaiser Permanente Medical Center.
                                Retain uses at the Kaiser Permanente Medical Center and seek ways to improve traffic
                                and parking.
                                    See LU-2a (Development Review).
                                    Neighborhood Design
                                NH-163. Youth Recreation Facilities in North San Rafael.
                                Encourage safe places for the young people in the North San Rafael Community to
                                gather and to explore and pursue their interests.
                                                          NH-163a. Youth Facilities. Through the development review
                                                          process, require, as needed, improvements consistent with this
                                                          policy. Provide and maintain additional recreation facilities in
                                                          North San Rafael, including a teen center and skate park.
                                                             Responsibility: Community Development
                                                             Timeframe: Short Term
                                                             Resources: Fees
                                                          NH-164. Santa Margarita Creek.
                                                          Improve the appearance of the Santa Margarita Creek on Del
                                                          Ganado Road while maintaining storm drain capabilities.
                                                          See CON-8a (Creek Restoration) and CON-8b (Tree Rentention)
Th e T e r r a L i n d a
pool is one of the              NH-165. San Rafael Library Services.
most popular                    Encourage library services west of Highway 101.
recreation
facilities in San
Rafael.
                                    See CA-12a (Opportunities for Community Based Libraries)
         Vi s io n o f                   WEST END
         W est En d
                                         The West End neighborhood, located west of Downtown, is a mixed-use area
  Development of mixed-use               consisting of single-family homes, apartments, and commercial uses. The
  projects on underutilized              “Miracle Mile,” a commercial corridor extending from the Downtown area,
  properties along the “Miracle          bisects the community and provides vehicular access to San Anselmo and
  Mile” is a possibility during          beyond to West Marin.
  the planning period of San
  Rafael 2020.
 126                         SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                                  Reprinted 04/28/2017

     Neighborhood Economy and Culture
NH-166. Miracle Mile.
Existing commercial uses along the Miracle Mile (Fourth Street west of the “Y” at
Second and Fourth Streets) shall be retained and improved in terms of visual appearance,
parking, landscaping and vehicular access from side streets where possible. New
development or redevelopment should be of a scale and intensity consistent with existing
development.
     See LU-2a (Development Review).
NH-167. Miracle Mile Noise Abatement.
Consider the benefits and practicality of noise abatement techniques when designing
or implementing capital improvements along the Miracle Mile.
     NH-167a. Miracle Mile Noise Abatement. Through the capital improvement program,
     consider the implementation of noise abatement techniques, including the use of attractive
     fencing, trees and landscaping, and noise mitigation pavement.
           Responsibility: Public Works
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                   SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS 127

                           This page intentionally left blank.
128 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / NEIGHBORHOODS                            Reprinted 04/28/2017
Community Design                                                                                  Our Use of Land
Introduction
This element addresses the physical form of the natural environment and the built
form of the City. The major features that give San Rafael its visual character are the
hills and valleys, the Bay, creeks, the San Rafael Canal, the highways and other
transportation corridors, neighborhoods, and the Downtown. The city's historic
structures also add to the uniqueness and identity of San Rafael. These include the
Mission San Rafael Arcangel and St. Raphael's Church, historic homes, buildings in
the Downtown constructed from the late 1800's through the 1920's, the Rafael Film
Center and the Marin Civic Center. Community Design policies address how these
natural and built elements visually create the identity of San Rafael, and how they
contribute to the city's quality of life.
The City Image section of this element addresses the qualities that form the City's
larger visual character. It provides direction regarding the preservation of views of
hillsides and ridgelines, the Bay and Canal, and surrounding areas. It explains how
the major transportation corridors can contribute to the quality of life in the City, and
how the character of neighborhoods can be recognized, maintained and strengthened.
The Design Quality section of this element addresses in greater detail the streets, the
Downtown, and other neighborhoods, and provides design direction to guide future
development in those areas. The Neighborhoods Element describes policies specific
to the Downtown and individual neighborhoods.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                             SAN RAFAEL 2020 / COMMUNITY DESIGN            129


                               GOAL 7: A BEAUTIFUL CITY
                               It is the goal of the City of San Rafael to have its best natural and built features
                               preserved and strengthened to enhance the attractiveness and livability of the
                               City. Community design policies guide the City's built environment to create an
                               appealing, functional and safe City where people will want to live, work and play. Our
                               well-designed city will be attractive and interesting, and will meet the living,
                               economic and social needs of the community. Within the Community Design Element
                               the valuable qualities of the natural and built environment are identified, and the
                               policies suggest methods to preserve and enhance those qualities.
                               City Image
                               San Rafael's strong visual quality is based on its setting between two dominant
                               physical features: San Francisco Bay and the hills of Marin County. The City's early
                               transportation corridors were developed based on ease of movement through the hills,
                               along the base of the hills, and alongside waterways. The Downtown and
                               neighborhoods formed along the sections of land that were easier to build upon and
                               close to transportation. The result is a city with a strong relationship to natural features
                               and distinct neighborhoods.
                               CD-1. City Image.
                               Reinforce the City’s positive and distinctive image by recognizing the natural features
                                                               of the City, protecting historic resources, and by
                                                               strengthening the positive qualities of the City's focal
                                                               points, gateways, corridors and neighborhoods.
                                                               CD-1a. Gateway Enhancements. Fund gateway enhancements.
                                                                         Responsibility: Community Development
                                                                         Timeframe: Long Term
                                                                         Resources: Staff Time, Growth Allocation Program
                                                               CD-1b Finer Grain Design Qualities. Deleted per Amendment
                                                               on 12/05/16
                                                               CD-1c. Way-Finding Signage. Prepare and implement an
                                                               attractive citywide way-finding sign program to direct people to
                                                               the City's cultural resources, public facilities, parks and other
                                                               important destinations.
 Th e c u p o l a o f S t .                                              Responsibility: Community Development
 Raphael’s Church                        Timeframe: Long Term
 is a local                              Resources: Staff Time
 landmark.
                                    CD-1c. Landscape Improvement. Recognize that landscaping is a critical design
                                    component. Encourage maximum use of available landscape area to create visual interest
                                    and foster sense of the natural environment in new and existing developments. Encourage
                                    the use of a variety of site appropriate plant materials.
                                    See CA-13b (Preservation Ordinance) and LU-2a (Development Review).
132                         SAN RAFAEL 2020 / COMMUNITY DESIGN                                    Reprinted 04/28/2017

Neighborhoods
Neighborhoods are the building blocks of San Rafael's character, with the most
important neighborhood being the Downtown. In addition to being the urban heart of
Marin County, Downtown is a livable and walkable place where people gather to enjoy
life or conduct business. San Rafael's residential neighborhoods are unique areas
defined by their street trees, architecture, or in some areas, a mix of residential and
commercial uses. Many of San Rafael’s neighborhoods have a mix of uses, such as
Dominican University in the Dominican neighborhood, or the industrial and retail areas
in north San Rafael. Neighborhood polices encourage enhancing the qualities that
define and make each neighborhood unique, and strengthening the overall visual and
functional quality of each neighborhood. Policies that control the defining elements of
neighborhoods should also allow for innovative architecture that is in context with the
surrounding neighborhoods. (See also the Neighborhoods Element for design policies
pertaining to specific neighborhoods.)
CD-2. Neighborhood Identity.
Recognize and promote the unique character and integrity of the city's residential
neighborhoods and Downtown. Strengthen the "hometown" image of San Rafael by:
• Maintaining the urban, historic, and pedestrian character of the Downtown;
• Preserving and enhancing the scale and landscaped character of the City's
     residential neighborhoods;
• Improving the appearance and function of commercial areas; and
• Allowing limited commercial uses in residential neighborhoods that serve local
     residents and create neighborhood-gathering places.
     See LU-2a (Development Review).
CD-3. Neighborhoods.
Recognize, preserve and enhance the positive qualities that give neighborhoods their
unique identities, while also allowing flexibility for innovative design. Develop
programs to encourage and respect the context and scale of existing neighborhoods.
     CD-3a. Design Review Process. Consider ways to perform limited design review for
     major ground floor additions and renovations to assure compatibility with surroundings.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Resources: Staff Time
     CD-3b. Development Standards. Reexamine residential development standards to
     address building size, setbacks, height, location of parking, landscaping and design
     impact.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time
     CD-3c. Revisions to Design Guidelines. Consider revisions to residential design
     guidelines to further identify design elements and unique neighborhood qualities.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Resources: Staff Time
     See LU-2a (Development Review), CD-10b (Compatibility of Patterns), CD-11a
     (Compatibility of Building Patterns) and H-2b (Compatibility of Building Patterns).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                   SAN RAFAEL 2020 / COMMUNITY DESIGN 133

                        Historic Resources
                        San Rafael is home to many valuable historic treasures. These features aid in defining
                        San Rafael's character and make the City unique. Policies in the Community Design
                        and the Culture and the Arts elements encourage preservation of these identifiable
                        features so that San Rafael can maintain its heritage and identity.
                        CD-4. Historic Resources.
                        Protect San Rafael’s positive and distinctive image by recognizing, preserving and
                        enhancing the City's historic resources.
                            CD-4a. Historic Resources Information. Help residents understand and enjoy their
                            City’s heritage by providing information about historic resources.
                                 Responsibility: Community Development
                                 Timeframe: Long Term
                                 Resources: Staff Time
                            CD-4b. Adaptive Reuse. Consider revisions to design guidelines and to zoning
                            regulations to provide development incentives for appropriate adaptive re-use. Since the
                            2004 adoption of the San Rafael General Plan 2020, some of the commercial and light
                            industrial/office zoning districts have been amended to expand the types of allowable uses,
                            some with reduced permit review.
                                 Responsibility: Community Development
                                 Timeframe: Long Term
                                 Resources: Staff Time
                            CD-4c. Sign Ordinance. Revise sign ordinance to allow appropriate signage and plaques
                            identifying historic structures.
                                 Responsibility: Community Development
                                 Timeframe: Long Term
                                 Resources: Staff Time
                            CD-4d. Design Guidelines. As part of the Community Design programs to prepare design
                            guidelines, include guidance to assist property owners of historic properties in defining
                            appropriate changes and alterations and to illustrate outstanding examples of how new
                            developments can fit into an historic neighborhood.
                                                                      Responsibility: Community Development
                                                                      Timeframe: Long Term
                                                                      Resources: Staff Time, Grants
                                                                      See also CD-3a (Design Review Process), CD-1c
                                                                      (Way-Finding Signage), CA-13a (Inventory
                                                                      Update), CA-13d (Public Education), CA-14b
                                                                      (Zoning), and CA-14c (Incentives).
   Th e B o yd
   Gatehouse was
   built in 1879 and
   now hosts the
   Marin History
   Museum.
134                  SAN RAFAEL 2020 / COMMUNITY DESIGN                                 Reprinted 04/28/2017

Focal Points
Focal points provide orientation by serving as landmarks and designating important
places. The Downtown is a focal point because of its taller buildings, the church, and
its density, history and lively walkable environment. The hills are focal points because
of their size and natural beauty, as are the San Rafael and San Pablo Bays. The
Marin County Civic Center is a focal point because of its architecture and important
public use.
Views to focal points and entrances into focal points should be recognized and
enhanced where desirable. The land uses in the Downtown and Marin Civic Center
should continue to be concentrated within their defined areas to further strengthen the
character of these areas. Downtown should continue to be characterized by
pedestrian oriented uses and its historic buildings, in order to retain its notable
character.
CD-5. Views.
Respect and enhance to the greatest extent possible, views of the Bay and its islands,
Bay wetlands, St. Raphael’s church bell tower, Canalfront, marinas, Mt. Tamalpais,
Marin Civic Center and hills and ridgelines from public streets, parks and publicly
accessible pathways.
     CD-5a. Views. Improve access to and enhance views of the Canalfront. Implement the
     Canalfront Conceptual Design Plan.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Resources: Grants, Staff Time
     See LU-2a (Development Review) and NH-74a (Design Plan and Vision for the
     Canalfront).
CD-6. Hillsides and Bay.
Protect the visual identity of the hillsides and Bay by controlling development within
hillside areas, providing setbacks from the Bay, and providing public access along the
Bay edge.
     CD-6a. Hillside Design Guidelines. Continue to implement hillside design guidelines
     through the design review process. Update the guidelines as needed.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees
     CD-6b. Wetland Setbacks. Continue to implement the wetland setbacks addressed in
     Policy CON-4 and in the zoning ordinance.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees
     CD-6c. Public Access Opportunities. Continue to evaluate public access opportunities
     through the development review process.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees
     See also C-27c (Bay Trail).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                SAN RAFAEL 2020 / COMMUNITY DESIGN 135

       CD-7. Downtown and Marin Civic Center.
       Build upon the character of these areas by controlling land uses to clearly distinguish
       their boundaries; by recognizing Mission San Rafael Arcangel and St. Raphael
       Church, Marin Civic Center, and other buildings that help define the City’s character,
       and requiring that these and other architectural characteristics and land uses that give
       these areas their identity are strengthened.
            See LU-2a (Development Review).
       Gateways
       Gateways are the entry points to the city or a specific area. A gateway could be a
       subtle change in the landscaping or a natural feature such as a hill which provides a
       vantage point. A gateway could also be a noticeable change in land use or a boundary
       marker. San Rafael's gateways are identified on maps.
       CD-8.Gateways.
       Provide and maintain distinctive gateways to identify City entryways.
            CD-8a. Gateways. Evaluate each of the gateways defined on the design element maps to
            determine what natural, architectural, signage or landscape treatments should further
            establish these locations as identifiable gateways within the City, and implement the
            desired improvements as part of the City’s Capital Improvement program.
                 Responsibility: Public Works
                 Timeframe: Long Term
                 Resources: Economic Development, Grants, Staff Time, Capital Improvement
            Program
            See also NH-37a (Freeway Ramps).
       Transportation Corridors
       San Rafael's transportation corridors are where most people develop their impression
       of the City. A well-designed corridor should be inviting, attractive and appear visually
       organized. A corridor's character should be of native landscaping, a prosperous
       commercial street, or a groomed neighborhood passageway. Some of San Rafael's
       major corridors are the freeways, Second and Third Streets in the Downtown, Lincoln
       Avenue and Redwood Highway, Pt. San Pedro Road, Miracle Mile and the roadways
       that connect San Rafael to neighboring communities.
       Corridors could be visually improved through streetscape programs that include trees,
       streetlights, and other furnishings. The visual quality of corridors can also be
       enhanced by requiring consistent building setbacks, controlling the mass and height of
       buildings, architectural guidelines, landscaping and signage. Each corridor should be
       evaluated to determine the unique set of controls and features that may enhance its
       visual appearance.
       CD-9. Transportation Corridors.
       To improve the function and appearance of corridors, recognize those shown on
       Exhibits 17 and 18 and define each corridor's contribution to the City based upon its
       land use and transportation function and how it is experienced by the public.
136 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / COMMUNITY DESIGN                                  Reprinted 04/28/2017

     CD-9a. Corridor Design Guidelines. Develop specific design guidelines for each
     corridor that address building massing, articulation of building facades, detailing, lighting,
     landscaping, street trees and other desired infrastructure and characteristics. Include
     appropriate zoning code provisions.
           Responsibility: Community Development, Public Works
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time
     CD-9b. Right-of-Way Landscaping. Encourage Caltrans to install and maintain
     landscaping along its right-of-ways.
           Responsibility: Public Works, Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: State and Federal Funds
     See also CON-16a. (Distribution of Information) and C-22a (Native Plants Along Roadway).
Design Quality
As modifications are made to San Rafael, whether through public improvements to
streets, parks or other public infrastructure, or as private development affects
neighborhoods or the Downtown, the design quality of these changes can determine
whether they improve or detract from the quality of life in San Rafael. This section of
the Community Design Element recognizes the important qualities of streets, the
Downtown, and other neighborhoods, and provides design direction for future
development. In many instances implementation of the policies will require the
preparation of detailed guidelines or other programs. Design Guidelines should
provide a framework of design principles without mandating any one style or genre.
See the Neighborhoods Element for design policies related to specific neighborhoods.
CD-10. Nonresidential Design Guidelines.
Recognize, preserve and enhance the design elements that contribute to the economic
vitality of commercial areas. Develop design guidelines to ensure that new
nonresidential and mixed-use development fits within and improves the
immediate neighborhood and the community as a whole.
     CD-10a. Visual Compatibility. Ensure that new structures are visually compatible             For D o wnt o wn D es i gn ,
     with the neighborhood and encourage neighborhood gathering places. Guidelines                s ee N H- 29 ( D o wn t o wn
     may address screening of service functions, materials and detailing, screening of            Des i gn ) f or p o l ic ies an d
     roof equipment, lighting, landscaping, outdoor café seating and pedestrian                   pr o gr am s r e la t ed t o
     amenities.                                                                                   r ec o g n i zi n g, pr es er v i n g
           Responsibility: Community Development                                                  an d e n ha nc in g
           Timeframe: Ongoing                                                                     Do wn t o wn ’s des i g n
           Resources: Staff Time                                                                  e lem en ts .
     CD-10b. Compatibility of Patterns. Adopt design guidelines to ensure
     compatibility of nonresidential building patterns. Guidelines may address setback
     patterns, parking and driveway patterns, building scale, height and building stepbacks,
     transition between commercial and residential districts, signage and landscaping.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Long-Term
           Resources: Staff Time
     CD-10c. Successful Design Portfolio. Establish a portfolio of desirable projects
     illustrating successful design.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                   SAN RAFAEL 2020 / COMMUNITY DESIGN                               137

       CD-11. Multifamily Design Guidelines.
       Recognize, preserve and enhance the design elements that ensure multifamily housing
       is visually and functionally compatible with other buildings in the neighborhood.
       Develop design guidelines to ensure that new development fits within and improves
       the character defining elements of neighborhoods.
            CD-11a. Compatibility of Building Patterns. Adopt design guidelines to ensure
            compatibility of neighborhood building patterns. Guidelines should address setback
            patterns, parking and driveway patterns, building scale, transitions between land use
            districts, height and building stepbacks, as well as entries, roof design, roof equipment,
            windows, architectural style, materials and detailing, lighting and landscaping.
                 Responsibility: Community Development
                 Timeframe: Long Term
                 Resources: Staff Time
            See CD-10c. (Successful Design Portfolio).
       CD-12. Industrial Areas.
       Recognize the economic importance of industrial areas to the community. Require
       building and landscape improvements to create a visually comfortable and welcome
       appearance of the streetscape along roadways in industrial areas adjacent to residential
       neighborhoods.
            CD-12a. Landscaping. Adopt design guidelines to address and modify zoning code
            landscape requirements to ensure compatibility with adjacent residential neighborhoods.
                 Responsibility: Community Development
                 Timeframe: Long Term
                 Resources: Staff Time
            CD-12b. Sidewalk and Street Trees. Install or improve sidewalks and street trees in
            existing industrial areas as redevelopment occurs, through the development review
            process.
                 Responsibility: Community Development
                 Timeframe: Ongoing
                 Resources: Private
            CD-12c. Unlawful Storage. Use code enforcement to eliminate unlawful storage and to
            assure property maintenance.
                 Responsibility: Community Development
                 Timeframe: Ongoing
                 Resources: Staff Time, Fines
            See EV-8a (Industrial Zoning).
       CD-13. Single-Family Residential Design Guidelines.
       Recognize, preserve and enhance the design elements that contribute to the livability
       of neighborhoods and their visual appearance. Recognize that each neighborhood is
       unique, and that design review must consider the distinct characteristics of individual
       neighborhoods. Develop design guidelines to ensure that new development fits within
       and improves the character-defining elements of neighborhoods.
            See CD-10c (Successful Design Portfolio), H-2a (Design Concerns of Single-Family
            Homes) and H-2b (Compatibility of Building Patterns).
138 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / COMMUNITY DESIGN                                    Reprinted 04/28/2017
CD-14. Recreational Areas.
In multifamily development, require private outdoor areas and on-site common spaces
for low and medium densities. In high density and mixed-use development, private
and/or common outdoor spaces are encouraged. Common spaces may include recreation
facilities, gathering spaces, and site amenities such as picnicking and play areas.
     CD-14a. On-Site Recreational Areas. Continue requirements for on-site recreational
     areas as specified in the zoning ordinance.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Fees
CD-15. Participation in Project Review.
Provide for public involvement in the review of new development, renovations, and
public projects with the following:
• Design guidelines and other information relevant to the project as described in the
     Community Design Element that would be used by residents, designers, project
     developers, City staff, and City decision makers;
• Distribution of the procedures of the development process that include the
     following: submittal information, timelines for public review, and public notice
     requirements;
• Standardized thresholds that state when design review of projects is required (e.g.
     residential conversions, second-story additions); and
• Effective public participation in the review process.
     CD-15a. Notification and Information about Development Projects. Continue to
     enhance San Rafael’s public notification and neighborhood meeting process to encourage
     early participation in the review of projects. Create succinct and understandable written
     handouts to guide property owners, designers, residents and business owners through the
     City submittal, review and approval processes. Continue notifying neighborhood and
     homeowner associations about proposed projects in nearby nonresidential areas. Evaluate
     the adequacy of notification procedures and enhance as needed. For example, consider
     requiring notification of non-owner occupants and requiring large on-site visible notice of
     projects under review.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing; Short Term (evaluation of notification process)
           Resources: Staff Time, Fees
     CD-15b. Thresholds for Design Review. Since 2004, some thresholds have been
     adjusted for projects. Reevaluate thresholds for design review to ensure sufficient public
     involvement in the evaluation of design review permits.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Resources: Staff Time
     See EV-17a (Pre-Submittal Process), G-7a (Review of Facilities Proposed by Other
     Agencies), I-5a (Design Review), and H-3a (Neighborhood Meetings).
CD-16. Property Maintenance.
Provide incentives and enforcement to achieve desirable property maintenance.
     CD-16a. Code Enforcement. Continue code enforcement efforts for trash and litter
     removal and other maintenance issues in all types of property.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time, Fines
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                   SAN RAFAEL 2020 / COMMUNITY DESIGN 139

            CD-16b. Educational Materials. Continue to provide programs and educational materials
            to inform property owners about property maintenance requirements in accordance with
            zoning regulations and design guidelines.
                 Responsibility: Community Development
                 Timeframe: Ongoing
                 Resources: Staff Time
            CD-16c. Loan Program. Encourage lower income property owners to use the Housing
            Authority’s loan program.
                 Responsibility: Community Development
                 Timeframe: Ongoing
                 Resources: Staff Time
            See NH-4a (Code Enforcement), NH-4b (Design Review Conditions of Approval) and
            NH-4c (Property Maintenance Standards Ordinance).
       CD-17. Street Furnishings.
       Encourage appropriate benches, trash containers, street lighting, public art, and other
       street furnishings. Select styles compatible with individual neighborhoods and the
       Downtown to strengthen their identities.
            CD-17a. Street Furnishings. Provide street furnishings that are consistent with applicable
            design style. Work with neighbors and businesses to fund program.
                 Responsibility: Public Works, Community Services
                 Timeframe: Long Term
                 Resources: Capital Improvements
            See LU-2a (Development Review).
       CD-18. Landscaping.
       Recognize the unique contribution provided by landscaping, and make it a significant
       component of all site design.
            CD-18a. Zoning Regulations for Landscaping. Evaluate and amend as necessary, the
            Zoning Ordinance’s landscaping provisions to promote development with a strongly
            landscaped character. The intent is that individual neighborhood character be developed
            and maintained, architecture be softened by plant materials where appropriate, conflicting
            uses be buffered, parking areas be screened, comfortable outdoor living and walking
            spaces be created, air pollution be mitigated and developments be made water efficient
            through the use of a variety of site-appropriate plant material.
                 Responsibility: Community Development
                 Timeframe: Short Term
                 Resources: Staff Time
       CD-19. Lighting.
       Allow adequate site lighting for safety purposes while controlling excessive light
       spillover and glare.
            CD-19a. Site Lighting. Through the design review process, evaluate site lighting for
            safety and glare on proposed projects.
                 Responsibility: Community Development
                 Timeframe: Ongoing
                 Resources: Planning application fees, Staff Time
140 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / COMMUNITY DESIGN                                  Reprinted 04/28/2017

     CD-19b. Lighting Plan. Require new development and projects making significant
     parking lot improvements or proposing new lighting to prepare a lighting plan consistent
     with the Design Guidelines for review by City planning staff.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Resources: Staff Time
     See also I-6d (Street Lighting Program).
CD-20. Commercial Signage.
Provide sign regulations and guidelines that allow adequate visual identification
necessary for successful commercial uses, while also taking into consideration the
visual impact along any given roadway.
     CD-20a. Sign Ordinance. Update the Sign Ordinance and, when developing regulations,
     take into account the cumulative effects of possible signage along a roadway or corridor.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Resources: Staff Time
CD-21. Parking Lot Landscaping.
Provide parking lot landscaping to control heat build-up from pavement, reduce air
pollution, provide shade cover for vehicles and soften the appearance of the parking
lot. Emphasize the use of trees, and limit the height of shrub plantings so as to avoid
creating security problems.
     CD-21a. Parking Lot Landscaping Requirements. Update parking lot landscape
     requirements to increase the screening of parking lots from the street and nearby
     properties. Requirements would address appropriate size and location of landscaping,
     necessary screening consistent with security considerations, tree protection measures, and
     appropriate percent of shade coverage required of parking lot trees. Include maintenance
     requirements in all approvals.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Resources: Staff Time
     CD-21b. Parking Lot Landscape Enforcement. Require that newly installed parking lot
     landscaping be maintained and replaced as needed. Assure that landscaping is thriving
     prior to expiration of the required 2-year maintenance bond.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                  SAN RAFAEL 2020 / COMMUNITY DESIGN 141
                         This page intentionally left blank
142 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / COMMUNITY DESIGN                      Reprinted 04/28/2017
Economic Vitality                                                                                  Our Foundation
Introduction
San Rafael’s outstanding quality of life and economy are linked – each supports and
benefits the other. Business is drawn to San Rafael by such amenities as the natural
setting, quality schools, and public services. In turn, the economy contributes to those
qualities – it generates local goods and services for residents, jobs for community
members and revenues for City services such as parks, libraries, schools, police and
fire protection. Municipal revenue from the business community, through sales and
hotel taxes and business license fees, exceeds the cost of City services, thereby
contributing to City programs and infrastructure that are enjoyed by all residents.
San Rafael is the business center of Marin County. Over 10,000 businesses exist in
Marin County, half of which are in San Rafael. The commercial base is broad and
diverse, with many small and medium sized businesses. Approximately 50 of the
almost 6,000 businesses in San Rafael have 100 or more employees.
Overall, San Rafael’s robust and stable economy is due to three factors. First, San
Rafael is viewed as a desirable place to do business with good transportation access,
high income residents and a good reputation. Second, the City’s economic base is
diverse and buffers impacts from economic downturns. Third, San Rafael responds to
change and accommodates new opportunities.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                           SAN RAFAEL 2020 / ECONOMIC VITALITY             143

                                          E co n o m i c      V i si o n
    The City of San Rafael envisions a future that continues to exhibit a healthy, vibrant economy,
    driven by the community’s commitment to the vitality of our individual business enterprises and
    key industries, to the recognition of the importance of our cultural diversity and its significant
    contribution to our prosperity, and to the preservation of our unique environment. Attaining the
    economic vision will be the result of productive partnerships among businesses, schools,
    neighborhood groups, government and environmental interests that have balanced competing
    concerns.
    San Rafael’s businesses continue to be diverse: ranging from small to large; from local-serving to
    global; from traditional to high technology and from specialty to consumer goods. The city is a
    supportive environment for entrepreneurs starting and growing their businesses, and for mature
    businesses adapting to a dynamic marketplace. Our businesses are successful in attracting and
    retaining skilled workers, who are eager to live and work in Marin’s transportation and cultural
    center. The business community is active in local affairs and embraces environmentally friendly
    business practices. In addition to being home to several prominent companies, San Rafael is
    known as a key North Bay center for automotive, building trades and home improvements, and
    technology-oriented industries.
    San Rafael’s downtown continues to be ‘alive after five’ with entertainment and cultural
    attractions, excellent restaurants offering a wide range of cuisines, and intriguing galleries and
    boutiques. The Canal waterway draws people to an appealing promenade that successfully links
    vibrant retail and maritime uses. Stores in a revitalized Northgate Town Center benefit from an
    efficient transportation network, drawing customers from beyond surrounding neighborhoods and
    nearby offices. Commercial properties are renewed in response to changing market conditions
    and opportunities. Throughout the City can be found appropriately scaled and sensitively
    designed mixed use projects that support the economy by providing, for example, both
    commercial square footage, and affordable and market rate housing, without compromising the
    integrity of our neighborhoods or worsening traffic congestion.
    City government is positioned to provide efficient, cost-effective services and has been particularly
    adept in securing funding from many sources. While respectful of the free market’s effectiveness,
    the City is willing to assert its authority to stimulate changes that are consistent with the City’s
    goals.
    The strength of San Rafael’s economy benefits the businesses and workforce as well as its
    residents. Workers have opportunities to secure affordable housing and competitively priced
    goods and services. This in turn has enabled household income to enhance the quality of life of
    San Rafael’s families, linking economic vitality to individual and collective prosperity.
144                    SAN RAFAEL 2020 / ECONOMIC VITALITY                            Reprinted 04/28/2017

GOAL 8: A SOUND ECONOMY
It is the goal for San Rafael to have a vital, forward-looking citywide
economy developed with appropriate respect for our environment. San
Rafael has an economy that readily adapts to and takes advantage of changes
in the way business is conducted. City government helps shape the existing
economy and provide for its growth in a way that ensures sufficient municipal
revenue without adversely impacting our quality of life. Policy and land use
decisions promote San Rafael’s economy with an emphasis on balance and
infrastructure limits, while maintaining a commitment to the environment.
EV-1. Economic Health and Quality of Life.
Understand and appreciate the contributions essential to our quality of life made by a
healthy economy, especially to public safety, our schools, recreation, and government
services.
     EV-1a. Education About the Local Economy. Continue to promote a business-friendly
     climate by educating decision makers and the public about interrelationships of
     community life and economic vitality. Disseminate information through the City
     newsletter, City website, staff reports, the State of the City dinner, and other means.
           Responsibility: City Manager, Economic Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     EV-1b. Economic Database. Maintain databases, generally available to the public, of
     economic and demographic information to support attainment of economic goals. Protect
     confidential economic data.
           Responsibility: Community Development, Economic Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
EV-2. Seek, Retain, and Promote
Businesses that Enhance
San Rafael.
Recruit and retain businesses that contribute to our
economic vitality, thus helping to provide needed local
goods, services and employment, and enhance the City’s
physical environment.
     EV-2a. Business Retention. Continue the business
     retention program in partnership with the Chamber of
     Commerce to keep existing businesses thriving in San
     Rafael.
           Responsibility: Economic Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                                                                           Th e C i t y p a r t n e r s
           Resources: Staff Time, Partnership                                                              wi t h t h e S a n R a f a e l
                                                                                                           Chamber of
                                                                                                           Commerce to
                                                                                                           support new
                                                                                                           businesses.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                   SAN RAFAEL 2020 / ECONOMIC VITALITY                            145

           EV-2b. Infill and Reuse Opportunities. Identify redevelopment opportunities and
           expansion potential and make this information available for the real estate community.
           Prepare an inventory of vacant and underutilized sites that could be redeveloped for more
           beneficial use. Address the type of infill appropriate, intensity of use, fiscal impacts, other
           likely impacts, and timing/phasing issues.
                Responsibility: Economic Development, Community Development
                Timeframe: Ongoing (Inventory: Long Term)
                Resources: Staff Time
           See EV-16a (Public/Private Partnerships).
           EV-2c. Partnership with the Chamber. Continue to support the Chamber of
           Commerce’s business promotion and recruitment efforts.
                Responsibility: Economic Development
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time
           EV-2d. Promoting Revenue-Generating Businesses. Enhance San Rafael’s fiscal
           climate by promoting high revenue-generating industries, such as automotive sales,
           building trades and home furnishings.
                Responsibility: City Manager, Economic Development, Community Development
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time
           EV-2e. Street Vendors. Continue to implement regulations and permit procedures for
           mobile vendors.
                Responsibility: Community Development, City Attorney
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time
       EV-3. Tourism.
       Recognize and support tourism as a significant contributor to San Rafael’s economy.
           EV-3a. Tourism Strategies. Explore strategies to take advantage of tourism opportunities
           in the County, to improve hotel and conference facilities in San Rafael, and to support the
           City’s, Chamber’s and Business Improvement District’s tourism enhancement programs.
                Responsibility: Economic Development, Community Development
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time
       EV-4. Local Economic and Community Impacts.
       In addition to review of environmental, traffic and community design impacts, take
       the following into account when major projects, policies and land use decisions are
       under review:
       • Fiscal impacts on the City’s ability to provide and maintain infrastructure and
           services.
       • Impacts on the community such as the provision of jobs which match the local
           workforce, commute reduction proposals, and affordable housing.
       • Additional or unique economic, fiscal and job-related impacts.
       • Fiscal and community impacts of not approving a project, plan or policy.
           EV-4a. Economic Impacts. Continue and expand identification and evaluation of relevant
           economic impacts in staff reports to Planning Commission and City Council.
                Responsibility: Community Development, Economic Development, City Manager
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time
146 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / ECONOMIC VITALITY                                 Reprinted 04/28/2017

EV-5. Strengthen Positive Relationships.
Strengthen the positive working relationships among the business community,
neighborhoods, surrounding communities and City government.
     EV-5a. Marin County Economic Commission. Work with the Marin County Economic
     Commission on shared approaches to the economic health of the region and on ways to
     encourage businesses to remain in and move to San Rafael.
           Responsibility: Economic Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     EV-5b. Communications with Residents. Regularly communicate with residents
     regarding relevant economic issues. Maintain consistent and accessible contact with
     residents through, for example, monthly meetings with neighborhood associations, and the
     City newsletter and website.
           Responsibility: City Manager
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     EV-5c. Chamber of Commerce and Business Improvement District. Continue regular
     meetings to coordinate with and support the Chamber of Commerce and Downtown
     Business Improvement District.
           Responsibility: Economic Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     See G-8a (Information about Community Issues)
EV-6. Shop Locally.
Encourage local purchase of goods and services by residents, workers, businesses and
City government so as to cycle dollars back into our local economy and generate
revenue for the City.
     EV-6a. Event Promotion. Continue to promote events that bring people to Downtown,
     Northgate and other community commercial centers to
     support local businesses.
           Responsibility: City Manager, Economic
           Development, Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     EV-6b. Education about ‘Shop Locally.’ Support
     the Chamber of Commerce and the Business
     Improvement District in their efforts to educate people
     about the benefits of shopping locally.
           Responsibility: Economic Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     EV-6c. Local Preference. Where other factors, such
     as price, are equal, the City should give preference to
     purchasing goods and services from local vendors.
           Responsibility: City Manager
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time                                                                      Double Rainbow is
                                                                                                      a popular local
                                                                                                      business.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                              SAN RAFAEL 2020 / ECONOMIC VITALITY                 147

       EV-7. Environmentally-Friendly Business Practices.
       Promote environmentally friendly business practices that reduce the need for non-
       renewable resources.
           EV-7a. Green Business Practices. Coordinate with Marin County, environmental
           organizations and the Chamber of Commerce to promote green business practices
           (alternate transportation modes, energy conservation, water conservation, packaging
           reduction, etc.) and the County’s Green Business Certification Program. Previous
           accomplishments have included promotion of environmentally-friendly business practices
           through the City’s sustainability web pages, obtaining a green business certification for the
           City Hall, and City staff’s participation with the Chamber of Commerce Green Business
           Committee and help in promoting green businesses.
                Responsibility: Community Development
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time
148 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / ECONOMIC VITALITY                               Reprinted 04/28/2017

GOAL 9: A RANGE OF GOODS AND
SERVICES
The goal of San Rafael is to have an economy that provides a full range of goods
and services, business, employment, educational and training opportunities, and
ample work force housing. San Rafael’s economy is balanced. The City enjoys a
broad diversity in its local business communities, which include industrial concerns,
knowledge-based companies, professional and financial services, retail, cultural and
entertainment providers, and restaurateurs.
EV-8. Diversity of our Economic Base.
Keep San Rafael a full-service city by retaining and supporting a broad and healthy
range of businesses.
     EV-8b. Industrial Zoning. Maintain zoning for industrial areas to the extent feasible to
     prevent a loss of industrial businesses.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Resources: Staff Time
      EV-8b. Day Laborers. (Deleted per Amendment on 12/5/16)
EV-9. Business Assistance Programs.
Support the creation and retention of programs that assist small businesses.
     EV-9a. Business Education. Work with the Chamber of Commerce and other public and
     private organizations to strengthen business education programs.
           Responsibility: Economic Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     EV-9b. Business Incubation. Evaluate the feasibility for business mentoring and
     incubation programs that could be undertaken in cooperation with public, institutional
     and/or private sector partners.
           Responsibility: Economic Development
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                               SAN RAFAEL 2020 / ECONOMIC VITALITY 149

                                      EV-10.Cooperation with Local Training and Education Efforts.
                                      Assist and support the efforts of business associations, labor organizations, businesses,
                                      non-profit organizations, cities, county, state, and schools in providing job and
                                      language skills training programs and business education.
                                          EV-10a. City Internships and Mentoring. Continue to participate in mentoring and
                                          internship programs, including cooperation with other agencies and organizations.
                                               Responsibility: All Departments
                                               Timeframe: Ongoing
                                               Resources: Staff Time
                                          EV-10b. English as a Second Language. Continue to support community wide efforts to
                                          provide English as a Second Language (ESL) training, citizenship, and other educational
                                          priorities as expressed by neighborhoods.
                                               Responsibility: Community Services, Library
                                               Timeframe: Ongoing
                                               Resources: Fees, Grants
                                          EV-10c. Workforce Education. Support the education of the workforce in order to
                                          strengthen skills needed to fill jobs in the community.
                                               Responsibility: All Departments
                                               Timeframe: Ongoing
                                               Resources: Staff Time
                                          See EV-9a (Business Education) and EV-9b (Business Incubation).
                                      EV-11. Promotion of Workplace Alternatives.
                                      Promote the establishment of workplace alternatives, including home-based
                                      businesses, telecommuting and satellite work centers.
                                          EV-11a. Home Occupations. Work with neighborhood organizations and business
                                          owners to reexamine and update home occupation zoning regulations to reflect changing
                                          trends. Continue to enforce compliance of unlicensed home businesses.
                                               Responsibility: Community Development
                                               Timeframe: Short Term
                                               Resources: Staff Time
                                                                              EV-11b. Telecommute Policy. Consider establishing a
                                                                              telecommute policy for City employees.
                                                                                        Responsibility: City Manager
                                                                                        Timeframe: Long Term
                                                                                        Resources: Staff Time
                                                                              EV-11c. Workplace Alternatives. Encourage
                                                                              employers to offer workplace alternatives and promote
                                                                              the formation of satellite business centers.
                                                                                        Responsibility: Community Development
                                                                                        Timeframe: Long Term
                                                                                        Resources: Staff Time
                                                                              EV-12. Workforce Housing.
                                                                              Aggressively encourage creation and retention of
Autodesk is a                                                                 workforce housing, both owner and renter-occupied
l e a d i n g e m p l o ye r i n      especially for public safety and community service personnel.
p r o m o t i n g wo r k p l a c e
a l t e r n a t i ve s .
 150                               SAN RAFAEL 2020 / ECONOMIC VITALITY                                  Reprinted 04/28/2017
     EV-12a. Benefits of Workforce Housing Educate residents regarding the benefits to the
     community of workforce housing.
           Responsibility: Community Development, Economic Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     EV-12b. Housing Opportunities for Local Public Service Workers. Aggressively
     support efforts to build and retain workforce housing opportunities for local public service
     workers such as, but not limited to, public safety employees and community service
     personnel.
           Responsibility: Community Development, Economic Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     See H-4b (Community Collaboration).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                SAN RAFAEL 2020 / ECONOMIC VITALITY 151
       GOAL 10: DISTINCTIVE BUSINESS
       AREAS
       It is the goal for San Rafael to have vital and attractive business areas, each with
       a distinctive character and emphasis. San Rafael has a broad spectrum of
       businesses. The business areas within Downtown, North San Rafael, East San Rafael,
       West Francisco Boulevard and the Miracle Mile maintain the community’s position as
       a full service city. In addition to these districts, there are distinct, attractive and
       convenient neighborhood-serving retail centers.
       Each of these areas has a unique economic role that contributes to and helps
       maintain San Rafael’s position as a full service city:
       • Downtown and the surrounding core area set the tone of the city.
       • North San Rafael offers the City’s largest employers, Kaiser Hospital, light
            industry and offices areas and the City’s only regional mall.
       • East San Rafael houses the building industry, auto retail and repair businesses,
            and offices.
       • West Francisco Boulevard includes retail with convenient freeway access, auto
            sales and services, and the building trades.
       • The Miracle Mile (Fourth Street between Second Street and San Anselmo)
            comprises a linear commercial corridor oriented towards a major thoroughfare
            with retail, restaurant and personal service uses.
       EV-13. Business Areas.
       Promote San Rafael’s economy and the strengths and benefits of all of its business
       areas.
       Pursue actions that revitalize and sustain San Rafael’s business areas such as:
       • Planning and managing the supply and operations of parking.
       • Beautification efforts along City public areas, such as installation and
            maintenance of planters, street trees, and lighting.
       • Housing and economic development.
       • Multi-modal circulation improvements for residents, workers, suppliers and
            customers.
            EV-13a. Zoning Regulations. Review zoning and development regulations for each
            business area and make sure that they are consistent, with the objective of strengthening
            the unique economic role of each area.
                 Responsibility: Community Development, Economic Development
                 Timeframe: Ongoing
                 Resources: Staff Time
            See C-14a (Transit Network), C-30 (Downtown Parking), I-8a (Street Tree Program), LU-
            2a (Development Review), H-14c (Continue to Implement Zoning Provisions to
            Encourage Mixed Use), NH-10 (Neighborhood Centers), NH-11 (Needed Neighborhood
            Serving Uses) and Neighborhood Element policies related to the specific commercial
            areas.
152 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / ECONOMIC VITALITY                                Reprinted 04/28/2017

EV-14. Support for Business Areas.
Support and encourage public and private redevelopment and upgrading of both
existing and underdeveloped commercial and industrial properties, while retaining
economic and architectural diversity.
     See LU-2a (Development Review).
EV-15. Mutual Support Between Business Areas and
Adjacent Neighborhoods.
Promote productive relationships between residential neighborhoods and adjoining
business areas to foster positive interaction.
     EV-15a. Business/Neighbor Collaboration. Seek innovative ways for businesses and
     their residential neighbors to collaboratively solve mutual concerns. Encourage conflict
     resolution between businesses and neighbors.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time, Partnerships
     EV-15b. Neighborhood Upgrades. Through development review, encourage
     neighborhood-friendly improvements, such as pedestrian and bicycle facilities and
     gathering places where appropriate that can be used by workers and residents.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     See NH-14 (Gathering Places and Events).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                SAN RAFAEL 2020 / ECONOMIC VITALITY 153
       GOAL 11: CREATIVE INFILL
       The goal of San Rafael is to have creative infill development and redevelopment
       that takes maximum advantage of our existing resources. Little vacant land
       remains in San Rafael. Further development will have to be extremely creative,
       utilizing infill wherever possible, together with redevelopment designed to obtain the
       highest and best use of our limited space, and the preservation of open space and
       ecologically-sensitive areas. In some areas, reinvestment is needed to upgrade or
       replace buildings and make other improvements so that these commercial areas are
       more competitive and better serve the community.
       EV-16. Partnerships for Infill Development .
       Encourage public/private partnerships as one means of redeveloping and revitalizing
       deteriorated and underdeveloped areas.
            EV-16a. Public/Private Partnerships. Identify and pursue promising public/private
            opportunities for partnerships in infill development.
                 Responsibility: Community Development, Economic Development
                 Timeframe: Ongoing
                 Resources: Staff Time
                 See EV-13a (Zoning Regulations), EV-2b (Infill and Reuse Opportunities).
       EV-17. Development Review.
       Expedite the development review process by encouraging design excellence, and
       effective community involvement.
            EV-17a. Pre-submittal Process. Review the pre-submittal process to identify ways to
            foster quality project submittals. Refine the neighborhood notification and meeting
            procedures to ensure productive involvement in the development review process.
            Periodically update the pre-application process and public notice requirements for
            streamlining and consistency.
                 Responsibility: Community Development
                 Timeframe: Ongoing
                 Resources: Staff Time, Fees
            See LU-2a (Development Review), CD-10a (Visual Compatibility), CD-11a
            (Compatibility of Building Patterns), CD-12a (Landscaping), and CD-15a (Notification
            and Information about Development Projects).
154 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / ECONOMIC VITALITY                                Reprinted 04/28/2017
Circulation                                                                                          Our Foundation
  Introduction
San Rafael is situated in the heart of Marin County, at the crossroads of Highway
101and Interstate 580. Given its central location, geographic constraints and vital
economy, San Rafael experiences significant traffic and congestion. Concern about
congestion is consistently ranked high among residents polled.
While traffic congestion is a sign of an active and vital local economy and community,
as congestion increases it can frustrate drivers, waste fuel, contribute to pollution and
reduce potential productivity and recreational time. Through careful circulation
planning, San Rafael has maximized the traffic capacity of its older network of streets.
Examples include one-way streets in Downtown, the Loop in East San Rafael, new
connections such as Andersen Drive and Lincoln/Los Ranchitos, and improved signal
timing. While the City has little control over regional traffic that passes through San
Rafael on Highways 101and 580, and Second and Third Streets, it can continue to
monitor local roadway congestion, construct roadway improvements, encourage
walking and biking, and support regional initiatives and projects that will provide a
greater range of transportation options.
  Overview of Key Recommendations
San Rafael’s key circulation improvement strategy is to create a safe and well-
managed transportation network that provides greater choice for the traveler and
limits, or even reduces, congestion on our roads. Various roadway improvements,
improved regional and local transit, expanded bicycle and pedestrian networks, and
improved connections between the different modes will help to lessen reliance on the
single occupancy vehicle and reduce emissions. Additionally, Land Use and Housing
policies supporting mixed-use development, higher densities around transit hubs, and
retention of neighborhood retail and services will further promote transit use and help
reduce new trips.
Proposals in this Element that will help accomplish the above include the following:
•    A greater City leadership role in the pursuit of regional transportation funding,
     planning and improvement strategies, with strong advocacy for passage of a
     transportation tax to help fund local transit, and roadway and highway projects.
•    Continued City monitoring and management of San Rafael congestion through
     level of service standards, signal timing, and other means.
•    Local roadway and regional highway interchange improvements to increase
     safety, improve flow and reduce congestion.
•    Completion of a continuous High Occupancy Vehicle lane on Highway 101.
•    Improved and expanded local bus service, and increased express bus service.
•    Increased regional ferry service.
•    New commuter rail service between Sonoma and Marin Counties.
•    Inter-modal transit hubs Downtown and in North San Rafael to support transit use.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                   SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION        155

                             •    Implementation of the San Rafael Bicycle and Pedestrian Master Plan to provide
                                  an expanded bikeway and sidewalk network and greater overall support for biking
                                  and walking.
                             •    Support of implementation of the North San Rafael Promenade.
                             •    Support of transportation demand management programs and techniques to
                                  encourage less driving.
                             •    Support of local school districts’ efforts to increase school bus and crossing guard
                                  services and to expand participation in the Countywide Safe Routes to Schools
                                  program.
                               Background
                             A number of key changes over the past decade have contributed to higher traffic
                             volumes in San Rafael and Marin County as whole:
                             •    County residents are making more trips per day. The average number of trips
                                  per household has increased by more than 10% since 1990. This is due in part to
                                  lifestyle changes such as two-worker families, flextime, more scheduled youth
                                  activities, and a larger retired senior population, all of which contribute to the
                                  greater number of household trips and also to greater off-peak hour traffic.
                                                        • Peak period trips are being made for many purposes.
                                                        School trips alone account for 21% of morning commute
              T ran sit a n d                           traffic in the County, as more parents drive their children to
              P ar at r an sit                          school in response to the absence of safe conditions for
                                                        biking and walking, and lack of school bus service. San
  Transit services include bus, rail, shuttle,          Rafael’s worst traffic congestion tends to occur during the
  airporter, private bus, and taxi services.            a.m. peak period.
  Paratransit services are specifically
  targeted to individuals who have difficulty           • More trips are being made inside Marin County. Marin
  using regular transit services, including             County is now more of a job center and less of a bedroom
  older adults and persons with disabilities.           community. This is especially true in San Rafael. The majority
                                                        of trips generated by Marin County residents stay within the
                                                        county.
                             •    Marin attracts workers from surrounding counties. As a job center, Marin
                                  County attracts workers from outlying areas, such as Sonoma County, that
                                  provide more affordable housing. More than half of southbound a.m. peak period
                                  trips at the Sonoma-Marin border are bound for Marin.
                             •    New development has generated more traffic. Over the past decade San
                                  Rafael, surrounding communities and surrounding counties have experienced
                                  growth, creating more regional traffic during peak and non-peak periods. In San
                                  Rafael, new nonresidential development over the past decade has generated
                                  needed sales tax and services, and business diversity; however, this development
                                  has resulted in more traffic.
                             During the same period, San Rafael’s highway infrastructure has experienced only
                             minor improvements, and capacity has not been substantially increased. The 101/580
                             interchange is inadequate and due for reconfiguration. A continuous High Occupancy
                             Vehicle (HOV) lane through Marin County along Highway 101 is not yet complete in
                             San Rafael, contributing to bottlenecks and backups. Because there are too few east-
                             west crossings, San Rafael experiences back ups on and near the 101 and 580
                             ramps. Additionally, there are limited direct north-south alternative routes parallel to
156                       SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION                                     Reprinted 04/28/2017

101, which places more pressure on 101 as drivers use it for local trips throughout the
day. This also puts more pressure on local streets as drivers seek indirect alternative
routes when 101 is backed up. It is largely because of these factors that, according to
the Metropolitan Transportation Commission, in 2001, southbound traffic on 101
through San Rafael during the a.m. peak hour ranked fourth among Bay Area highway
congestion spots. In addition to congestion along 101 and 580, Second and Third
Streets provide a major east/west route for San Anselmo and West Marin County
residents.
Between 2000 and 2020, Marin County is expected to grow by 11 percent while
Sonoma County, Napa County and the Bay Area region are expected to grow by 20
percent.
It is clear that some of San Rafael’s congestion is due to regional traffic over which the
City has little control. Even if the City limited further development entirely, congestion
would continue to grow in San Rafael as a result of growth in surrounding
communities.
At the same time, there are limited alternatives to the automobile for travel within San
Rafael. While the percentage of those who drove alone decreased, the single
occupant vehicle remains the dominant form of travel. The table below compares the
modes of travels, illustrating that some alternatives to driving alone have increased
over time but driving alone continues to be the most common way to commute for San
Rafael residents.
Repeatedly, traffic congestion has been identified as a top issue of concern for San
Rafael residents. It was identified as a top concern during development of General
Plan 2020 in both the Trends and Issues Reports, in which participants ranked
congestion as one of the top three issues facing San Rafael. The County, in a series
of reports culminating in its 25-Year Transportation Vision for Marin County concludes
that expanding transportation choice is the only realistic way to manage congestion
and improve mobility.
                          E xh i b it       1 9:    Sa n    R af ae l     Co m m u t e r *        M o d e
                          Sp lit
                         Commute Mode                      1990                     2000                   2013
                     Work at home                    1,280        5.0%       1,854        6.5%       2,318      8.1%
                     Drive alone                    17,120      65.5%       18,166       64.0%       17,512   61.2%
                     Carpool                         3,274      12.5%        3,353       12.0%       3,176    11.1%
                     Transit and Paratransit         2,993      11.5%        3,519       12.5%       3,262    11.4%
                     Walk                              948        3.5%          903       3.0%       1,374      4.8%
                     Other (including bicycle)         324        2.0%          664       2.0%        944       3.3%
                        *Workers 16 years and over.
                        SOURCE: U.S. Census, 1990, 2000; American Community Survey 2013.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                     SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION              157

       The Circulation Element of the General Plan is closely tied to the Land Use Element.
       The Circulation element ensures that the transportation network – including roads,
       transit, and bicycle and pedestrian facilities are designed to accommodate the City
       into the future. The focus of this element is on managing the City’s infrastructure,
       expanding transportation options for San Rafael citizens, and allowing patterns of
       development that support walking, bicycling and transit use as alternatives to driving.
         Transportation Successes Since the 1980s
       Since adoption of General Plan 2000 in 1988, the City has been successful in helping
       improve the local circulation system on several fronts. Key accomplishments include:
       •    Making land use changes in the Downtown area that support transit over the long
            run, including more housing and development that includes a variety of uses
            (mixed-use development).
       •    Establishing and monitoring Level of Service (LOS) standards for signalized
            intersections throughout San Rafael.
       •    Developing the Priority Projects Procedure (PPP) to allocate growth based on
            limited traffic capacity.
       •    Improving traffic flow and connections by making major roadway improvements
            including the Lincoln/Los Ranchitos connector, the Merrydale Overcrossing,
            Andersen Drive, reconfiguration of the Civic Center Drive intersection, “The Loop”
            in East San Rafael, Downtown signal timing, and a new lane on Second Street
            between Lindaro and Hetherton.
       •    Supporting regional efforts to create a continuous High Occupancy Vehicle lane
            through Marin County.
       •    Introducing traffic calming techniques to reduce speeds and increase safety on
            residential streets.
            Adopting the San Rafael Bicycle and Pedestrian Master Plan in 2002. The plan
            was updated in 2004 and implementation has been underway.
       •    Completing the North San Rafael Promenade Conceptual Plan in 2002, outlining
            pedestrian and bicycle connections between neighborhoods in Terra Linda and
            commercial and cultural areas in Northgate and the Marin County. Civic Center.
       •    Constructing the Downtown Transportation Center, serving regional transit users.
       •    Complete construction of a 400-car parking garage Downtown.
       •    Participating in various regional transportation planning efforts through the County
            Congestion Management Agency (CMA), the Water Transportation Agency
            (WTA), the Golden Gate Bridge and Highway and Transportation District
            (GGBHTD) and the new Sonoma Marin Area Rapid Transit (SMART) Authority.
       •    Supporting the countywide Safe Routes to School program that has reduced
            single occupancy vehicle trips in participating San Rafael schools by up to 15
            percent.
       •    City Council accepted the Downtown Station Area Plan and Civic Center Station
            Area Plan passed in 2012. The City will continue to collaborate with transit
            agencies and make infrastructure improvements.
158 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION                                  Reprinted 04/28/2017

•    City Council adopted a Complete Streets Policy by Resolution 14088 (March 21,
     2016), that supersedes the “Complete Streets Directive” issued by the Department
     of Public Works on February 24, 2011. The Complete Streets Policy was adopted
     to comply with the California Complete Streets Act of 2008 (AB 1358) as well as
     the California Global Warming Solution Act of 2006 (AB 32). This policy provides
     procedures and criteria for establishing a comprehensive, integrated
     transportation network with infrastructure and design solutions that allow for safe
     and convenient travel along and across streets for all users. Further, the
     Resolution directs that the City shall incorporate Complete Street policies and
     principals, consistent with AB 1358, as part of the next substantial revision of the
     City of San Rafael General Plan circulation element.
  Circulation Needs in San Rafael
A brief overview of circulation needs is presented below, and discussed in more detail
under the relevant Circulation Goals that follow. Roadway conditions for Baseline
(existing conditions with approved projects) and 2020 are in Appendix C.
Roadway Improvements
Because San Rafael is impacted by regional traffic, reducing congestion and
decreasing the frequency of incidents on Highways 101 and 580 are important to
improving traffic flow and reducing congestion in San Rafael. More connections
between neighborhoods for pedestrian, bicycle and automobiles are also needed.
Some residential streets impacted by traffic generated outside the neighborhood could
also benefit from traffic calming techniques to improve safety. Roadway conditions are
closely monitored in order to identify other circulation improvements needed to
improve flow or increase safety.
School Transportation
City studies have estimated that 21 percent of a.m. peak traffic is caused by school-
related traffic. Studies also show that 10 percent of students use a school bus for
transport to school, while 75 percent arrive by car. Many parents feel it is unsafe for
students to ride the bus or bike or walk to school. The countywide Safe Routes to
School program is addressing these issues.
Transit Users
The Marin Transit Futures Report presents the following relevant findings regarding
local transit needs. Though based on countywide needs, these findings also apply to
San Rafael.
•    Over two-thirds of all transit riders in Marin are transit dependent.
•    Approximately 60 percent of all local transit trips are considered by users to be the
     primary way they get to work.
•    The heaviest concentration of ridership occurs in the Downtown and Canal
     neighborhoods, which together account for 41 percent of all transit trips in the
     county.
•    Transit users in the San Rafael Basin share the following characteristics: 70
     percent of riders are 19-45 years of age; 70percent are transit dependent; 70
     percent ride transit at least five days a week; and 65percent earn less than
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                  SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION 159

             $20,000/year. The heaviest used routes in the County are in the Canal
             Neighborhood, served primarily by routes 20 and 35.
       •     Users in Las Gallinas Valley are older, with riders 65 and older comprising 18.2
             percent of total ridership compared with a countywide average of 5.4 percent.
             There are fewer riders aged 19-29 than elsewhere in the county. Additionally,
             most riders use transit less regularly than elsewhere in the county.
       Transit Services
       The Marin County Transit District and Golden Gate Bridge, Highway and
       Transportation District provide local and regional bus service, with connection to
       surrounding neighborhoods, communities and counties. Transit within San Rafael
       primarily consists of bus service, however with the completion of the Sonoma Marin
       Area Rail Transit (SMART) system, residents of San Rafael will also be able to make
       rail trips within the North Bay.
       •     Bus. Marin County Transit District and Golden Gate Bridge, Highway and
             Transportation District provide local and regional bus service, with connections to
             surrounding neighborhoods, communities, and counties.
       •     Shuttles. Several City-sponsored and private shuttles were previously operated in
             the 1980s and 1990s in San Rafael but were discontinued due to low ridership. A
             2002 study to consider the feasibility of City shuttle with connections between
             Downtown and major employers concluded shuttle service is not currently a viable
             option. In 2015, the Golden Gate Bridge, Highway and Transportation District
             instituted a pilot program for a shuttle service between the San Rafael transit
             center and the Larkspur ferry terminal.
       •     Commuter Rail. The Sonoma Marin Area Rail Transit (SMART) Commission was
             formed in 1995 to study possible rail service between Cloverdale and San Rafael
             using the former Northwestern Pacific Railroad Authority right-of-way. In 2003, the
             Commission became the SMART Authority. Construction began in May 2012. The
             SMART rail corridor parallels Highway 101.. The two SMART stations in San
             Rafael are planned for the Civic Center area and the downtown area. Phase 1
             passenger service of SMART, a connection between Airport Boulevard in Santa
             Rosa and downtown San Rafael, is expected to begin in late 2016. Phase 2
             extends the rail service; the system would connect Larkspur to Cloverdale.
       •     Other Transit. Sonoma and Marin Airporter services connect riders with the
             Oakland and San Francisco airports; Greyhound Bus service provides national
             bus service, and private taxi companies provide taxi service.
       Paratransit Services
       Paratransit services are small-scale transit services catering to special needs
       populations such as the elderly or disabled. Under contract from Marin County Transit
       District, Whistlestop Wheels provides demand-responsive service for elderly and
       disabled citizens that qualify for Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) paratransit
       service. Marin County Transit District estimates that the growing senior population
       countywide will create a growth in annual paratransit ridership from approximately
       125,000 to 180,000, between 2014 and 2024. Local paratransit service operated by
160 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION                                    Reprinted 04/28/2017

Whistlestop Wheels will continue to serve an important role in providing mobility and
access for a portion of that need located in San Rafael.
Bicycling and Pedestrian Facilities
In 2002, the City adopted the San Rafael Bicycle and Pedestrian Master Plan. The
Plan outlines the need for an expanded network or bikeways and pedestrian pathways
and sidewalks, as well as end-of-trip facilities and public education about the merits of
bicycling and safety. Furthermore, in 2016 the City adopted the “Complete Streets
Policy”, which provides procedures and criteria for cerating and maintaining complete
street systems that provide safe, comfortable and convenient travel along and across
City streets for all users.
Parking Facilities
Parking supply throughout the City is limited and must be managed based on the
adjacent land uses it serves. Downtown requires a flexible, urban parking strategy.
Some other commercial areas require additional parking. Some residential areas are
impacted by on-street parking shortages due to older apartment buildings with
inadequate on-site parking, spillover parking from nearby commercial areas, and other
factors, and require City assistance in balancing the needs of different parking users.
Bicycle parking should be secure, visible and convenient. More bike parking is
required on busy commercial roads such as Fourth Street, at the Transportation
Center, at shopping and employment centers, and at public parks and recreation
centers.
Airport Facilities
San Rafael is served by two international airports at San Francisco and Oakland.
Sonoma and Marin Airporters serve these airports. The San Rafael Airport is a
privately owned and operated local airport. Marin County operates a small airport for
business and pleasure at Gnoss Field, located in Novato.
Funding Needs
San Rafael’s circulation funding comes from Federal, State and local sources,
including traffic mitigation fees. Transportation Measure A, a local half-cent sales tax,
was passed in November 2004. To support the implementation of much needed
transportation improvements, the City will seek additional funding and work with the
County to secure grants and resources that can be utilized by local jurisdictions. .
  Relationship of the Circulation Element to State Law and
  Other General Plan Elements
Consistent with State law, this Circulation Element establishes policies affecting the
movement of people, goods, and vehicles within and through the City, and meets
other requirements as outlined by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research.
Specifically, the State requires the Circulation Element to identify the extent and
location of existing and proposed major thoroughfares, transportation routes,
terminals, any military airports and ports, and other local utilities and facilities, all
correlated with the land use element of the plan. The Infrastructure Element
addresses other local utilities and facilities.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                   SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION 161

       The Circulation Element is related to other elements of the General Plan as follows:
           • Land Use Element. See policies concerning timing development with
                circulation improvements and growth allocation. See also policies concerning
                mixed use, infill and transit-oriented approaches to higher density
                development.
           • Community Design Element. See policies concerning transportation corridor
                improvement programs, street trees and parking lot landscaping.
           • Infrastructure Element. See policies concerning the Capital Improvement
                Program and street maintenance, including street pavement, sweeping,
                lighting and sidewalk maintenance.
           • Safety Element. See policies concerning access for emergency vehicles and
                emergency roadway connectors.
           • Air and Water Quality Element. See policies concerning promotion of
                circulation alternatives, including low-emission vehicles.
           • Neighborhoods Element. See policies concerning safe streets, street
                appearance, creating pedestrian friendly environments, bicycle and pedestrian
                paths, parking, open space access, San Rafael Airport, and specific road
                improvement and access projects.
162 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION                                  Reprinted 04/28/2017

GOAL 12: A LEADERSHIP ROLE IN
TRANSPORTATION
It is the goal of San Rafael to take a leadership role in developing regional
transportation solutions. San Rafael is proud of the leadership role it has taken in
planning and securing funding for regional transportation projects that expand travel
choices for local citizens. Through working closely with regional transportation
planning agencies, funding sources and service providers, the City continues to play a
pivotal role in making highway connections more efficient, improving bus service,
establishing commuter rail service, expanding ferry service, and creating an extensive
Countywide bikeway network.
Transportation is a regional issue that must be addressed on a regional level. The
Transportation Authority of Marin (TAM) is the County’s Congestion Management
Agency (CMA) was formed in the early 1990s to address regional transportation
planning and funding needs. San Rafael, located centrally in the county and the
largest city in Marin, can play a major role in
shaping the future of transportation in Marin.
Through the City’s participation on the boards                                   M arin Co u n t y’ s
of the CMA, the Golden Gate Bridge and                                  T ran sp o rt at io n Vi si o n
Highway Transportation District (GGBHTD),
and the new Sonoma-Marin Area Rail Transit                    T he Ci t y of S an R af a e l ’s p o lic i es ar e
(SMART) Authority, the City of San Rafael has                 c om pat i b le wi th ef f or ts b y M ar i n Co u nt y t o
a significant voice in matters of regional                    im pr o v e tr a ns p or t at i o n c h o ic es as ou t l in e d i n
                                                              Mov i n g F or war d - A 2 5 - Y ear Tr a ns p or ta t io n
significance. On a wider regional scale, the
                                                              V is io n f or Ma r in C o un t y ( 2 0 03) , wh ic h
City also monitors Metropolitan Transportation                ad v oc at es t he f o l lo wi n g:
Commission (MTC) planning activities that                     • Im pr o ve d a n d ex p a n de d l oc a l b us s er v ic e.
affect Bay Area-wide transportation decisions.
                                                              • Co u nt ywi d e s c h oo l b u s s er v ic e a nd s up p or t
                                                                   of t h e S af e Ro u tes t o Sc ho o l pr og r am .
C-1. Regional Transportation                                  • Loc a l r o a d wa y a nd h i g h wa y i nt er c h an g e
Planning.                                                          im pr o v em ents .
Actively coordinate with other jurisdictions,                 •    Com pl e t io n of a c o nt i n uo us H i gh O c c up a nc y
regional transportation planning agencies, and                     V eh ic l e l an e o n H ig h w a y 1 01 .
transit providers to expand and improve local                 •    T r ans it C en t er s to s er v e as i nt er- m od a l
and regional transportation choice. Work                           hu bs .
cooperatively to improve transit and paratransit              • Ne w c om m uter r ai l s e r v ic e.
services, achieve needed highway corridor                     • Inc r e as e d ex pr es s bus s er v ic e.
improvements, and improve the regional                        • Inc r e as e d f er r y s er v ic e.
bicycling network. As part of this effort,
support implementation of Marin County’s 25-
Year Transportation Vision.
     C-1a. Participation in CMA, MTC and Other Regional Transportation Planning
     Efforts. Continue to participate in and monitor activities of regional transportation
     planning agencies, including but not limited to the Transportation Authority of Marin and
     the Metropolitan Transportation Commission, and actively support implementation of
     Marin County’s 25-Year Transportation Vision.
           Responsibility: City Council, Public Works, Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                         SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION                    163

           C-1b. Public Information About Transportation. Through public workshops,
           neighborhood meetings, staff reports and other means, provide public information and
           education on local transportation conditions, behavior, issues and improvement options.
           Hold at least one traffic and transportation workshop annually to update the public on
           conditions and proposed improvements.
                Responsibility: Public Works
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time
       C-2. Regional Transportation Funding.
       Support a regional funding approach to pay for transportation improvements to transit,
       highway corridors, and bicycle routes and facilities by seeking a broad range of
       federal, state and local funds to help pay for these improvements. Use locally
       generated funds to leverage/match outside funding sources.
           C-2a. Local Transportation Tax. (Deleted per Amendment on 12/5/16)
           C-2b. Transportation Project Grants. Work with governmental agencies, non-profits
           and community groups to secure grants for appropriate transportation projects.
                Responsibility: Public Works,
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time
       C-3. Seeking Transportation Innovation.
       Take a leadership role in looking for opportunities to be innovative and experiment
       with transportation improvements and services.
           C-3a. Transportation Technology. Use the most effective technologies in managing the
           City’s roadways and congestion. For example, support timed connections at transit hubs,
           and promote the use of transportation information systems.
                Responsibility: Public Works
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time, Mitigation Fees
164 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION                                      Reprinted 04/28/2017

GOAL 13: MOBILITY FOR ALL USERS
It is the goal of San Rafael to have a diversified, cost-effective and resource-
efficient transportation network that provides mobility for all users. Our
transportation system is safe and responsive to the needs of San Rafael residents,
workers and visitors. It provides a range of travel options that include improved
highway and roadway connections, expanded bus service, new commuter rail, smaller
scale transit options responsive to special populations, and an excellent network of
bikeways and pedestrian paths. Our transit and paratransit systems effectively serve a
broad spectrum of users, including commuters, youth, seniors and people with
disabilities. Our roadways and parking resources are efficiently managed and
accommodate automobiles as well as alternative modes of transportation. San Rafael
continues to monitor and limit its local congestion levels using traffic standards.
San Rafael and Marin County residents largely rely on the single occupancy vehicle
for their transportation needs. While San Rafael continues to be responsive to the
needs of automobile drivers, there needs to be a greater set of alternative
transportation options, or congestion will continue to grow and the quality of life will
degrade as residents and workers spend more time stuck in traffic in their cars. Even
if San Rafael were to stop growing entirely, surrounding communities in the region
would continue to grow, and congestion will increase. As promoted by the County’s
25-Year Transportation Vision for Marin County and presented in this Element, a more
diversified and resource-efficient transportation network offering expanded travel
options is needed. Such a system would have less of an impact on the environment
as a whole and improve residents’ quality of life. The City and community should
continue to work together to reduce trips, promote use of alternatives to the single
occupancy automobile, reduce school commute trips, encourage employers to
implement transportation demand management strategies, and to improve our transit
and paratransit services.
  Effectively Managing San Rafael’s Roadways and
  Congestion
Since 1988, San Rafael has used level of service (LOS) standards applied to all
signalized intersections. Standards first applied in the P.M. Peak Hours (4 - 6 p.m.)
but were later also applied in the A.M. Peak Hours (7 - 9 a.m.) as part of the City’s
environmental review procedure. Much of the City is approaching the LOS standards
limit for many intersections. In order to encourage development that would meet San
Rafael’s housing and economic vitality goals, even in congested areas, City policy
allows for evaluation of projects that exceed LOS standards.
Also, in 1988, the City adopted a program called the Priorities Projects Procedure
(PPP) that allocated development in portions of North and East San Rafael based on
traffic capacity.
In 2004, the PPP was replaced with the Project Selection Process (PSP), which
implemented the same allocation process citywide. However, by 2011, the purpose
and importance of the PSP diminished because: a) the community is now largely built-
out and there are very few remaining land development opportunities; and b) the
limited traffic capacity has been used up or needed transportation improvements have
been implemented.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION 165

                          In addition, City policy requires that roadway improvements be planned and funded
                          consistent with approved development. The City administers a Traffic Mitigation Fee
                          program, adopted in 1988, that requires development to help fund needed roadway
                          improvements.
                          In designing and maintaining roadways, the City must ensure that they are safe for all
                          users. As alternative modes of transportation become more viable, their
                          accommodation in roadway design will grow in importance. The City must also ensure
                          that emergency vehicles can access all portions of the City. This is particularly
                                                                 challenging during periods when high levels of
                                                                 congestion tend to occur. The City therefore has a
                                                                 responsibility to identify alternative routes for
          Ro a d w a y D e si g n                                emergency vehicles.
    S an R af a e l us es Am er ic an
    As s oc i a ti o n of St a te H i gh wa y a n d
    T r ans p ir at i o n O f f ic i a ls ( A A S HT O )         C-4. Safe Roadway Design.
    ge om etr ic d es ig ns a n d S t at e a nd                  Design of roadways should be safe and convenient for
    Fe der a l s t an d ar ds t o d es ig n                      motor vehicles, transit, bicycles and pedestrians. Place
    r oa d wa ys .                                               highest priority on safety. In order to maximize safety
                                                                 and multimodal mobility, the City Council may
                                                                 determine that an intersection is exempt from the
                                                                 applicable intersection level of service standard where
                          it is determined that a circulation improvement is needed for public safety
                          considerations, including bicycle and pedestrian safety, and/or transit use
                          improvements.
                                 C-4a. Street Pattern and Traffic Flow. Support efforts by the City Traffic Engineer to
                                 configure or re-configure street patterns so as to improve traffic flow and turning
                                 movements in balance with safety considerations and the desire not to widen roads.
                                        Responsibility: Public Works
                                        Timeframe: Ongoing
                                        Resources: General Fund
                                 C-4b. Street Design Criteria to Support Alternative Modes. Establish street design
                                 criteria to the extent permitted by State law to support alternative transportation modes to
                                 better meet user needs and minimize conflicts between competing modes.
                                        Responsibility: Public Works, Fire
                                        Timeframe: Long Term
                                        Resources: Staff Time, Grants
                                 C-4c. Appropriate LOS Standards. At the time City Council approves a roadway
                                 improvement and safety exemption from the applicable LOS standard, the appropriate
                                 LOS will be established for the intersection.
                                        Responsibility: Public Works
                                        Timeframe: Ongoing
                                        Resources: Staff Time
                          C-5. Traffic Level of Service Standards.
                          A. Intersection LOS. In order to ensure an effective roadway network, maintain
                                 adequate traffic levels of service (LOS) consistent with standards for signalized
                                 intersections in the A.M. and P.M. peak hours as shown below, except as provided
                                 for under (B) Arterial LOS.
166                    SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION                                          Reprinted 04/28/2017
Intersection Level of Service Standards, A.M. and P.M. Peak Hours
                                   Location                             LOS
          Citywide, except as noted below                                 D
               a. Downtown except as noted below                          E
                     1. Mission Ave. and Irwin                            F
               b. Irwin Street and Grand Avenue between                   E
                     Second Street and Mission Avenue
               c. Third and Union Streets                                E*
               d. Andersen and West Francisco                             E
               e. Andersen and Bellam                                     E
               f.    Freitas at Civic Center/Redwood Highway              E
               g. Merrydale at Civic Center Drive                         E
               h. Merrydale at Las Gallinas                               E
     *Maximum 70 seconds of delay during peak hours.
B. Arterial LOS. The City Traffic Engineer may apply arterial level of service
     analysis as the primary method of analysis for any proposed development project.
     The City Traffic Engineer will make this determination based on intersection
     spacing and other characteristics of the roadway system where conditions are
     better predicted by arterial analysis. Where arterial LOS analysis is warranted, a
     proposed development must be consistent with the following arterial LOS
     standards. If an intersection LOS is above or below the standard, the project shall
     be considered consistent with this policy if the arterial LOS is within the standard.
     The project will not be deemed consistent with this policy if the arterial LOS fails
     to meet the standard.
     When arterial level of service is applied as the primary method
     of analysis for a proposed project, the project shall be deemed             T ran spo rt at io n Au t h o rit y
                                                                                          o f M ar in ( T AM )
     to be consistent with this policy if it is demonstrated that the
     arterial LOS standards described below are met regardless of             T he T r a ns p or ta t io n Au th or it y
     the intersection LOS, or the project shall be deemed to be               of M ar i n ( T A M) h as b e en
     inconsistent with this policy if the arterial LOS standards are          des i g na te d as t h e M ar i n
     not met regardless of the intersection LOS.                              Co n ges t io n M a na g em ent
                                                                              A ge nc y ( C M A) , wh ic h i s a
                                                                              J o in t P o wer s Ag e nc y
                                                                              es t a bl is h ed b e t we en t he
                                                                              Co u nt y a n d c it i es t o a ddr es s
                                                                              Ma r i n's u n i qu e tr an s p or t at i o n
                                                                              is s ues a n d to f u lf i l l t h e
                                                                              l eg is l at i v e r e qu ir em en ts of
                                                                              Pr op os it i o ns 11 1 a n d 11 6 ,
                                                                              ap pr o v ed in J u n e 1 99 0 .
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                  SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION                     167

Arterial Level of Service Standards, A.M. and P.M. Peak Hours
                              Location                                     LOS
Citywide, except as noted below                                              D
     a. Downtown except as noted below                                        E
                  Congestion Management Segments
                                                                             D
                  (Second, Third and Fourth Streets) (as
                  established by the Marin County
                  Congestion Management Agency)
     b. Arterials operating at LOS E outside                                  F
            Downtown, and F (1)
(1) For arterials operating at LOS E outside Downtown, and F as of the date of adoption of General
     Plan 2020, see Appendix C.
                                                        Intersection Level of Service (LOS)                    Arterial LOS
      W h at i s L ev e l
         o f Se rv i c e?                                                                                   Speed
                                                      Signalized                      Unsignalized          (mph)
                                               Delay                                               Delay
    Le v e l of s er v ic e ( LO S)           (Sec)                                               (Sec)
      is a t oo l t o m eas ur e
      op er at i o n c on d it i o ns                                  F                                                    F
      an d c o n ges t io n l e v e ls
    T he LO S c r i te r i a a n d
      thr es ho l ds ar e                                                                                       7
      d if f er e nt b et we e n                  80+
                                                                                 F                                          E
      uns i g na l i ze d an d
                                                                                                                9
      s i gn a l i ze d
                                                                       E
      i nt er s ec t i ons , a nd                                                                                           D
      ar t er i als                                                                                            13
    For u ns ig n a li ze d a nd
      s i gn a l i ze d
      i nt er s ec t i ons , LO S is               55
                                                                                                                            C
      an in d ic at i on of                                                                        50+
      s ec o n ds of de l a y                                          D
                                                                                 E
    For ar te r i a l s e gm ents ,                                                                           19
      LO S is a n i n d ic a t io n o f
      tr a v e l s p ee d a n d de l a y          35                                               35
      at in ter s ec ti o ns                                                     D                                          B
                                                                       C
    T he m et ho d o lo g y us e d
      to pr e pa r e G en er a l                                                                   25
      P la n 2 0 20 id e nt if i e d                                             C
      LO S l e ve ls f r om A t o                 20                  B
      F, b as e d o n th e                                                       B                 15         25+
      am oun t of v eh ic l e                                                                                               A
                                                  10                                               10
      de l a y a t a s i gn a l i ze d                                A          A
      i nt er s ec t i on . T he L O S
      l e ve ls ar e s u bj ec t t o
      c ha n ge bas e d o n
      ac c e p te d tr af f ic
      en g i ne er i ng s t a nd ar ds .
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                          SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION                   169

    C. Exemptions. Signalized intersections at Highway 101 and Interstate 580 onramps
        and offramps are exempt from LOS standards because delay at these locations is
        affected by regional traffic and not significantly impacted by local measures.
    D. Evaluation of Project Merits. In order to balance the City’s objectives to provide
        affordable housing, maintain a vital economy and provide desired community
        services with the need to manage traffic congestion, projects that would exceed
        the level of service standards set forth above may be approved if the City Council
        finds that the benefits of the project to the community outweigh the resulting
        traffic impacts.
        C-5a. LOS Methodology. Use appropriate methodologies for calculating traffic Levels of
        Service, as determined by the City Traffic Engineer.
             Responsibility: Public Works
             Time Frame: Ongoing
             Funding: General Fund
        C-5b. Monitoring Traffic. To assure acceptable traffic operating standards over time,
        monitor traffic conditions throughout San Rafael on an ongoing basis. Based on such
        evaluation, the City Traffic Engineer shall identify traffic mitigations to reduce congestion
        and address safety concerns.
             Responsibility: Public Works
             Timeframe: Ongoing
             Funding: General Fund
        C-5c. Exception Review. When the City Council finds that a project provides significant
        community benefits yet would result in a deviation from the LOS standards, the City
        Council may approve such a project through adoption of findings, based on substantial
        evidence, that the specific economic, social, technological and/or other benefits of the
        project to the community substantially outweigh the project’s impacts on circulation, and
        that all feasible mitigation measures have been required of the project.
             Responsibility: Community Development
             Timeframe: Ongoing
             Funding: Fees
        See also LU-2a (Development Review).
    C-5.1. Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT) Methodology for
    Environmental Review of Traffic Impact
    Pursuant to Public Resources Code § 21099 and 21083 (provided under Senate Bill
    743, effective January 2016,) an alternative method for measuring transportation
    impacts of projects will replace the Level of Service (LOS) methodology. For
    environmental review, the use of the vehicle miles traveled (VMT) metric will be
    applied in assessing development projects.
        C-5.1a. Develop a VMT Model. Use VMT in the assessment of traffic impacts for the
        purposes of environmental review, provided that each project meets the criteria for use of
        VMT measurements identified under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)
        and that the City Traffic Engineer determines the appropriateness of using VMT for a
        project.
        a. Develop and adopt a VMT model. Incorporate the model into the General Plan
             Environmental Impact Report
        b. Implement VMT for CEQA review of projects
             Responsibility: Public Works
             Timeframe: Ongoing
             Funding: Fees
170 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION                                    Reprinted 04/28/2017

C-6. Proposed Improvements.
The proposed circulation improvements in Exhibit 21 have been identified as potentially
needed to improve safety and relieve congestion in San Rafael over the next 20 years.
Major Proposed Circulation Improvements include those improvements deemed
necessary to maintain City LOS standards. Other recommended roadway improvements,
include additional improvements that may become necessary in the long-term and are
desirable to enhance San Rafael’s circulation system, but are not necessary to maintain
LOS standards. Specific improvements will be implemented as conditions require, and
will be refined during the design phase. Recognize that other feasible design solutions
may become available and be more effective in achieving the same goals as the
improvements listed in Exhibit 19, and allow for their implementation, consistent with
the most recent engineering standards. As conditions change, planned roadway
improvements may be amended, through the annual General Plan Review. Roadway
improvements are implemented through the Capital Improvements Program, and are
typically funded through a variety of sources, including Traffic Mitigation Fees.
Environmental review is required.
     C-6a. Update Proposed Circulation Improvements. On a regular basis, monitor and
     update the list of Proposed Circulation Improvements.
           Responsibility: Public Works
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                               SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION 171

Exhibit 21
Major Planned Circulation Improvements a
                                                                                                  Funding Source
                       Proposed Roadway Improvements                        Projected  Mitigation    State &    Other Grants  Projected Project Timing (b)
                                                                               Cost       Fee        Federal     & Sources
 1    Smith Ranch Road/Lucas Valley Road                                    $4,000,000 $4,000,000                            Depends On Development Timing
      Widen roadway to provide two westbound and two eastbound lanes
      between Redwood Highway and Los Gamos and provide pedestrian
      and bicycle facilities.
      Widen northbound 101 off ramp and southbound 101 off ramp for
      additional right and left turn lanes.
 2    Lucas Valley/Los Gamos                                                $2,000,000 $2,000,000                            Depends On Development Timing
      Widen Lucas Valley Road to provide two through lanes for
      eastbound and westbound, and reconfigure Highway 101 ramps and
      provide pedestrian and bicycle facilities.
      Signalize intersection and coordinate with adjacent intersections.
 3    Las Gallinas Avenue (Merrydale to Del Presidio)                        $300,000   $300,000                             Depends On Development Timing
      Remove parking and widen street to provide four lanes (one
      southbound, two northbound and one two-way left turn).
 4    Freitas/Las Gallinas                                                   $650,000   $650,000                             Under design
      Upgrade the traffic signal system and operation. Improve intersection
      geometry, cover portions of drainage ditch and provide pedestrian
      and bicycle facilities.
 5    Freitas/Del Presidio                                                   $900,000   $900,000                             Depends On Development Timing
      Explore feasibility of double northbound right turn and southbound
      101 on ramp widening
 6    Freitas/ Northbound 101 Ramps- Redwood- Civic Center                  $7,500,000 $7,500,000                            Depends On Development Timing
      widening and signalization.
      Interim interchange improvement and signalization
 7    Grand Avenue (south of Grand Avenue bridge to Fourth Street)
      Widen north/south, add one lane as required, and upgrade traffic      $6,500,000 $3,250,000                $3,250,000  Depends On Development Timing
      signal system. Requires right of way and major bridge widening.
      Signalize Grand/ Fifth, and restrict parking to provide turn lanes.    $200,000   $200,000                             Depends On Operations
                                                                                                                              Reprinted 04/28/2017
                                                                                                       Funding Source
                          Proposed Roadway Improvements                          Projected  Mitigation    State &    Other Grants  Projected Project Timing (b)
                                                                                   Cost        Fee        Federal     & Sources
        Signalize Grand/ Mission, and restrict parking to provide turn lanes.    $200,000    $200,000                             Depends On Operations
  8     Francisco Blvd. East (Bellam to Grand Avenue Bridge)
        Four lanes required. One southbound, one two-way left turn and two      $10,000,000 $5,000,000                $5,000,000  Depends On Development Timing
        northbound lanes. Major right of way required.
        Signalize Francisco Blvd. East/Harbor.                                   $200,000    $200,000                             Depends On Operations
  9     Lincoln Avenue (Second Street to southbound 101 ramps -
        Hammondale or as required)
        Extend the existing PM peak northbound Tow-Away zone for AM              $400,000    $400,000                             Depends On Operations
        peak as well (four lanes may be required). This parking restriction is
        likely to be extended north toward the southbound 101 ramps.
        Signalize Lincoln/ Grand, and restrict parking to provide turn lanes.    $200,000    $200,000                             Depends On Operations
  10    Mission/Lincoln                                                         $4,000,000  $4,000,000                            Depends On Development Timing
        Provide additional lanes for northbound, and westbound; upgrade
        traffic signal system, requires right of way.
  11    Fourth Street (Miracle Mile)                                             $450,000    $450,000                             Depends On Operations
        Re-align Ross Valley and Santa Margarita and re-design intersection
        operation. LOS may deteriorate but community access will be
        provided.
        Additional Signalization
  12    Signalize Fifth & H Street, and restrict parking to provide turn lanes.  $100,000    $100,000                             Depends On Operations
  13    Signalize First/C Street, and restrict parking to provide turn lanes. 1  $150,000    $150,000                             Depends On Operations
  14    Signalize First/ D Street, and restrict parking to provide turn lanes.   $150,000    $150,000                             Depends On Operations
        Roadway configuration changed on D Street between First and
        Second.
  15    Signalize Fourth/Union Street, and restrict parking to provide turn      $200,000    $200,000                             Depends On Development Timing
        lanes.
  16    Signalize or Roundabout Mission/Court Street.                            $200,000    $100,000                  $100,000   Depends On Development Timing
  17    Signalize Merrydale/Southbound 101 Ramps, and provide turn lanes.        $250,000    $250,000                             Depends On Operations
        (Intersection under monitor)
1 On watch due to other improvement.
Reprinted 04/28/2017
                                                                                                Funding Source
                    Proposed Roadway Improvements                        Projected  Mitigation     State &    Other Grants   Projected Project Timing (b)
                                                                            Cost        Fee        Federal      & Sources
18 Signalize Lincoln/DuBois/Irwin and re-align intersection. Right of    $2,500,000                             $2,500,000 Depends On Development Timing
   way required.
19 Third/Union Street                                                     $900,000    $900,000                             Completed in 2009
   Widen Union Street to provide 4 lanes between Third and Fourth.
   Fire Station 4 modification required.
   Reconfigure Third/Union eastbound left turn pocket.
   Provide westbound right turn pocket.
   Upgrade the traffic signal system and operation.
20 Kerner Blvd or Francisco Blvd. East. To Andersen Drive                $8,000,000  $4,000,000                 $4,000,000 Depends On Development Timing
   Undercrossing
   Provide a minimum 3-lane connector near Shoreline Parkway.
   Signalize at both ends.
21 Andersen /East Sir Francis Drake-eastbound 580 Ramps                  $2,000,000   $500,000    $1,000,000     $500,000  Actively monitoring. Depends On
   Major widening and signalization.                                                                                       Operations.
22 Upgrade traffic signal system.                                        $3,000,000  $1,500,000   $1,500,000                Actively monitoring.
                                                                                                                           Improvements underway.
23 Install traffic monitoring sensors and camera system.                 $1,000,000   $500,000     $500,000                 Actively monitoring.
                                                                                                                           Improvements underway.
24 Install Fiber Optic network throughout the traffic system.            $2,000,000  $1,000,000   $1,000,000                Actively monitoring.
                                                                                                                           Improvements underway.
                                                              Sub Total $57,950,000 $38,600,000   $4,000,000   $15,350,000
                                                                                                                             Reprinted 04/28/2017
                                 Other Projects                                                         Funding Source
                                                                           Projected      Mitigation       State &         TAM and         Projected Project Timing (b)
                                                                              Cost           Fee           Federal      Other Grants
                                                                                                                         and Sources
 25     Implement Bicycle and Pedestrian Master Plan                       $5,300,000     $2,650,000      $2,650,000                       7-20 years
 26     Pedestrian bridge at Third/Hetherton – GGT Transportation          $2,000,000      $500,000       $1,000,000       $500,000        Depends On Operations, 10-20 years
        Center
 27     Pedestrian and bicycle bridge to connect Canal Neighborhood        $4,500,000     $1,125,000      $2,250,000      $1,125,000       10-20 years
        to Andersen Drive/Downtown.
 28     Pedestrian and bicycle bridge to connect Canal Neighborhood        $4,000,000     $1,000,000      $2,000,000      $1,000,000       10-20 years
        to Montecito Shopping Center.
 29     Freitas / Northbound 101 Ramps - Redwood-Civic Center or a        $16,000,000     $7,000,000      $7,000,000      $2,000,000       Depends On Development Timing
        new flyover from Civic Center Dr. to Freitas. Long Term                                                                            [funding source incorporates all
        Improvement                                                                                                                        amounts from previous program 31]
 30     Second Street (from E Street to east side of A Street).            $6,000,000     $1,500,000      $1,500,000      $3,000,000       10-20 years
        The projected volume requires right turn lanes or through/right
        lanes be added in the long term. Right of way required.
 31     North San Rafael Promenade                                         $2,000,000     $1,000,000      $1,000,000                       10-20 years
                                               Sub Total Other Projects   $39,800,000    $14,775,000     $17,400,000      $7,625,000
                                               Grand Total Project Cost   $97,750,000
(a) Priorities for circulation improvements are set in the Capital Improvements Program. This list may be amended as part of the five-year General Plan update.
(b) The timing for the improvements depends on the size, type and phasing of additional development. Policies LU-2 (Development Timing) requires findings when project-
     related traffic will not cause the LOS to be exceeded.
Source: San Rafael Public Works Department
Reprinted 04/28/2017

                       This page intentionally left blank.
176 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION                          Reprinted 04/28/2017
C-7. Circulation Improvements Funding.
Take a strong advocacy role in securing funding for planned circulation
improvements. Continue to seek comprehensive funding that includes Federal, State,
and County funding, among other funding sources; Local Traffic Mitigation Fees; and
Assessment Districts. The local development projects’ share of responsibility to fund
improvements is based on: (1) the generation of additional traffic that creates the need
for the improvement; (2) the improvement’s role in the overall traffic network; (3) the
probability of securing funding from alternative sources; and (4) the timing of the
improvement.
     C-7a. Traffic Mitigation Fees. Continue to implement and periodically update the City’s
     Traffic Mitigation Program.
     Responsibility: Public Works, Community Development
     Timeframe: Ongoing
     Resources: Staff Time
     C-7b. Circulation Improvements. Seek funding for and construct circulation
     improvements needed for safety, to improve circulation, or to maintain traffic level of
     service.
     Responsibility: Public Works
     Timeframe: Ongoing
     Resources: Capital Improvements, Grants, CMA, MTC, State and Federal funding
     See LU-2a (Development Review).
C-8. Eliminating and Shifting Peak Hour Trips.
Support efforts to limit traffic congestion through eliminating low occupancy auto
trips or shifting peak hour trips to off-peak hours. Possible means include
telecommuting, walking and bicycling, flexible work schedules, car and vanpooling
and other Transportation Demand Management approaches.
     See Programs C-13a (School Transportation) C-11a (Car and Vanpooling), C-12a
     (Regional Support for TDM), C-12b (City Support for TDM) and C-12c (City TDM
     Program).
C-9. Access for Emergency Services.
Provide safe routes for emergency vehicle access so that that emergency services can
be delivered when Highway 101 or 580 are closed or congested with traffic.
     C-9a. Highway Closures. Develop, and update as necessary, an emergency contingency
     plan that addresses highway closure events.
     Responsibility: Public Works
     Timeframe: Ongoing
     Resources: Staff Time
     C-9b. Roadway Monitoring. Support local traffic monitoring and control approaches,
     such as closed-circuit cameras and high-tech traffic signal systems that can be used to
     relieve congestion around incident sites or support emergency vehicle access.
     Responsibility: Public Works
     Timeframe: Ongoing
     Resources: Staff Time
     See S-32a (Safe Buildings) and S-36a (Emergency Connectors).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                      SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION 177

      Expanding Alternatives to the Single Occupant
      Automobile for Local and Regional Mobility
    The single occupant vehicle is the dominant form of travel in San Rafael and Marin
    County as a whole. If congestion levels are to be kept at current or lower levels, the
    City, County and community as a whole need to do what they can to reduce trips and
    encourage use of alternatives to the single occupancy automobile. The County
    concludes in its 25-Year Transportation Vision for Marin County that expanding
    transportation choice is the only realistic way to manage congestion and improve
    mobility.
    How can San Rafael’s residents be inspired to reduce automobile trips and make
    more trips by alternative modes?
    •    Land use changes that allow people to live closer to shops and places of work to
         promote walking, rather than driving, for daily needs.
    •    Transportation Demand Management (TDM) programs create incentives for
         changing travel behavior, and can be administered on a mandatory or voluntary
         basis by employers. The box below provides a range of tools that could be used.
    •    The Safe Routes to School program and related efforts are beginning to change
         school commute behavior in participating schools and should be actively
         supported. County and City studies have found that 21 percent of a.m. peak hour
         trips are due to school commute trips, and that 75 percent of students arrive at
         school by car.
    C-10. Alternative Transportation Mode Projects.
    Encourage and support projects, such as the Highway 101 High Occupancy Vehicle
    Gap Closure Project, that benefit alternatives to the single occupant automobile.
         C-10a. Advocating Alternative Mode Projects. Through the City’s participation in the
         CMA and other regional transportation agencies, advocate for innovative and alternative
         transportation projects that will reduce single occupancy vehicle use.
              Responsibility: Public Works, Community Development
              Timeframe: Ongoing
              Resources: Staff Time
    C-11. Alternative Transportation Mode Users.
    Encourage and promote individuals to use alternative modes of transportation, such as
    regional and local transit, carpooling, bicycling, walking and use of low-impact
    alternative vehicles. Support development of programs that provide incentives for
    individuals to choose alternative modes.
         C-11a. Car and Vanpooling. Support car and vanpooling in San Rafael through local and
         regional programs that match riders interested in carpooling or vanpooling.
              Responsibility: Public Works, Community Development
              Timeframe: Ongoing
              Resources: Staff Time
178 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION                                   Reprinted 04/28/2017

     C-11b. Car Sharing. Support efforts to organize and run car-sharing programs in
     SanRafael.
           Responsibility: Public Works, Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     C-11c. Low-Impact Alternative Vehicles.                       T ran sp o rt at io n D em an d
     Encourage the use of street-legal alternative                       M an ag e m e n t T o o l s
     vehicles that minimize impacts on the environment.
     Investigate new technology regarding electric             TDM programs are generally administered by large
     vehicles and cleaner burning combustion vehicles.         employers, both public and private. Groups of
     To support this program, encourage the
                                                               smaller employers can combine forces to offer
     development of alternative fuel infrastructure (for
     instance, electric plug-ins) in parking facilities and    program benefits. The following tools are designed
     other key locations around the City as well as, when      to create incentives for using modes other than the
     cost-effective, include electric, hybrid, or alternative  single occupancy auto. Benefits include reduced
     fuel vehicles in the City fleet.                          congestion, parking needs, and emissions, and,
           Responsibility: Public Works, Community             potentially, healthier workers:
           Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing                                  Examples of TDM tools include:
           Resources: Staff Time                                 • Bicycling incentive programs, such as free
                                                                    bikes, secure parking, restrooms and showers.
     C-11d. Bike to Work Day. Encourage City                     • Projects to improve the comfort and safety of
     employees, other San Rafael workers and residents              pedestrians.
     to participate in Bike to Work Days and similar             • Telecommuting and flexible work hours.
     programs and provide support services for the
                                                                 • Carpool/vanpool use incentives, such as ride-
     program.
                                                                    matching services, at-cost fuel, and priority
           Responsibility: Public Works, Community
                                                                    parking.
           Development
                                                                 • Bus/rail use incentives, such as subsidies.
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time                                 • Express shuttles to connect workers with other
                                                                    commute modes and provide lunchtime
     C-11e. Reduction of Single Occupancy Vehicles.                 service to activity centers.
     Encourage developers of new projects in San                 • Guaranteed Ride Home programs.
     Rafael, including City projects, to provide                 • On-site cafeterias, child-care facilities, and
     improvements that reduce the use of single                     concierge services for employees.
     occupancy vehicles. These improvements could                • Promotion of pedal cab and bicycle delivery
     include preferential parking spaces for car pools,             systems.
     bicycle storage and parking facilities, and bus stop        • Low emission vehicle fleets with fueling or
     shelters.                                                      charging stations and preferential parking.
           Responsibility: Community Development,                • Public education, ridesharing and promotion
           Public Works                                             information.
           Timeframe: Short Term                                 • On-site employee housing to encourage
           Resources: Fees                                          walking to work.
     See H-15 (Infill Near Transit) and C-17a (SMART).
C-12. Transportation Demand Management.
Work cooperatively with governmental agencies, non-profits, businesses, institutions
and residential neighborhoods to create new and effective Transportation Demand
Management (TDM) programs to minimize single occupancy automobile use and
peak period traffic demand.
     C-12a. Regional Support for TDM. Support regional efforts to work with employers to
     provide TDM programs.
           Responsibility: Public Works, Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                    SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION              179

        C-12b. City Support for TDM. Serve as a resource to employers wishing to implement
        TDM by providing information through printed materials, workshops and other means.
        Encourage smaller employers to “pool” resources to create effective TDM programs.
             Responsibility: Public Works, Community Development
             Timeframe: Ongoing
             Resources: Staff Time
        C-12c. City TDM Program. Identify cost-effective City of San Rafael TDM programs for
        City employees. Consider approaches taken by the County in its Employee Commute
        Alternative Program.
             Responsibility: Public Works, Community Development
             Timeframe: Long Term
             Resources: Staff Time, Grants
    C-13. School-Related Automobile Traffic.
    Actively encourage public and private schools to implement trip reduction programs
    and reduce congestion caused by commuting students and staff.
        C-13a. School Transportation. Actively support efforts to improve transportation options
        for students and reduce school-related traffic congestion. Examples include advocating for
        funding for the Safe Routes to Schools program, encouraging transit providers to offer free
        passes or awards to students to use transit, supporting increased funding of school buses
        and crossing guards, and staggering school hours.
             Responsibility: Public Works
             Timeframe: Ongoing
             Resources: Staff Time, Grants
        C-13b. TDM for Schools. Require TDM programs for new or expanded private schools.
             Responsibility: Community Development
             Timeframe: Ongoing
             Resources: Fees
180 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION                                   Reprinted 04/28/2017



  Improving Transit and Related Services
  Of all the alternative travel options, transit holds perhaps the greatest potential for
  expanding transportation options and increasing mobility in San Rafael and the county.
  San Rafael’s low-density suburban development and dispersed travel pattern, however,
  provide significant challenges to transit planners. The local transit system is not currently
  competitive with the automobile in terms of convenience and
  accessibility.
                                                                                               W h o P ro v id e s
  Land use policies that support transit use are essential in
                                                                                 T ran sit a n d P ar at r an sit
  supporting and planning for transit use. Locating higher
                                                                                 L o c al l y an d R eg i o n al l y?
  density mixed use development with housing along transit
  lines reduces the need for automobiles and encourages
                                                                                 G old en G at e B ri dg e, Highw a y an d
  transit use. Working with surrounding communities and
                                                                                 T ran spo rt at io n Di st ri ct ( G G BHT D)
  regional transportation planning and transit providers to plan
                                                                                 pr o v i d es r e gi o n al an d l oc a l b us
  for responsive transit services is also essential. Key transit
                                                                                 s er v ic e , as we l l as f er r y s er v ic e f r om
  service improvements needed include:
                                                                                 Lar k s p ur t o S an Fr a nc is c o.
• Ongoing dissemination of transit services information.                         M arin Cou nt y T r an sit Di st r ict
                                                                                 ( MCT D) pr o v i des loc a l b us s er v ic e
• Improved regional transit service to include expanded                          thr o ug h a c o n tr ac t wi t h G G B HT D.
  express bus and transbay basic bus service, new commuter
  rail service, and expanded ferry service and ferry feeder bus                  W at e r T ra ns it Au t h or it y (W T A) was
  service.                                                                       f or m ed t o p l an ex p a nd ed f er r y s er v ic e
                                                                                 i n th e B a y Ar e a.
• Improved local transit service to include expanded local bus
  service and new shuttle service to connect with rail service,                  Son om a M ar in Ar e a Ra il T ra ns it
  local employers and other destinations as feasible.                            Au t ho r it y ( S M ART ) was f or m e d i n
                                                                                 20 0 3 to pl a n a nd p r o v i de nor th /s ou t h
• Two intermodal commuter hubs, centering on rail and bus                        c om m ute r a i l s er v ic e.
  service in Downtown and in North San Rafael. Transit hubs
  should provide a high level of passenger amenities, such as                    G r e yh o u n d Bu s pr o v i des na t io n al bus
  real-time transit information, safe and convenient pedestrian                  s er v ic e .
  and bicycle access and secure bike parking.
                                                                                 M arin an d So n o m a Ai rp o rt e r pr o v i d e
       C-14. Transit Network.                                                    bus an d s h ut t le s e r vic e to t h e O ak l an d
                                                                                 an d S a n Fr a nc is c o A ir por ts .
  Encourage the continued development of a safe, efficient, and
  reliable regional and local transit network to provide
  convenient alternatives to driving.
  C-14a. Transit Network. Support Countywide efforts to sustain and expand Marin County’s
  transit network. Work with neighborhoods, employers, transit providers, transportation planning
  agencies and funding agencies to improve and expand regional transit to and from adjacent
  counties, increase local transit services, and provide responsive paratransit services.
                  Responsibility: Public Works
                  Timeframe: Ongoing
                  Resources: Staff Time
            See also H-15 (Infill Near Transit).
       C-15. Transit Needs.
       Support efforts to track, understand and respond to changing transit and paratransit
       needs in order to meet the requirements of specific population groups including, but
       not limited to, elders, youth, persons with disabilities, persons with limited economic
       means, residents of specific neighborhoods, employers and visitors to the region.
       Advocate for meaningful public participation in meetings and discussions with transit
       Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                        SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION                        183

                            providers, and ensure that the needs of those in the community who are transit-
                            dependent are well represented.
                                C-15a. Transit Needs. Work with transit providers to identify underserved neighborhoods
                                and population groups and advocate for expanded service in those areas and populations.
                                    Responsibility: Public Works
                                    Timeframe: Ongoing
                                    Resources: Staff Time
                                                 C-15b. City Survey of Transit Needs. In City-sponsored surveys of
                                                 residents, seek transit satisfaction levels when appropriate and feasible.
                                                           Responsibility: Management Services, Public Works
                                                           Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                           Resources: Staff Time
                                                 C-15c. Transit for Tourism. Support efforts to provide and promote
                                                 effective transit options for visitors to West Marin and other County tourist
                                                 destinations, in order to reduce regional traffic flow through San Rafael.
                                                           Responsibility: Public Works
                                                           Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                           Resources: Staff Time
                                                 C-16. Transit Information.
                                                 Encourage the development and dissemination of local and regional
                                                 transit information to facilitate greater use of transit systems. This
                                                 includes service, educational and promotional information. Support
                                                 efforts to provide transit information in languages other than
                                                 English as needed.
                                                 C-16a. Transit Information Dissemination. Encourage development and
                                                 distribution of transit information through printed materials, kiosks, web
                                                 sites, radio and television broadcasts, and other means. Provide transit
                                                 information on the City’s website, at City offices open to the public and
                                                 through other dissemination means. Include transit access information on
Th e B e t t i n i                               City meeting notices and in notices for City-permitted events, and
Tr a n s p o r t a t i o n                       encourage merchants to provide transit information in their advertisements
Center is a                                      and in their places of business.
multimodal transit                               Responsibility: Public Works, Community Development, City Manager,
h u b wi t h s e r vi c e s                       Library
connecting San                                    Timeframe: Ongoing
Rafael to San                                     Resources: Staff Time
Francisco, the
E a s t B a y, a n d t h e
North Bay.                  C-17. Regional Transit Options.
                               Encourage expansion of existing regional transit connecting Marin with adjacent
                              counties, including basic service, express bus service, new commuter rail service,
                              and ferry service.
                              Regional Bus Service. Encourage expansion of regional bus service to and from
                              Sonoma, San Francisco, Contra Costa and Alameda Counties. Support efforts to
                              increase the frequency of service, and expand express bus service along the 101
                              corridor to connect with major employers.
                              Commuter Rail: Encourage development and use of a viable commuter rail service
                              through San Rafael operating on the Sonoma Marin Area Rail Transit (SMART)
                              right-of-way. Though SMART service will initially have its southern termination
                              point Downtown, encourage efforts to ultimately connect it with ferry service to San
                              Francisco.
184                         SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION                                     Reprinted 04/28/2017

  Ferry Service: Support efforts to improve and expand ferry service, and provide
  efficient connections to the ferry via other transportation modes.
  Airporter Service: Support continued regional dedicated bus and shuttle service to
  and from the San Francisco and Oakland International Airports.
  Other Regional Transit: Support continued Greyhound Bus service and other
  similar services that may develop.
       C-17a. SMART. Support the following design features for
       SMART commuter service within San Rafael:
       1. Establish stations in Downtown and in the Civic Center
           that will serve as multi-modal commuter transit hubs.
       2. Design stations and rail crossings safe for pedestrians and
           with minimal impacts on roadway traffic.
       3. Support crossings at-grade through Downtown and
           strongly advocate for trains that are of a length that they
           avoid blocking traffic at an intersection.
       4. Ensure that new development adjacent to the rail line is set
           back a safe distance and adequately attenuates noise.
       5. Encourage high-density transit-oriented development in
           the vicinity of the rail stations.
       6. Include noise mitigation as described in policy N-9
           (Sonoma Marin Area Rail Transit).
       7. Provide a north/south bike/pedestrian path on or adjacent
           to the railroad right-of-way.
           Responsibility: Public Works, Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
  C-17b. SMART Right-of-Way. Maintain the SMART right-of-
  way for rail service.
           Responsibility: Public Works, Community Development
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time
  C-17c. Ferry Terminals. Support creation of a ferry terminal at an environmentally                   Th e S M A R T r a i l
  appropriate location north of San Rafael, near Highway 37 and Petaluma River, offering               l i n e wi l l r u n f r o m
  service to San Francisco, in order to reduce regional commute traffic passing through Marin          San Rafael to
  on Highway 101. In addition, support efforts to re-locate the Larkspur Landing Ferry                 C l o ve r d a l e , w i t h
  Terminal to San Quentin in order to shorten the Ferry commute distance to San Francisco.             plans for a
                                                                                                       connection to
           Responsibility: Public Works, Community Development
                                                                                                       Larkspur Ferry
           Timeframe: Long Term
                                                                                                       Te r m i n a l a s we l l .
           Resources: Staff Time
     See N-8 (Sonoma Marin Area Rail Transit).
C-18. Local Transit Options.
Support improvement and expansion of local transit options including local bus,
shuttle and taxi services.
a. Local Bus Service. Support efforts to improve bus routing, frequency and stop
     amenities to meet local needs.
b. Local Shuttles. Support efforts to create shuttle services as they become feasible
     to serve specialized populations and areas of San Rafael. If rail service is
     developed, support shuttle service connections between rail stations and major
     employers.
c. Other Local Transit. Support Dial-A-Ride and taxi services serving San Rafael.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                     SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION                      185
        C-18a. Improved Bus Stops. Continue to support efforts to improve bus stops to provide
        a safe and convenient experience for riders. Allow commercial advertising to fund bus
        stop upgrades and maintenance.
             Responsibility: Public Works
        Timeframe: Ongoing
             Resources: Staff Time
        C-18b. Local Shuttle Program. Should there be an increase in density in a potential
        service area or implementation of the SMART rail line, and if funding becomes available,
        investigate the feasibility of a local shuttle program to serve San Rafael.
             Responsibility: Public Works
             Timeframe: Ongoing
             Resources: Staff Time
    C-19. Paratransit Options.
    Encourage expansion of paratransit services as needed to serve specialized
    populations including seniors and persons with disabilities.
        C-19a. Paratransit Service. Support continued Whistlestop Wheels service, and support
        expanded regional paratransit services where needed.
             Responsibility: Public Works
             Timeframe: Ongoing
             Resources: Staff Time
    C-20. Intermodal Transit Hubs.
    Support efforts to develop intermodal transit hubs in Downtown and at the Civic
    Center to provide convenient and safe connections and support for bus, rail, shuttle,
    bicycle, and pedestrian users, as well as automobile drivers using transit services.
    Hubs should include secure bicycle parking and efficient drop-off and pick-up areas
    without adversely affecting surrounding traffic flow. Reference the Downtown Station
    Area Plan and the Civic Center Station Area Plan, which address and present
    recommendations for transportation and access improvements to transit within a half
    mile radius of the two SMART stations.
        C-20a. Transit Hubs. Work with Marin County, the Marin County Transit District,
        SMART Commission, the Golden Gate Bridge Transportation District, and other regional
        agencies to ensure that intermodal transit hubs are designed to be convenient and safe for
        San Rafael users. Work with SMART on the design of the new rail stations and the transit
        center interaction with the rail service.
             Responsibility: Public Works, Community Development
             Timeframe: Short Term
             Resources: Staff Time
        See Exhibit 23 for information about transit routes and transit hubs.
186 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION                                     Reprinted 04/28/2017
GOAL 14: A SAFE AND EFFICIENT
STREET SYSTEM
It is the goal of San Rafael to have a safe and efficient street system that
minimizes impacts on residential neighborhoods. Our local streets are safe and
attractive, and our neighborhoods are protected from outside traffic impacts, such as
commuter speeding, through our use of innovative traffic calming techniques.
One key factor in protecting residential neighborhood quality of life is ensuring street
safety. As congestion increases on our regional roadways, some commuters seek
alternative routes through adjacent neighborhoods. In response, neighborhoods seek
City assistance in reducing the impacts of increased traffic and speeds. Neighborhood
traffic calming techniques seek to improve vehicular flow and safety by installing traffic
control devices, increasing enforcement and promoting public awareness of traffic
safety problems and potential solutions. Traffic control devices, such as revised speed
limits, stop signs, speed humps, curb bulbs and roundabouts, have been used
effectively in communities to reduce speeds and increase safety. The City Council has
adopted a “Speed Hump Installation Policy” establishing specific criteria for street
conditions warranting speed hump installation. The Council also has adopted a “Multi-
Way Stop Installation Policy” establishing criteria for intersections warranting a multi-
way stop. These policies provide guidance to the City Traffic Engineer in determining
whether these control devices should be recommended. The City’s Traffic
Coordinating Committee evaluates community requests for such devices.
Another key factor contributing to the quality of life of San Rafael’s neighborhoods is
street design. Street trees and other landscaping, small public spaces and public art
can create attractive design themes unifying the appearance of a street.
The Neighborhoods Element includes other neighborhood-specific policies pertaining
to the safety and appearance of residential streets that supplement those presented
below.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                  SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION 187

                   C-21. Residential Traffic Calming.
                   Protect residential areas from the effects of traffic from outside the neighborhood by
                   continuing to evaluate and construct neighborhood traffic calming solutions as
                   appropriate such as speed humps, bulb outs, speed limits, stop signs and roundabouts.
                   Ensure that traffic calming approaches do not conflict with emergency response.
                       C-21a. Traffic Calming Program. Maintain a neighborhood traffic calming program
                       under the direction of the City Traffic Engineer, and seek funding for its implementation.
                       Ensure neighborhood participation in the development and evaluation of potential traffic
                       calming solutions.
                            Responsibility: Public Works
                            Timeframe: Ongoing
                            Resources: Contributions, Staff Time
                       See also CD-9a (Corridor Design Guidelines).
                   C-22. Attractive Roadway Design.
                   Design roadway projects to be attractive and, where possible, to include trees,
                                                landscape buffer areas, public art, integration of public
                                                spaces and other visual enhancements. Emphasize tree
                                                planting and landscaping along all streets.
                                                C-22a. Native Plants Along Roadways. Continue to regularly
                                               remove non-native invasive plants along roadways, and to
                                               encourage attractive native plantings.
                                                        Responsibility: Public Works
                                                        Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                        Resources: Staff Time
                                               See LU-2a (Development Review), CD-9a (Corridor Design
                                               Guidelines), CD-9b (Right-of-Way Landscaping), I-8b (Street
                                               Trees for New Development).
 A Public W orks
 crew installs a
 speed hump to
 slow neighborhood
 traffic.
188                SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION                                   Reprinted 04/28/2017
GOAL 15: CONNECTIONS BETWEEN
NEIGHBORHOODS
It is the goal of San Rafael to have convenient connections between
neighborhoods. Our neighborhoods are conveniently and directly connected to one
another and to activity centers. The daily life of our residents is enhanced because
they are more easily able to reach workplaces, schools, shopping, and recreation
areas by foot, bike or transit.
San Rafael’s topography, highways, and street layout have worked together over time
to isolate some neighborhoods from others. Highway 101 contributes to this
significantly by bisecting the city, east from west. Improved connections within and
between neighborhoods are needed to increase mobility on foot, by bicycle and by
transit.
Examples of neighborhoods with poor connections between them that would benefit
from future projects include the Canal Neighborhood with Montecito, Terra Linda with
the Civic Center and Terra Linda with Downtown. In the recent past, better
connections have been achieved in some areas through projects such as the
Merrydale Overcrossing, the Lincoln/Los Ranchitos connector and the Andersen
extension. A key opportunity for improving east-west connections within the city
occurs when highway interchanges are improved. In addition, the 2002 Bicycle and
Pedestrian Master Plan, briefly summarized in the next section, outlines specific
routes that will contribute to better connecting neighborhoods within San Rafael and
routes that will improve connections to surrounding communities.
C-23. Connections Between Neighborhoods and with Adjoining
Communities.
Identify opportunities to improve pedestrian, bicycle and transit connections between
San Rafael neighborhoods and between San Rafael and adjacent communities.
     C-23a. Better Signage. As opportunities arise, provide better signage, consistent with the
     Bicycle and Pedestrian Master Plan for bicycle, pedestrian and transit routes to identify
     pathways between neighborhoods and other communities.
           Responsibility: Public Works
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Capital Improvement Program
     See also LU-2a (Development Review) and S-36a (Emergency Connectors).
C-24. Connections Between Neighborhoods and Activity
Centers.
Seek opportunities to increase connectivity between San Rafael neighborhoods and
activity centers.
     C-24a. North San Rafael Promenade. Support the creation of a promenade that connects
     the Terra Linda Shopping Center and Community Center to the Marin Civic Center as
     described in the North San Rafael Vision Promenade Conceptual Plan. Require sections
     to be built in conjunction with new development along the Promenade route. Work with
     community groups to seek funding for improvements in the public right-of-way, and for
     recreational facilities consistent with the Capital Improvements program.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                      SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION 189

             Responsibility: Community Development, Public Works
             Timeframe: Ongoing
             Resources: Staff Time, Grants, Donations
        C-24b. Canal Crossing. Seek a pedestrian and bicycle crossing over the Canal to better
        link the Canal neighborhood with schools, shopping and other services.
             Responsibility: Public Works, Community Development
             Timeframe: Long Term
             Resources: Capital Improvement Program, Grants
        C-24c. Access between Downtown and Canal/Montecito Neighborhoods. Seek
        improved pedestrian and bicycle access from Downtown, under Highway 101, to the
        Montecito and Canal neighborhoods, particularly from the Transit Center to the Montecito
        Shopping Center and Grand Avenue.
             Responsibility: Public Works, Community Development
             Timeframe: Long Term
             Resources: Capital Improvement Program, Grants
        See N-83 (Canal Access), NH-92 (North San Rafael Promenade), NH-139 (Pedestrian and
        Bicycle Safety and Accessibility), NH-133 (Northgate Mall) and NH-161 (Terra Linda
        Shopping Center).
    C-25. Meeting Local Circulation Needs Around Highway
    Interchanges.
    Work with appropriate agencies to address local circulation needs for all modes when
    freeway improvements are planned and constructed.
        C-25a. Highway Bus Stops. As interchange improvement projects along Highway 101
        and Interstate 580 are in the planning and construction stages, work closely with
        appropriate agencies and the community to identify ways to improve drop-off parking at
        bus stops and bicycle and pedestrian access over or under 101 and 580.
             Responsibility: Public Works, Community Development
             Timeframe: Ongoing
             Resources: Staff Time
190 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION                                   Reprinted 04/28/2017
GOAL 16: BIKEWAYS
It is the goal of San Rafael to have safe, convenient and attractive bikeways and
amenities. Bicycling has become an integral part of daily life for many San Rafael
citizens. The city features an extensive bikeway system, nested within the larger
countywide system, which connects riders with neighborhoods, activity centers, transit
stops and surrounding communities. Bicycling is well supported by visible route
signage, extensive bike parking, convenient transit connections, and public education
programs promoting biking and bike safety.
The City Council adopted the San Rafael Bicycle and Pedestrian Master Plan in 2002.
As one of its primary goals, the Plan strives to make San Rafael a model community
for alternative transportation, aiming for a 20 percent mode share of all utilitarian trips
to be made by bike or on foot in the year 2020. The Plan strives to make the bicycle
an integral part of daily life in San Rafael, particularly for trips of less than five miles,
by implementing and maintaining a bikeway network,
providing end-of-trip facilities, improving bicycle/transit
integration, encouraging bicycle use, and making bicycling                    S an R af a el             Bi c yc le a n d
safer.                                                                        P ed est r ian            M ast e r Pl an
The Plan proposes a number of new bicycle connections,                       T he “ B ik e/ P ed P la n” i d en t if i es s h or t-
including both north-south and east-west routes and including                ter m pr i or it y pr oj ec ts ( 1 – 5 ye ar s ) ,
routes that connect San Rafael with other communities. It                    m edi um - ter m pr oj ec ts ( 1 – 1 0 ye a r s ) ,
                                                                             an d l o ng -t er m pr oj ec ts ( 1 – 20 ye ar s ) .
also promotes safe biking to schools, educational programs,
considering bikeway improvements when planning all                           Ex am pl e pr oj ec ts i nc l u de a
transportation projects, routine maintenance of bikeway                      nor t h/s ou t h c o nn ec t or a lo n g th e
facilities, upgraded and expanded bicycle parking facilities                 S M ART r ai l l in e ( as f e as ib l e) , a
and other support facilities such as showers and restrooms.                  nor t h/s ou t h c o nn ec t or to L ar k s pu r
Finally, it recommends seeking funding through regional,                     thr o ug h t he Lar k s p ur t un n e l, s i d e wa lk
State, and Federal programs, and coordinating with other                     ga ps a n d th e B a y T r ai l , an
jurisdictions when seeking funding.                                          o ver c r os s i ng f r om t he Ca n al t o t he
                                                                             wes t s i de of H i gh wa y 10 1 a n d a
                                                                             br id g e f r om t h e Ca n al to M o nt ec it o.
The County adopted the Marin County Unincorporated Area
Bicycle and Pedestrian Master Plan in 2000. The County’s
Plan also promotes increasing the mode share of bicycle and
pedestrian trips to 20 percent by 2020.
C-26. Bicycle Plan Implementation.
Make bicycling and walking an integral part of daily life in San Rafael by
implementing the San Rafael’s Bicycle and Pedestrian Master Plan.
     C-26a Implementation. Implement provisions of the Bicycle and Pedestrian Master Plan
     in conjunction with planned roadway improvements or through development or
     redevelopment of properties fronting on the proposed routes.
           Responsibility: Public Works, Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Funding: Staff time, Capital Improvement Program
     C-26b. Funding. Seek grant funding for implementation of segments of the Bicycle and
     Pedestrian Master Plan.
           Responsibility: Public Works
           Timeframe: Ongoing
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                      SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION                        191

                                   Funding: Staff time
                               C-26c. Bicycle Parking. Update Zoning Ordinance requirements for bicycle parking.
                                   Responsibility: Community Development
                                   Timeframe: Short term
                                   Funding: Staff time
                                                 See LU-2a (Development Review).
D o wn t o w n
bicycle patrols
a r e a n e f f e c t i ve
part of San
Rafael’s police
services.
192                        SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION                             Reprinted 04/28/2017

GOAL 17: PEDESTRIAN PATHS
It is the goal of San Rafael to have safe, convenient and pleasurable pedestrian
paths and amenities. Walking to reach local shopping, transit stops and other
nearby destinations has become a part of daily life for many San Rafael residents and
workers. Pedestrians are well served by an extensive network of convenient and well-
maintained sidewalks and other pathways throughout the city. Walking is also a
popular form of recreation, as users enjoy the Bay Trail and other urban trails
through open spaces and neighborhoods.
One of the top goals of the San Rafael Bicycle and Pedestrian Master Plan is to
encourage walking as a daily form of transportation in San Rafael by completing a
pedestrian network that accommodates short trips and transit, improves the quality of
the pedestrian environment, and increases pedestrian safety and convenience. An
additional goal, as noted in the previous section, is to increase the mode share to 20
percent for utilitarian trips made via walking and biking by 2020.
Expanding and improving the pedestrian network will help better connect
neighborhoods with the larger community. The Plan proposes and prioritizes a set of
projects to make sidewalks and pathways safer and to expand the existing pedestrian
network. The Plan also proposes completing missing connections to establish direct
routes for walking, making walking to schools safer, ensuring improved accessibility to
pedestrian facilities for the elderly and disabled, routine maintenance, and supporting
installation of appropriate pedestrian facilities in new transportation improvements,
development projects and transit facilities. In addition, the Plan recommends seeking
funding for ongoing maintenance of sidewalks and pathways and ADA curb cuts.
C-27. Pedestrian Plan Implementation.
Promote walking as the transportation mode of choice for short trips by implementing
the pedestrian element of the City’s Bicycle and Pedestrian Master Plan. In addition
to policies and programs outlined in the Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan, provide support
for the following programs:
     C-27a. Implementation. Monitor progress in implementing the pedestrian-related goals
     and objectives of the Bicycle and Pedestrian Master Plan on an annual basis.
           Responsibility: Public Works, Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Grants
     C-27b. Prioritizing Pedestrian Improvements. Develop a program for prioritizing the
     maintenance of existing pedestrian facilities based on pedestrian use and connectivity as
     well as maintenance need, and secure funding sources for its implementation.
           Responsibility: Public Works
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Resources: Staff Time
     C-27c. Bay Trail. Support efforts and seek funding to complete the Bay Trail System.
           Responsibility: Public Works, Community Services
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Grants, Staff Time, Capital Improvement Program
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                      SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION 193

        C-27d. Pedestrian Safety Enforcement. Continue enforcement of traffic and parking
        laws that protect the pedestrian right of way on local streets (e.g., no parking on sidewalks
        or pathways, and crosswalk violations).
             Responsibility: Police, Management Services
             Timeframe: Ongoing
             Resources: Staff Time
        C-27e. Pedestrian Safety. Consider new projects and programs to increase pedestrian
        safety.
             Responsibility: Public Works
             Timeframe: Ongoing
             Resources: Capital Improvements, Grants
        C-27f. Disabled Access. Continue efforts to improve access for those with disabilities by
        complying with Federal and State requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act
        (ADA). Seek to incorporate ADA improvements into street and sidewalk projects.
        Develop a program identifying street barriers to pedestrian access, and prioritize curb cut
        and ramp improvements.
             Responsibility: Public Works, City Manager
             Timeframe: Ongoing
             Resources: Capital Improvement Program, Grants
        See also LU-2a (Development Review) and I-6c (Sidewalk Repair).
    C-28. Urban Trail Network.
    Encourage identification, renovation and maintenance of an urban trails network
    throughout San Rafael to encourage walking and appreciation of historical and new
    pathways.
        C-28a. Urban Trail Network Project. Prepare a plan to include a map and descriptions
        of existing and potential urban trails in San Rafael. Urban trails to be identified include,
        but are not limited to, historic neighborhood stairways and walkways, Downtown
        alleyways, park pathways, and creekside paths. The document should identify a network
        of connecting pathways that can be promoted for walking enjoyment, and means to
        preserve and maintain these paths.
             Responsibility: Public Works, Community Development
             Timeframe: Long Term
             Resources: Grants
194 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION                                    Reprinted 04/28/2017
GOAL 18: ADEQUATE PARKING
It is the goal of San Rafael to provide parking that is adequate and accessible,
with attention to good design. San Rafael uses innovative approaches to providing
adequate parking. Our mix of accessible on and off-street parking is responsive to the
unique needs of commercial areas, such as Downtown. In residential neighborhoods
where there is a high demand for parking, the City works cooperatively to minimize
impacts on residents and resolve conflicts between users. In some areas, preferential
parking spaces are provided to carpool vehicles, low-impact electric vehicles, bicycles
and other alternative modes of transportation to encourage their use.
San Rafael’s parking needs vary by area. The highest demand for parking occurs in
the Downtown area, where development is most dense. A Downtown Parking
Assessment District was formed in 1958 to better provide parking for the area. The
current Parking District configuration roughly encompasses the area between Lincoln
Avenue, D Street, Second Street, and Fifth Avenue. Other
commercial areas experiencing high parking demand, such
as the Montecito shopping area, may have parking shortages                       In n o v at iv e P a rk in g
during peak shopping hours. Downtown in particular requires                   M an ag e m e n t S t r at e g i es
innovative parking strategies and calls for an urban parking
strategy based on multi-purpose trips, availability of transit               Shared Parking: Parking spaces for more
and shared parking, while other areas call for a required on-                than one use.
site parking approach.
                                                                             Tandem Parking: Two or more parking
Several residential areas of San Rafael experience high                      spaces, sharing the same access.
parking demand and resulting conflicts. The City’s Traffic
Coordinating Committee meets regularly to discuss and                        Stacked Parking: Vertical parking, where
resolve residential parking issues as well as other circulation              car(s) are stored above the ground floor
issues.                                                                      with a mechanical system.
The Neighborhoods Element includes other specific policies
pertaining to parking in residential areas that supplement
those presented below.
Parking to serve transit users of local and express buses, as well as future rail service
may be provided through park and ride lots and shared parking. This need must be
balanced with the desire to discourage parking in some areas in order to encourage
greater transit use.
Parking should be provided not only for automobiles but also for bicycles and other
low-impact vehicles. Providing preferential parking for alternative modes encourages
their use.
C-29. Better Use of Parking Resources.
Improve use of existing parking and create new parking opportunities through
innovative programs, public/private partnerships and cooperation, and land use policies.
C-29a. Shared Parking. Promote shared off-street parking arrangements to serve private and
public users. For example, consider shared parking in mixed-use developments or encourage
private office parking lots to make spaces available for nighttime public use.
           Responsibility: Management Services, Public Works, Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Parking Services Fund, Fees
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                      SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION               195

                                   C-29c. Innovative Off-Street Parking. Where feasible, allow off-street parking through
                                   stackable and automated parking systems.
                                        Responsibility: Management Services, Public Works, Community Development
                                        Timeframe: Ongoing
                                        Resources: Parking Services Fund, Fees
                                   C-29d. Parking Districts. Consider formation of new parking districts where warranted
                                   and feasible.
                                        Responsibility: Management Services, Public Works, Economic Development
                                        Timeframe: Long Term
                                        Resources: Staff Time, Parking Services Fund
                                   C-29e. Parking Meters. Evaluate the feasibility of expanding parking metering in
                                   business areas throughout the City.
                                        Responsibility: Management Services, Public Works, Economic Development.
                                        Timeframe: Ongoing
                                        Resources: Parking Services Fund
                                   See also H-15 (Infill Near Transit).
                                                                                         C-30. Downtown Parking.
                                                                                         Optimize the use of parking spaces
                                                                                         Downtown.
                                                                                         C-30a. Downtown Parking District.
                                                                                         Conduct periodic evaluations and,
                                                                                         consistent with State Law, modify the
                                                                                         Downtown parking regulations to meet
                                                                                         changing needs and to optimize
                                                                                         parking Downtown
                                                                                         Responsibility: Economic Development,
                                                                                         Management Services, Public Works
                                                                                         Timeframe: Ongoing Resources:
                                                                                         Parking Services Fund, Assessment
                                                                                         District
                               C-31. Residential Area Parking.
A 400-car parking
g a r a g e a t Th i r d a n d Evaluate effective means to manage residential parking to minimize the impacts of
C Streets opened in            excess demand.
2005.
                                   See NH-8a (Restore Parking Spaces), NH-8b (Additional On-Site Parking), NH-8c
                                   (Permit Parking) and NH-8d (Zoning Ordinance Review).
                               C-32. Parking for Alternative Modes of Transportation.
                               Use preferential parking as an incentive to encourage alternative modes of
                               transportation.
                                   C-32a. Preferential Parking. Consider zoning amendments to encourage the use of
                                   preferential parking for alternative vehicles such as carpools, low-emission vehicles, and
                                   bicycles in parking-impacted business areas.
                                        Responsibility: Community Development
                                        Timeframe: Long Term
                                        Resources: Staff Time
196                            SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION                                    Reprinted 04/28/2017
C-33. Park and Ride Lots.
Support regional efforts to fund and construct commuter parking along transit routes,
near commuter bus pads, and possibly near inter-modal commuter hubs in order to
support use of transit. Parking areas should include secure parking for carpools,
bicycles and other alternative modes and minimize neighborhood impacts.
     C-33b. Commuter Parking. Further evaluate provision of additional commuter parking
     near intermodal transit hubs in Downtown and in the Civic Center area to determine the
     effects of the additional parking on increasing transit ridership.
           Responsibility: Public Works, Management Services
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Resources: Staff Time
     See also C-29a (Shared Parking).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                    SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION 197
                       This page intentionally left blank.
198 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / CIRCULATION                          Reprinted 04/28/2017
Infrastructure                                                                                       Our Foundation
Introduction
The Infrastructure Element addresses the planning, provision and maintenance of
public buildings, landscaping, roads, drainage, telecommunications, water and power
systems, and other facilities in the City of San Rafael. The prosperity of San Rafael is
in part founded upon an adequately sized and well-maintained infrastructure.
The City of San Rafael is committed to maintaining and modernizing the City’s
facilities through ongoing planning and investment. The City will also continue to
address issues such as functional and technological adequacy, accessibility for the
disabled, and changing needs of San Rafael residents. An adequate and well-planned
system of infrastructure facilities is one of the primary prerequisites for a city's
development. The planning, construction and management of complex infrastructure
facilities and networks is essential to the well-being of the City.
San Rafael owns and maintains many buildings that house its public safety and
administrative activities. The City also owns and operates a variety of facilities and
buildings to meet the recreational and cultural needs of its residents. In addition, San
Rafael is responsible for maintaining and managing facilities located in the public
right-of-way, including street surfaces, signals, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street trees,
landscape medians and entryways, signs, and streetlights.
Construction of new facilities and maintenance of existing facilities are managed
through the City’s Capital Improvements Program (CIP). The CIP is a major element
of the City’s budget, and includes projects that have been evaluated and prioritized
through the City’s interdepartmental review process. The CIP lists expected new
facilities as well as facility improvements and repairs: the list includes fully funded
projects as well as projects where funding is not yet available. As part of the City’s
budget, the CIP is updated on a bi-annual basis. The list of CIP projects identifies
funding priorities. These priorities change in response to the amount of funds
available. Sources of funding include the City’s General Fund, Gas Tax Fund, Storm
Water Fund, State and regional grants, and private donations.
Through evaluation of facilities, regular maintenance, and planning for additional
facilities to meet community needs, San Rafael is committed to having the best
infrastructure the community can afford. For example, the City’s building condition
surveys identify seismic-safety and maintenance needs for public safety-related
facilities. While periodic State budget issues affected the City’s ability to adequately
fund facility maintenance, the long-term goal of the City is to have an infrastructure to
match the community’s needs, and to establish a disciplined funding program for
regular maintenance of these public facilities.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                SAN RAFAEL 2020 / INFRASTRUCTURE             199

                                     GOAL 19: SOUND INFRASTRUCTURE
                                     It is the goal of San Rafael to have well planned, well–maintained and
                                     adequate infrastructure, public buildings, and landscaping. In order to
                                     ensure the quality of infrastructure expected by the San Rafael community,
                                     public buildings, streets and sidewalks, landscape medians, and storm drains
                                     receive rehabilitation or replacement as needed, as well as continued
                                     maintenance. Prudent management and planning of resources is designed to
                                     allocate sufficient money to fund the construction and maintenance required.
                                     I-1. Capital Improvements Maintenance and Replacement.
                                     Provide for ongoing, preventative maintenance of infrastructure facilities and timely
                                     replacement of City equipment.
                                          I-1a. Capital Improvement Programming. Plan for the improvement of public facilities
                                          and infrastructure through maintenance of a multi-year capital improvement program.
                                              Responsibility: Public Works, Management Services,
                                              Economic Development, Community Services
                                              Timeframe: Ongoing
                                              Resources: Capital Improvement Program
                                                                             I-1b. Public Input. Continue to improve public input
                                                                             into the City’s CIP process. Consider ways to utilize
             Cap it al I m p ro v em e n t                                   the City’s website to list funded or proposed capital
                     P ro g r am ( C I P)                                    improvements.
                                                                                       Responsibility: Public Works
  T he m ul t i ye ar s c h e du l i ng of p u bl ic p h ys ic a l                     Timeframe: Ongoing
  im pr o v em ents . T h e s c he d u li n g is b as ed on                            Resources: Staff Time
  s tu d ies of f is c al r es o u r c es a v ai l a b le a n d th e
  c ho ic e of s pec if ic im pr o vem en ts t o b e                         I-1c. “Sinking Fund.” Establish a ‘sinking’ fund to
  c ons tr uc t ed f or a per i o d of f i v e t o s ix ye a r s             finance maintenance of the City’s infrastructure.
  i nt o th e f ut ur e. T he p u r pos es of th e C I P ar e:                         Responsibility: Management Services, Public
  • Id e nt if y p r es e nt a n d f u tur e n ee ds f or                              Works
        ph ys ic a l im pr o v em en ts i n t he C i t y.                              Timeframe: Long Term
                                                                                       Resources: Staff Time, (charges to
  • Id e nt if y t h e p ot en t ia l c os ts of r e qu es te d
                                                                             departments),
        im pr o v em ents .
                                                                                       Tax, General Fund, Assessment District
  • Id e nt if y p os s i b le s o ur c es of r e ve n ue t o
        pa y f or t he r eq u es t e d i m pr ov em en ts .
  • Pr o v id e t he C i t y Co u n c i l a pr oc ed ur e f or               I-2. Adequacy of City
        s et t in g pr i or it i es am on g r e qu es t e d                  Infrastructure and Services.
        im pr o v em ents .                                                  Assure that development can be adequately
  • Pr om ote c o or d in a ti o n of c o ns tr uc t io n                    served by the City’s infrastructure and that new
        pr o gr am s am on g p ub l i c a g enc i es a nd                    facilities are well planned and well designed.
        pr i va te i nt er es ts .
  • Pr o v id e a n ef f ec t i v e to o l f or im pl em ent i ng
                                                                             I-2a. Long-term needs. Continue to use the CIP as a
        th e G e n er a l Pl a n.
                                                                             tool to conduct comprehensive analyses of long-term
  T he CI P is inc l u de d i n t he C i ty of Sa n R af a e l
                                                                             infrastructure needs, including new facilities and
  Pr ogr a m B u dg e t, a v a i l ab l e i n t he Pu b l ic
                                                                             maintenance.
  L ibr ar y a n d th e C it y C l er k ’s O f f ic e.
                                                                                       Responsibility: Public Works
                                                                                       Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                                                       Resources: Staff Time
200                               SAN RAFAEL 2020 / INFRASTRUCTURE                                   Reprinted 04/28/2017

     I-2b. Diversified Funding. Seek diversified funding sources in addition to the City’s
     various funds.
           Responsibility: All Departments
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: State and Federal Funds, Grants,                              Si n k in g F u n d
           Partnerships, Mitigation Fees, Partnerships.
                                                                  A s i nk in g f u nd is a f u n d s et up t o p ut m on e y
     See also LU-2a (Development Review                           as id e f or a f u t ur e pr oj ec t . It is us e d t o
                                                                  ac c um u la t e r es o ur c es ( an n u al ad d it i ons an d
I-3. Availability of Utilities.                                   ear n i ngs ) ne e de d t o r e tir e t he lo n g- t er m
Promote the availability of reliable and reasonably               bo n d is s ues at m atur i t y.
priced utilities necessary for businesses and
residences to prosper.
     I-3a. Capacity Management. Work with the Central Marin Sanitation Agency and San
     Rafael Sanitation District to ensure completion of a Capacity Management Alternative
     Study to determine the scope of needed improvements, costs, and expected benefits to
     avoid excess of water treatment capacity.
           Responsibility: Public Works
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     I-3b. Water Supply Impacts. Work with Marin Municipal Water District to meet the
     projected water demand and to ensure reduction of existing and projected water supply
     impacts.
           Responsibility: Public Works
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     See LU-2a (Development Review).
I-4. Utility Undergrounding.
Continue to pursue the undergrounding of overhead utility lines.
     I-4a. Funding Undergrounding Utilities. Seek funding opportunities to underground
     utilities. Sources include PG&E’s dedicated underground funding (“Rule 20A/20B”),
     private funding, and assessment districts.
           Responsibility: Public Works
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time, Assessment District
     I-4b. Prioritizing Undergrounding Utilities. Consider prioritization of utility
     undergrounding along corridor or gateways identified in Exhibits 17 (San Rafael
     Community Design) and Exhibit 18 (Central San Rafael Community Design).
           Responsibility: Public Works
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Utility Funds
     I-4c. Neighborhood Efforts. Provide information about funding options for
     undergrounding utilities. Assist neighborhoods with self-help efforts to fund
     undergrounding of utility lines.
           Responsibility: Public Works
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Assessment District
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                  SAN RAFAEL 2020 / INFRASTRUCTURE                           201

       I-5. Public Involvement.
       To the extent appropriate, continue to encourage public participation in the conceptual
       design and funding of major City building projects, such as public buildings and
       landscaping.
           I-5a. Design Review. Involve the community in the planning and design of major public
           facilities. As public improvements, City projects are subject to the appropriate level of
           design review.
                Responsibility: Public Works, Community Development, Community Services
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time, Capital Improvements Program
       Street Maintenance and Landscaping
       The City is responsible for maintaining 331 lane miles of street surfaces, 42 miles of
       landscaped street medians, and 50,000 street trees. These responsibilities include
       repairs, right-of-way, and streetlights. In order to prioritize and schedule street
       maintenance, the City uses a Pavement Management System for a more cost-efficient
       way of maximizing resources. In addition to the ‘hardscape’, San Rafael maintains
       landscaping, including, for example, the medians along Andersen Drive and Freitas
       Parkway, and the entryways in Downtown and in North San Rafael The City’s street
       trees are a valuable resource that add character to neighborhoods and commercial
       areas, control temperatures and reduce air pollution.
       I-6. Street Maintenance.
       Maintain and modify where appropriate existing levels of street and sidewalk repair,
       street sweeping, and street lighting.
           I-6a. Pavement Management. Continue the Pavement Management Program to allocate
           funds and prioritize street resurfacing projects.
                Responsibility: Public Works
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Gas Tax
           I-6b. Street Sweeping. Continue to maintain a program for adequate street sweeping.
           Work with neighborhoods on ways to improve the efficiency of street sweeping, and to
           publicize street sweeping programs. Investigate alternative funding sources for street
           sweeping.
                Responsibility: Public Works
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time
           I-6c. Sidewalk Repair. Develop a sidewalk repair program consistent with applicable
           State law and as local conditions warrant.
                Responsibility: Public Works, City Attorney
                Timeframe: Short Term
                Funding: Staff Time
           I-6d. Street Lighting Program. Continue the Street Lighting Program to allocate funds
           and plan for needed street lights and repairs.
                Responsibility: Public Works
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Joint Powers Agreement, Staff Time
                See C-27b (Prioritizing Pedestrian Improvements).
202 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / INFRASTRUCTURE                                  Reprinted 04/28/2017

I-7. Landscape Maintenance.
Provide for low maintenance entryway landscaping. Give priority to maintenance of
landscaping along the City’s most heavily traveled roadways and gateways as shown
on Exhibits 17 (San Rafael Community Design) and Exhibit 18 (Central San Rafael
Community Design).
     I-7a. City Landscaping. Encourage partnerships with neighborhood and civic
     organizations to maintain and improve the City’s landscaped areas.
           Responsibility: Public Works
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time, Donations, Volunteers
     See CD-8a (Gateways) and I-8c (Street Tree Maintenance).
I-8. Street Trees.
Create street tree planting and maintenance programs and encourage the use of large
canopy trees where appropriate in order to control temperature, improve air quality,
control wind, define neighborhoods, and improve street appearance.
     I-8a Street Tree Program. Develop a comprehensive citywide street tree planting,
     maintenance, replacement, diversification, wood utilization and tree waste-recycling
     program. The citywide street tree program should consider the use of large canopy trees
     where the planting areas and locations make such trees feasible and appropriate. Include
     coordination and communication with PG&E regarding tree maintenance in relation to
     power lines. Utilize volunteers to the extent feasible in creating a street tree inventory.
           Responsibility: Public Works
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time, Partnerships, Grants, Volunteers
     I-8b. Street Trees for New Development. Require street trees at frequent spacing in all
     new developments and property upgrades, and consider mitigation for tree removal by
     planting street trees in locations other than the project site. Continue replacing trees that
     have aggressive root systems affecting vehicular and pedestrian travel.
           Responsibility: Public Works
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Resources: Contributions
     I-8c. Street Tree Maintenance. Seek diversified funding
     sources for street tree maintenance and replacement.
           Responsibility: Public Works
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Resources: Staff Time
     I-8d. Landscape Maintenance Next to Sidewalks.
     Revise City ordinances to require maintenance of private
     landscaping which encroaches onto the City right-of-way
     and sidewalks.
           Responsibility: Public Works
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Resources: Staff Time                                                                          Street trees add
                                                                                                          to the beauty
     See I-6c (Sidewalk Repair).                                                                          and character of
                                                                                                          neighborhoods.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                     SAN RAFAEL 2020 / INFRASTRUCTURE                  203

       Water and Wastewater Infrastructure
       Marin Municipal Water District, a public utility governed by an elected Board, provides
       water service generally to all eastern Marin cities south of Novato. District facilities
       include six area reservoirs, two water treatment plants, storage tanks, pumps and
       lines.
       The primary source of water for the District is rainfall stored in area reservoirs. The
       District also maintains a line inter-tie with the North Marin Water District for Russian
       River water. Area rainfall water sources are limited by water reservoir storage
       capacity. The total current capacity of the Water District is approximately 80,000 acre-
       feet. Seventy-five percent of the water used within the District is from local reservoirs,
       while the other twenty-five percent comes from the Russian River in Sonoma County.
       Usage of potable and recycled water within the MMWD was an average of 27,560
       acre-feet annualy for the years 2004 to 2014. The watershed is currently managed for
       an operational yield of 28,500 acre-feet per year. MMWD has contracts for water from
       the Russian River to meet shortfalls in supply. However, use of additional Russian
       River water is limited by pipeline capacity and environmental concerns. To respond to
       anticipated supply deficits, MMWD is continuing its efforts to increase water
       conservation, is exploring additional opportunities to partner on water recycling with
       the Las Gallinas Valley Sanitary District and is designing and evaluating a possible
       desalination plant to increase supply.
       Wastewater treatment in the part of San Rafael south of Puerto Suello is handled by
       two entities: Central Marin Sanitation Agency and the San Rafael Sanitation District.
       The Central Marin Sanitation Agency serves the southern half of San Rafael and the
       Ross Valley, which includes essentially all of Corte Madera, Larkspur, Greenbrae, San
       Anselmo and Fairfax. The Agency owns and operates the sewage treatment plant,
       which provides modified secondary treatment, a deep-water sewer outfall line, and
       three transport lines from San Rafael, Larkspur and San Quentin.
       The San Rafael Sanitation District covers the portion of San Rafael south of Puerto
       Suello hill to the southerly city limit and adjacent unincorporated neighborhoods. The
       District owns and operates 32 pump stations and nine miles of force mains. Of the
       pump stations, 12 are considered to be major with sizeable tributary service areas,
       and 20 are minor. The District owns and maintains all of the 124 miles of gravity flow
       sewer mains in the District, although there are also some private sewer mains. Sewer
       laterals (lines between the sewer main and individual homes) are the responsibility of
       property owners.
       The Las Gallinas Valley Sanitary District provides sewage collection and treatment in
       San Rafael north of Puerto Suello Hill and in adjacent unincorporated areas. The
       District serves all northern City areas, and the unincorporated neighborhoods of Lucas
       Valley, Marinwood, and Santa Venetia. The District provides all treatment and
       transport facilities, which include the treatment plant, about 300 acres of ponds and
       land irrigation areas, pump stations, force mains and gravity flow sewer mains. Sewer
       laterals are privately owned.
       Wastewater from the Las Gallinas Valley Sanitary District is given additional treatment
       by Marin Municipal Water District (MMWD) and piped through a circulation system
204 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / INFRASTRUCTURE                                Reprinted 04/28/2017
separate from that of potable water to irrigate parks and landscaping throughout North
San Rafael.
The CMSD has a dry weather treatment capacity of 10 million gallons per day (mgd),
and current flows of 8 mgd. The plant’s wet weather capacity is between 90 and 125
mgd, depending on tidal conditions. Current wet weather flows vary with storm
events, with a maximum flow reaching 107 mgd in recent years. Projected
development through 2020 would increase wastewater flows by about 12 percent, or
by 1 mgd during dry weather and 13 mgd during wet weather. Both increases are
within the plant’s current capacity, but the CMSA is currently studying ways to reduce
wet weather flows and/or increase treatment capacity.
The LGVSD has a dry weather capacity of 2.92 mgd and flows currently are measured
at 2.2 mgd. The district has capacity for the equivalent of 4,500 additional dwelling
units, which is well within projected growth.
See the Air and Water Quality Element for policies and programs related to the City’s
stormwater infrastructure.
I-9. Water Supplies.
Encourage Marin Municipal Water District to develop cost effective strategies for
adequate long-term water supplies.
     1-9a. Water Supplies. Monitor efforts by the MMWD to expand the local water supply to
     meet long-term needs. In addition to environmental review, request adequate review of
     economic impacts. Ensure adequate review of environmental, design and economic issues
     related to a potential desalination plant.
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
I-10. Sewer Facilities.
Existing and future development needs should be coordinated with responsible
districts and agencies to assure that facility expansion and/or improvement meets
Federal and State standards and occurs in a timely fashion.
     I-10a. Coordination of Services. Participate in coordination efforts between responsible
     agencies providing sewer facilities.
           Responsibility: Public Works
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     See also LU-2a (Development Review).
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / INFRASTRUCTURE 205

       I-11. Improvements to Drainage Facilities.
       Continue to monitor and pursue as appropriate improvements to areas with insufficient
       drainage.
            I-11a. Pipe Replacement. Pursue the replacement of the City’s older corrugated metal
            drainage pipe system with a more durable material.
                 Responsibility: Public Works
                 Timeframe: Ongoing
                 Resources: Fees (Clean Water Fund)
            I-11b. Silt Removal. Continue to remove accumulated silts from city maintained
            drainageways and ponds.
                 Responsibility: Public Works
                 Timeframe: Ongoing
                 Resources: Fees (Clean Water Fund), Staff
                 Time, Assessment District
            See CON-6a (Municipal Code Compliance) and CON-8b (Tree Retention).
            I-11c. Mahon Creek. Develop a Creek Management Plan for the periodic dredging and
            maintenance of Mahon Creek from B Street to Highway 101. Continue the implementation
            of the Master Plan for Proposed Drainage Improvements within the San Rafael Basin,
            Final Implementation Plan as funding becomes available. Explore other feasible and cost-
            effective solutions to minimize or divert drainage to reduce periodic flooding on Mahon
            Creek.
                 Responsibility: Public Works
                 Timeframe: Ongoing
                 Resources: Staff Time
            See S-18 (Storm Drainage Improvements and S-19a (Incremental Flood Control
            Improvements).
       I-12. Cost Effective Services. (Deleted per Amendment on
       12/5/16)
       I-12a. Consolidation of Services. (Deleted per Amendment on 12/5/16)
       I-13. Wastewater Treatment and Reuse.
       Encourage additional water recycling at Las Gallinas Valley Sanitary District and
       encourage the Central Marin Sanitation Agency to investigate recycling and reuse of
       its treated wastewater.
            See SU-5e (Water Recycling).
206 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / INFRASTRUCTURE                                   Reprinted 04/28/2017

Telecommunications
Telecommunications are undergoing rapid technological changes. Through
assessment of information technology needs and available resources, the City seeks
to remain current with the demands for effective, reliable telecommunication
infrastructure.
I-14. City Technology.
Invest in upgrading the City’s technology infrastructure and improving public access
to City services.
     I-14a. Technology Improvements. Implement and update the City’s Information
     Technology Plan.
           Responsibility: Management Services (Information Services Committee)
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time, Grants, Fees
I-15. Telecommunication Improvements.
Ensure that residents, schools, businesses and organizations have access to reliable,
modern and cost-effective telecommunications.
     I-15a. Marin Telecommunications Agency. Coordinate with the County to upgrade
     telecommunications infrastructure in accordance with the Marin Telecommunications
     Agency or any successor agency.
           Responsibility: Management Services, Public Works
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time\
     See S-29a (Involvement with Marin Emergency Radio Authority).
     I-15b. Telecommunication Ordinance. (Deleted on Amendment 12/5/16)
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                               SAN RAFAEL 2020 / INFRASTRUCTURE 207

                      Page intentionally left blank
208 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / INFRASTRUCTURE                Reprinted 04/28/2017
Governance                                                                                                       Our Foundation
Introduction
The City of San Rafael’s government embraces its role of serving residents,
preserving traditions, and fostering innovation through steady, focused leadership.
Elected officials understand and value the trust and confidence of residents, built
through ongoing dialogue. A motivated professional city staff is dedicated to
continuous improvement in the quality of services. Elected officials and staff rely on
citizen participation to assist in establishing reasonable and effective programs.
Community-based local government engages residents, businesses, and other
stakeholders in maintaining a network of diverse and distinct neighborhoods. Public
engagement allows people to share information and concerns, and to address and
pursue common interests. Good government requires active and effective leaders to
make wise decisions in the resolution of local and regional issues, and to make
government an energizer of civic action in the furtherance of social and economic
common good.
Serving a complex and diverse city, San Rafael government:
• Strives for wide public policy participation;
• Uses local commissions, boards and other groups to provide informed
     recommendations for balanced decision-making; and
• Explains the reasons for decisions as they are reached.
                                                          Co m m u n it y- B a se d                    G o v e rn an ce
                                                     Com m unit y- b as ed loc a l g o ver nm en t ac ts as a
                                                     c at a l ys t in m ob i li zi n g ne i g hb or ho o ds , s h if t i n g
                                                     • Fr om b ur e a uc r ac y, a ut hor i t y a nd po wer t o
                                                           c om m uni t y s e lf - d et er m i na t io n, m ut ua l
                                                           r es p o ns ib i l it y a n d ac c ou n ta b i li t y;
                                                     • Fr om tr ea t in g r es i de n t s as c li e nts t o tr ea t in g
                                                           r es id e nts as ac t i v e c it i ze ns ;
                                                     • Fr om to p d o wn t o b ot t om up ;
                                                     • Fr om o uts i de in t o i ns i de ou t;
                                                     • Fr om s er v ic e c o ll a bo r at i on t o c om m unit y
                                                           c o ll a bo r a t io n;
                                                     • Fr om b et ter m en t t o em po we r m ent ;
                                                     • Fr om im pos i ng t o gr o w i ng .
                                                     A c om m unit y- b as e d S an R af a e l g o ver nm en t en g ag es
                                                     r es id e nts a n d ot h er s t ak eh o ld er s i n t he di r e c ti o n,
                                                     c ha n ges , d ec is i o ns , pr i or i t ies , p l an n i ng , or ga n i zi n g,
                                                     im pl em ent a ti o n a nd e v a lu at i o n of t h e c o ll a b o r at i v e
                                                     de v e l opm en t of a s us t a in a bl e n et wo r k of di v er s e ,
                                                     d is t i nc t n e ig h bo r h o ods .
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                         SAN RAFAEL 2020 / GOVERNANCE                       209

                               GOAL 20: DIVERSITY
                               It is the goal of San Rafael to have a community of people diverse in age,
                               ethnicity, culture, and income levels. San Rafael welcomes a wide variety of people
                               and ideas. This is one of San Rafael’s strengths, which is important to sustain.
                               The City of San Rafael is committed to successfully working within its diverse
                               community. Through an economy providing jobs with a mix of incomes, and a variety
                               of neighborhoods offering a range of housing types, San Rafael enjoys a community
                               rich in people from different backgrounds and cultures. The City works to the greatest
                               extent possible so that every resident can have a positive experience within San
                               Rafael’s community and benefit from an enhanced quality of life.
                               G-1. Jobs and Diversity.
                               Encourage the creation and retention of a wide variety of job opportunities at a mix of
                               economic levels.
                                    See EV-8a (Industrial Zoning).
                               G-2. Variety of Housing.
                               Encourage the creation and retention of a wide variety of housing types serving people
                               of all economic levels.
                                    See H-7e (Retention of Mobilehomes and Preservation of Mobilehome Sites), H-10c
                                    (Single Room Occupancy (SRO) Units, H-10d (Zoning for Live/Work Opportunities), H-
                                    14c (Continue to Implement Zoning Provisions to Encourage Mixed Use), H-16a (New
                                    Second Units), H-18a (Inclusionary Housing Nexus Study), and LU-23a (Zoning
                                    Ordinance Amendments).
                               G-3. Housing Agencies.
                               Support agencies and organizations that provide shelter, housing, and related services
                               to very low-, low-, and moderate-income households.
                                                        See H-4a (Inter-Jurisdictional Housing Activities and Resources), H-
                                                        11a (Homesharing and Tenant Matching Opportunities), H-12a
                                                        (Countywide Efforts to Address Homeless Needs).
                                                        G-4. Diversity at City Hall.
                                                        Make efforts to reflect on Boards and Commissions, and among
                                                        City employees the characteristics of San Rafael’s population.
                                                        G-4a. Outreach. Monitor the diversity of membership on City Boards
                                                        and Commissions. Solicit applications from all segments of the
                                                        community when making appointments.
                                                                Responsibility: City Clerk
                                                                Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                                Resources: Staff Time
 San Rafael City
 H a l l wa s b u i l t i n    G-4b. City Employment. Promote City employment opportunities throughout the community.
 1966.                                  Responsibility: Human Resources
                                        Timeframe: Ongoing
                                        Resources: Staff Time
210                         SAN RAFAEL 2020 / GOVERNANCE                                      Reprinted 04/28//2017

GOAL 21: COMMUNITY
PARTICIPATION
It is the goal of San Rafael to have enthusiastic participation in civic life by
residents and neighborhood organizations representing all ages and segments of
the community. Active, broad-based public participation in developing community
policy is needed and encouraged. We need successful partnerships among the City
and neighborhoods, businesses, schools, and social and cultural service organizations
so that there is a strong community-wide commitment to improvements.
Public participation is at the core of successful city government. San Rafael’s
participatory program of education, input, dialogue and consensus-building is one of
the key strategies for enhancing our entire community, creating a greater sense of
community, and developing a commitment to the greater good. The recently approved
Community Engagement Action Plan, approved in 2013, lays out a number of actions
to improve public communication, outreach, transparency, and open government. In
addition, the City has worked in the improvement of technology to expand public
access to information, including online availability of public meeting agendas and
video archive of meetings as well as the launcing of “e-permits” to allow the public to
track active permits. San Rafael continues to evaluate the effectiveness and
responsiveness of its engagement with the community, making strides to encourage
participation as addressed in policies G-5 to G-8 below.
San Rafael benefits from broad community involvement in local planning matters.
Through partnerships with local organizations and involvement with the community,
the City has been able to take collaborative approaches towards providing services to
the public and finding cost-effective solutions for services. Examples of partnerships
include the renovation of Beach Park with Terrapin Crossroads and management of
Canal Community Garden provided by Canal Alliance. Citizen interest and
participation in the public forum has been and continues to be an integral part of the
policy and plan development process.San Rafael’s experience has been that such
involvement is beneficial for effective land use decision-making and neighborhood
design as well as housing availability, quality, and affordability.
G-5. Leadership.
Provide responsive and effective leadership to achieve the City’s vision, consistent
with the Community Engagement Action Plan.
     G-5a. Staff Leadership Skills. Recruit, train and retain highly competent employees.
     Continue providing regular orientations and leadership training to City employees.
           Responsibility: Human Resources
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     G-5b. Board and Commission Training. Develop an annual orientation to City
     government for members of San Rafael City Council, boards, commissions, and advisory
     groups. Provide information about the roles and responsibilities of effective civic
     leadership.
           Responsibility: City Clerk, City Attorney
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                      SAN RAFAEL 2020 / GOVERNANCE 211

           G-5c. Leadership Training. Encourage efforts to provide leadership training by
           community groups such as Canal Ministry, Marin Interfaith Youth Outreach, local
           schools, neighborhood associations and the Chamber of Commerce. Encourage City staff
           and board and commission members to participate in leadership training programs.
                Responsibility: City Manager, Community Development, Community Services
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time
           G-5d. City Hall Academy. Consider creation of a City Hall Academy to provide training
           in City governance and public involvement. Prepare and distribute information about
           effective involvement in government activities.
                Responsibility: City Manager
                Timeframe: Long Term
                Resources: Staff Time
           G-5e. Advocacy at Regional and State Level. Seek appointment to regional and State
           committees and boards and continue to advocate for State legislation which can affect City
           services and further City objectives.
                Responsibility: City Manager, City Council
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff and Council member’s time
       G-6. Broad-Based Involvement.
       Establish methods to encourage broad-based, meaningful community involvement.
       Encourage residents who historically have not been involved in political processes to
       become engaged in government, consistent with the Community Engagement Action
       Plan.
           G-6a. Community Stakeholders. Actively seek community-wide representation and
           public involvement opportunities on City issues through vigorous outreach programs to
           engage residents who are not typically involved, such as young people and residents not
           fluent in English.
                Responsibility: City Manager, City Clerk, Community Development, Community
                Services
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time
           See G-8c (San Rafael Website) and G-5d (City Hall Academy).
       G-7. Community Participation.
       Encourage and support public participation in the formulation and review of policies,
       especially neighborhood level planning. Work with community groups and other
       organizations to develop, implement and evaluate strategies that enhance San Rafael’s
       neighborhoods, consistent with the Community Engagement Action Plan.
           G-7a. Review of Facilities Proposed by Other Public Agencies. Encourage other public
           agencies such as Marin County and the school districts, to participate in the City’s design
           review process.
                Responsibility: Community Development
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time
           See CD-15a (Notification and Information about Development Projects), I-5a (Design
           Review), H-3a (Neighborhood Meetings) and G-18a (Collaboration with Local Agencies).
212 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / GOVERNANCE                                      Reprinted 04/28//2017

G-8. City and Community Communication.
Emphasize effective communication between City Hall and the community-at-large.
Involve stakeholders in City projects as early as possible, consistent with the
Community Engagement Action Plan.
     G-8a. Information about Community Issues. Make information about community issues
     available to increase understanding and insight into the complexity of challenges that
     affect the community. Where possible, information about City services and programs
     should be made available in languages other than English, e.g., Spanish or Vietnamese.
     Use the City newsletter, community meetings, electronic means, and media that reaches
     the varied population groups in San Rafael.
           Responsibility: City Manager, Community Development, City Clerk
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
     G-8b. Contact Database. Maintain a database of stakeholders who attend community
     meetings and want to be involved. Centralize or consolidate community-wide mailing lists
     that include representation from homeowners
     associations, neighborhood and service groups, the
     faith community, the school districts, the business
     community and other interest groups.                        Vo lu n t e er i sm in S an R af ae l
           Responsibility: Community Development, City
           Clerk, City Manager                                   The City of San Rafael Volunteer Program was
           Timeframe: Ongoing                                    created in 1996. The purpose of the program is to
           Resources: Staff Time                                 develop volunteers within City government and to
                                                                 partner with neighborhood and community groups to
     G-8c. San Rafael Website. Use the City’s website            build a better San Rafael. Volunteers are recruited
     to invite people to participate in City government          for a variety of tasks, jobs, and projects, including the
     and to provide access to City information and               annual Daffodil Planting Days, the Spring and Fall
     documents and links to community organizations.             Clean Up Days, the City Hall Concierge Desk and all
     Create new methods to distribute cost-effective
                                                                 the departments within City Hall.
     electronic notification about City activities,
     meetings, and programs, and to interact with the
     community.                                                  Over 1,000 individuals volunteer each year.
           Responsibility: Information Services, City            Together, these stalwart citizens contribute over one
           Manager                                               million dollars of service to the City annually! This is
           Timeframe: Ongoing                                    a tremendous donation of time and energy deserving
           Resources: Staff Time                                 of special recognition which is a hallmark of this
                                                                 program.
     See CD-15a (Notification and Information about
     Development Projects).
G-9. Advisory Committees.
Use appointed boards, task forces, commissions, and other advisory and ad hoc
committees to assist City staff and the City Council in decision-making processes.
     G-9a. City Boards and Commissions. On a periodic basis, review the purpose of City
     boards and commissions. In addition, assess appointment procedures and member
     representation to ensure public involvement, new ideas and adequate advice and
     recommendation to Council. Consider the benefits and disadvantages of establishing term
     limits for members of City Boards and Commissions to encourage more public
     involvement and new ideas.
           Responsibility: City Manager, Departments
           with advisory boards and commissions
           Timeframe: Long Term
           Resources: Staff Time
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                     SAN RAFAEL 2020 / GOVERNANCE                213

                                      G-9b. Recognition and Feedback. Recognize departing commission members for their
                                      contributions. Interview board and commission members about their experiences when
                                      they complete their service. Consider involving retired commission members in training
                                      new commissioners.
                                           Responsibility: Departments with advisory boards and commissions
                                           Timeframe: Short Term
                                           Resources: Staff Time
                                      See CD-15a (Notification and Information about Development Projects) and I-5a (Design
                                      Review).
                                  G-10. Volunteerism in Government.
                                  Encourage and support people of all ages and backgrounds to volunteer with the City,
                                  and develop volunteerism at all levels of City government.
                                      G-10a. Volunteer Program. Create meaningful volunteer opportunities within City
                                      departments and foster worthwhile community projects through partnerships with
                                      neighborhoods and service groups. Recruit new volunteers from various sources including
                                      schools, seniors, neighborhoods and local business. Recognize volunteers for their service
                                      to the City.
                                           Responsibility: Human Resources, City Manager
                                           Timeframe: Ongoing
                                           Resources: Staff Time
                                                                    G-11. Empower Residents to Take
                                                                    Responsibility.
                                                                    Provide opportunities to increase residents’ skills and
                                                                    knowledge to promote community involvement.
I n 2 0 0 4 , o ve r 1 , 7 0 0
volunteers contributed                                              G-11a. City Training Programs. Continue, and improve
more than 28,500
                                                                    where possible, City-sponsored programs such as:
hours and over $1.2
m i l l i o n wo r t h o f                                          • Community Emergency Response Team (CERT)
donated labor.                                                      • Citizens Police Academy
                                                                    • CPR training and first aid
                                                                    • Neighborhood Crime Watch
                                                                    • Neighborhood Clean-up Days
                                                                            Responsibility: Fire Department, Police Department,
                                                                            Human Resources (Volunteer Program)
                                                                            Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                                            Resources: Staff Time
                                                                    See G-5d (City Hall Academy), G-10a (Volunteer Program),
                                      S-26a (Public Safety Training), S-33a (Disaster Preparedness Plan) and S-40b (Enrollment
                                      in Training Programs).
                                      G-12. Local Elections.
                                      Encourage participation in local elections.
                                      G-12a. Voter Information. Support voter registration drives, and participate in voter
                                      education programs. Educate students, new residents and new U.S. citizens about how to
                                      participate in local elections. Continue to provide voter registration information at City
                                      Hall, community centers, and libraries.
                                      Responsibility: Community Services, Library, City Clerk
                                      Timeframe: Ongoing
                                      Resources: Staff Time
   214                         SAN RAFAEL 2020 / GOVERNANCE                                       Reprinted 04/28//2017

     G-12b. Voter Participation. Work with the County to publicize the number of people
     voting in elections.
           Responsibility: City Clerk, Management Services
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Resources: Staff Time
GOAL 22: EDUCATIONAL
EXCELLENCE
It is the goal of San Rafael to have excellent schools and enhanced lifelong
education. The City will support the school districts’ efforts to ensure access to
quality education for everyone. The City of San Rafael offers and supports a wide
range of programs to fulfill the needs of the community including adult education
classes, literacy tutoring, career development and technology courses, childcare, and
after school programs.
The City of San Rafael recognizes the value of schools and education to the
community. The City is committed to taking a leadership role in collaborating with
school districts in San Rafael to ensure that exceptional education is provided to a
wide spectrum of students. San Rafael is also committed to offering classes and
programs that provide lifelong educational opportunities.
There are three public school districts in the San Rafael planning area (Dixie
Elementary, San Rafael Elementary, and the San Rafael High School District). In
addition to the sixteen public schools in the San Rafael planning area, there are
seventeen private schools, which are all elementary
schools except Marin Academy. San Rafael is also home
to Dominican University with over 2,200 students.
In addition, a number of classes and programs are
offered by the City of San Rafael, including pre-
kindergarten programs and adult education classes at
community centers, cultural and arts classes at Falkirk
Cultural Center, and the Marin Literacy Program at the
San Rafael Public Library.
G-13. Education.
Collaborate with schools, from preschools to the
university level, in fostering educational programs to
benefit the community.                                                                              O ve r 2 , 2 0 0
                                                                                                    undergraduate and
     G-13a. Partnerships with Schools. Participate in school projects and career days to            graduate students
     educate young people about local issues and City government and financing.                     attend Dominican
           Responsibility: City departments                                                         U n i v e r s i t y.
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
G-14. Relationship with School Districts.
Maintain a close, collaborative relationship with the school districts to maximize
public benefit.
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                   SAN RAFAEL 2020 / GOVERNANCE                      215

                                 G-14a. Communication with the School Districts. Maintain regular communications
                                 with the School Districts to foster community collaborations. Continue periodic joint City
                                 Council and School Board meetings on topics of mutual interest.
                                      Responsibility: City Manager
                                      Timeframe: Ongoing
                                      Resources: Staff Time
                             G-15. School Facilities as Gathering Places.
                             Collaborate with schools to provide greater access to school facilities for
                             neighborhood and community activities.
                                 G-15a. Joint Use of Educational Facilities. Develop and adopt Memorandum of
                                 Understanding agreements with Dixie and San Rafael School Districts, Marin Academy,
                                                                             and Dominican University governing the
                                                                             development, maintenance, and community use
                                                                             of facilities for recreation, childcare and/or
                                                                             community events.
                                                                                        Responsibility: City Manager,
                                                                                        Community Services
                                                                                        Timeframe: Ongoing
                                                                                        Resources: Staff Time
                                                                             See PR-20 (City-School Cooperation).
                                                                             G-16. Business and School
                                                                             Relationships.
                                                                             Strengthen the positive working
                                                                             relationship between the business
                                                                             community and the schools to enhance the
                                                                             quality of education.
   Th e c o m m u n i t y                                                    G-16a. Internships. Provide governmental
   celebrated the                internships with local high schools and college within the various city departments.
   opening of the                Encourage local businesses to provide internships and mentoring programs. Assist with
   new Coleman                   publicity about internship opportunities.
   Elementary                         Responsibility: All Departments
   School campus.                     Timeframe: Ongoing
                                      Resources: Staff Time
                             G-17. City Programs and Classes.
                             Offer programs and classes to address the needs and interests of the whole
                             community.
                                 G-17a. City Programs and Classes. Continue to offer a variety of leisure, recreation,
                                 educational and personal enhancement courses and programs for all age groups at the
                                 Community Centers, Falkirk Cultural Center, Library and other public and private
                                 facilities. Regularly assess participants and the public at large to determine interests and
                                 support.
                                      Responsibility: Community Services, Library
                                      Timeframe: Ongoing
                                      Funding: Fees, Volunteers
216                       SAN RAFAEL 2020 / GOVERNANCE                                         Reprinted 04/28//2017
GOAL 23: SUPPORT FOR CARE
PROVIDERS
It is the goal of San Rafael to have collaborative efforts to support those who are
in need. There are many public, private and non-profit providers in San Rafael,
which help seniors, people with disabilities, homeless people, families who are
disadvantaged, and others. The City supports these providers as appropriate to
maintain San Rafael as a compassionate city.
As a compassionate city, San Rafael collaborates with agencies that provide services
to those who are in need. Coordination among government and private organizations
helps stretch resources. Over 70 private and public organizations within San Rafael
offer a broad range of aid and services such as meals, housing, health care and
counseling to individuals and families. Organizations provide rehabilitation and
adaptive technologies to people living with disabilities. In addition, there are many
group homes for the elderly and people with disabilities. San Rafael is distinguished
by being the center and headquarters for national and local innovative and creative
organizations.
G-18. Support for Special Needs Groups.
Encourage government and business support for non-profit and other organizations
that provide services to the elderly, people with disabilities, homeless people, and
others in need. Support efforts of Marin County to encourage the availability of social
services throughout the County.
     G-18a. Collaboration with Local Agencies. Work with non-profits and other
     organizations on priorities, services and facilities. Assist in establishing avenues of
     communication between non-profits and neighbors. Current examples include supporting
     efforts to provide emergency shelter and transitional housing to homeless individuals,
     families and victims of domestic violence, and working with local organizations on
     sidewalk accessibility.
           Responsibility: City Manager, Community Development, Economic Development,
           Public Works
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time, CDBG Funds
     G-18b. County and Other Cities’ Programs. Collaborate with Marin County and other
     Marin cities to support efforts to provide effective and efficient social services in the
     region.
           Responsibility: City Manager
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time, Grants
     G-18c. Zoning Allowance. Provide zoning allowance for group homes, transitional
     housing and treatment facilities, but preclude over-concentration of such facilities in
     residential neighborhoods as allowed by state law. Per the requirements of SB2, Zoning
     Ordinance amendments have been drafted to incorporate new definitions for “transitional
     housing” and “supportive housing”
           Responsibility: Community Development
           Timeframe: Short Term
           Resources: Staff Time
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                         SAN RAFAEL 2020 / GOVERNANCE 217

       G-19. Interdepartmental Approach.
       Continue innovative interdepartmental efforts that enable residents to access needed
       health care and social services.
           G-19a. Interdepartmental Collaboration. Encourage and support interdepartmental
           efforts to address local health care and social service needs. Examples include community
           policing, community fire servicing, and the Health and Safety Committee.
                Responsibility: City Manager, All Departments
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time, Grants
218 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / GOVERNANCE                                        Reprinted 04/28//2017
GOAL 24: FUNDING FOR CITY
SERVICES
It is the goal of San Rafael to have sufficient funding for city services. San Rafael
provides a broad range of services to meet diverse residential and business
community needs. The City continues to explore new avenues of funding to maintain
and improve city services and the quality of life.
Maintaining and enhancing San Rafael’s revenue base is necessary for the City to
provide essential and prioritized, desired services. The City must maintain sound
financial practices that meet applicable standards and direct San Rafael’s financial
resources to achieve its short- and long-term goals.
G-20. Public Involvement in the Budget Process.
Maintain an open dialogue with the public to evaluate and prioritize needed services.
     G-20a. Public Involvement. Continue to involve residents and businesses in the budget
     process to the extent feasible, through community meetings, telephone surveys, focus
     groups, and other outreach methods.
           Responsibility: City Manager
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
G-21. Financial Planning.
Plan for both short- and long-term financial needs.
     G-21a. Financial Management Policy Updates. Review and update the Financial
     Management Policies as changes in community needs or other considerations warrant such
     policy review.
           Responsibility: Management Services
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
G-22. Program Assessments.
     Evaluate the performance of city programs and services in achieving their stated goals as
     part of the City’s budget process. Retain, adjust or eliminate programs or services as
     appropriate.
     G-22a. Program Assessment. Continue to provide the City Council semi-annual reports on
     progress made toward achieving goals and objectives and meeting performance indicators.
     Look at ways to effectively and objectively measure performance, and consider establishing
     benchmarks to determine progress in the implementation of City policies.
           Responsibility: Management Services, Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing; (for benchmark study: long term)
           Resources: Staff Time
     G-22b. Residents’ Feedback. Use appropriate methods to regularly survey residents on
     the satisfaction levels regarding various City services and programs.
           Responsibility: Management Services, Community Development
           Timeframe: Ongoing
           Resources: Staff Time
Reprinted 04/28/2017                                                      SAN RAFAEL 2020 / GOVERNANCE 219

       G-23. Government Financing.
       As an alternative to increased taxation, pursue methods to diversify funding sources to
       adequately finance government functions, including:
       • Seeking grant funding.
       • Using economic development to leverage opportunities to provide needed public
           services.
       • Determining the full cost of services and charging fees, as appropriate, to recover
           those costs. Fees may be adjusted based on the priorities and needs of the
           community.
       • Seeking ways to streamline services and reduce fees and charges.
           G-23a. Revenue Monitoring. Continue to maintain a revenue monitoring system to assist
           in trend analysis and revenue forecasting.
                Responsibility: Management Services
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time
           G-23b. Grants. Actively seek grant opportunities, and encourage interdepartmental
           cooperation and coordination in preparing grant applications.
                Responsibility: Management Services
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time
           G-23c. Cost of Services. Periodically evaluate the cost of providing services and adjust
           fees accordingly.
                Responsibility: Management Services
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time
           See also G-10 (Volunteerism in Government), I-2b (Diversified Funding), LU-17a (Retail
           and Services Uses in Industrial and Office Areas), and EV-8a (Industrial Zoning).
       G-24. Local Government Partnerships.
       Partner with other local governments and organizations to provide community
       services and cost-effectively resolve shared problems.
           G-24a. Funding Strategies for Infrastructure and Services. Develop, in cooperation with
           other jurisdictions, funding strategies for governmental infrastructure and services that take
           into account local and regional economic development goals and consider the costs to, and
           benefits for, the jurisdictions and the region. An example is a Joint Power Agreement for
           shared services, such as the Marin County Congestion Management Agency and Marin
           Emergency Radio Authority.
                Responsibility: Management Services, Public Works
                Timeframe: Ongoing
                Resources: Staff Time
           G-24b. New Revenue Sources for City Services and Infrastructure. Consider
           establishing new revenue sources to adequately fund services and infrastructure. Such
           funding would require voter approval and a broad-based community campaign.
                Responsibility: City Manager
                Timeframe: Short Term
                Resources: Staff Time
220 SAN RAFAEL 2020 / GOVERNANCE                                       Reprinted 04/28//2017

