Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 
This page intentionally left blank
2          LAND USE ELEMENT
The Land Use Element provides guidance for the ultimate pattern of
development and relationship between land uses in Yucca Valley.
This Element describes the long range future of the built
environment as a distinctive, high quality place to live and, work in
addition to being a recreational destination. The Land Use Element
will guide the Town’s efforts to provide the desired characteristics
outlined in the Town’s General Plan Vision 2035 including safe
residential neighborhoods, efficient public services, enriching public
facilities, and natural and recreational open spaces that make Yucca
Valley a desirable place to live.
The land uses defined in this Element are linked to goals and policies
related to housing, economic development, circulation,                   A view of the Town from a hillside.
infrastructure, recreation, and public safety. This Element provides a
land use vision for how and where the community may grow, while
preserving the Town’s most valued features. The combination of land
uses proposed in this element is strongly tied to the Town’s long-
term fiscal viability and sustainability.
Purpose of the Land Use Element
Purpose of the Land Use Element
The Land Use Element provides a comprehensive plan of the types,
intensities, and distribution of land uses throughout the community.
The Element and Land Use Map identify the desired pattern of
growth and land use. The purpose of the Land Use Element is to
guide decision-making to ensure that the land uses developed are
cohesive and compatible with the Town’s vision for the future.
Relationship to Other Documents
Development Code
While the General Plan provides broad goals and policies to help
guide the Town in achieving its vision over time, the Development
Code provides detailed standards related to the regulation of land
use and development. The General Plan describes the big picture
vision of the Town’s future, while the Development Code regulates
the day-to-day activities that help to achieve that vision. The two
documents are complimentary. The Development Code is consistent
with the General Plan and many of the regulations within the
Development Code implement goals and policies of the General
Plan.
Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan
The Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan establishes standards for
the compatibility between the Yucca Valley Airport and surrounding
parcels. These standards identify land uses that are considered
incompatible with airport operations and areas where the greatest
noise from aircraft is expected to occur, and establish height limits in
                                                                                    Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 2-1

                                      select areas around the runway (see Figure LU-2 Airport Avigation
                                      Map). The Yucca Valley Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan is
                                      consistent with the Land Use Element.
                                      Specific Plans
                                      The General Plan provides overall guidance and a comprehensive
                                      vision for the physical development of the entire Town. Specific Plans
                                      are typically used for large-scale projects that require a
                                      comprehensive approach to planning and infrastructure issues or
                                      areas that warrant customized regulatory guidance that is not
                                      present in the Town’s Development Code. Specific plans address site-
                                      specific concerns and provide guidance for the design, use, and
                                      development of that site.
                                      Specific plans are typically implemented as customized zoning for a
                                      focused geographic area of the Town and can be initiated by the
                                      Town or a project applicant. In some cases, such as the Old Town
                                      area, the Specific Plan serves as both the General Plan and zoning
                                      designation for the area.
                                      Old Town Specific Plan
                                      The Old Town Specific Plan (OTSP) was adopted in 2007 and
                                      encompasses approximately 250 acres along SR-62 that served as the
                                      Town’s original commercial core. According to the Specific Plan, the
                                      Old Town area is envisioned to become:
                                           •    A vibrant destination in the Morongo Basin where history,
                                                environment, art and culture, education, shopping, living,
                                                and working coincide amidst a very walkable downtown;
                                           •    A renewed setting with its own “Main Street,” mix of
                                                housing, diversity of shopping and working environments,
                                                and inviting public spaces;
                                           •    A district that is highlighted with eclectic architecture, an
                                                abundance of indigenous landscaping, comfortable
                                                pedestrian areas, and public art; and
                                           •    A gathering place for respite and discovery by community
                                                members and visitors alike.
                                      The OTSP has defined the vision of the gateway into Yucca Valley as
                                      the community’s “main street,” with a distinctive character that is
                                      intended to be different than, but complementary to, the West Side,
                                      Town Center or East Side activity areas. The OTSP provides the Town
                                      with a master plan for the development of the area, which includes a
                                      mix of residential, commercial, hospitality and industrial uses and
                                      identifies development standards and design guidelines that must
                                      be followed by new development.
2-2 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                          LAND USE
Development Agreements
State law provides for the adoption of development agreements
between a project applicant and the Town (Government Code
Section 65865). Development agreements provide project
proponents with additional assurances that development approvals
will not be nullified by enacting a future policy or regulation change.
In exchange, an applicant may be required to meet certain
conditions or performance criteria that become part of the
development agreement.
It is important to emphasize that, as set forth in Government Code
Section 65866, the Town is not prohibited from applying new rules,
regulations, and policies to a property with a development
agreement unless specifically stated in the agreement, nor is the
Town prevented from denying or conditionally approving any
subsequent development project application on the basis of such
existing or new rules, regulations, or policies.
2.1 Land Use Designations
                                                                           Density: The number of housing units per
The Land Use Element and Land Use Map describe the distribution of
                                                                           acre of land; typically described as dwelling
land uses by type, location, intensity, and density. Future land uses are  units per acre (du/ac). Minimum and
mapped to show where residential, commercial, office, mixed use,           maximum densities limit the capacity of the
industrial, public/quasi-public facilities, and open space are expected to land.
be located. Figure LU-1, Land Use Map, establishes 20 land use
designations, four Special Policy Areas, and one overlay category.         Intensity: The way nonresidential and
                                                                           mixed use development potential is
Each General Plan land use designation is implemented by a                 described. Levels of intensity are expressed
correlating set of zoning designations described in the Town’s             as floor area ratios.
Development Code. It should be noted that there need not be an
equal number of land use designations and zoning classifications. In       Floor area ratio (FAR): The relationship
many instances, multiple zoning classifications may be consistent          between the amount of floor area allowed
                                                                           in a building and the area of the lot on
with a single General Plan land use designation.
                                                                           which it stands. Lower FARs allow less
                                                                           nonresidential development potential
The maximum allowable development potential of each individual
                                                                           (square footage) than higher FARs.
parcel is influenced not only by the land use designation, but also
physical site characteristics, environmental constraints, infrastructure   Adjusted gross acres: Acreage that does
requirements, and detailed standards provided in the Development           not include the right-of-way for major
Code. Actual development is expected to typically occur at levels less     roadways (Collector Roads and above) and
than the maximums allowed due to the factors stated above as well          ﬂood control facilities.
as market demand and development trends.
Residential Densities
Each of the residential land use designations includes a range of
allowable densities. The maximum density signifies the maximum
number of dwelling units per adjusted gross acre (du/ac) that are
allowed in each residential area. Dwelling unit projections are
estimated by multiplying the gross acres of each residential land use
designation by the corresponding assumed density factor. For
example, 100 acres of Medium Density Residential with an assumed
density of 8.0 du/ac would result in 800 dwelling units.
                                                                                     Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 2-3

                                      To illustrate residential density further, the Low Density Residential
                                      (LDR) designation allows a range of 2.0 to 5.0 dwelling units per gross
                                      acre. The lower threshold figure for each residential designation
                                      represents a minimum amount of development anticipated,
                                      provided that all other required conditions can be met, and the
                                      higher figure represents a potential maximum that could be located
                                      in each to maintain the intended residential character of the area.
                                      It should be noted that a variety of lot sizes and residential product
                                      types may be used in a land use category, as long as the maximum
                                      number of dwelling units allowed by the designation is not exceeded
                                      (not all lots must be exactly the same size unless zoning dictates it).
                                      Areas designated for specific plans have unique assumptions that are
                                      addressed separately in the Land Use Plan Buildout Summary (Table
                                      LU-1).
                                      Nonresidential Intensities
                                      Building intensities for nonresidential uses are measured by floor
                                      area ratio (FAR). A FAR describes the intensity of the use of a site and
                                      not the building height or site coverage; however, building height
                                      and site coverage standards are critical in determining the
                                      arrangement and form of the buildings at the intensity permitted by
                                      the FAR. FAR calculations do not include areas within parking
                                      structures or outdoor open storage areas.
                                       A site with a 0.5 FAR generally might have a range between a one-
                                      story building with 50 percent coverage to a three-story building
                                      with 10 percent coverage of the site. The graphic below shows
                                      possible development arrangements using this FAR.
2-4 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                             LAND USE
Actual density (residential uses) and FAR (nonresidential uses) ranges
are determined on a parcel-specific basis. Density and FAR are based
on adjusted gross acreage, which subtracts acres associated with
existing right-of-way.
Residential Land Uses
Hillside Residential (HR) 1 du/20 acres maximum
Single-family residential development with a minimum lot size of 20
acres. Development and use of these lands is generally restricted by
topography and slope, as well as drainage and biological resources.
The low density allows for private open space preservation and
equestrian and animal keeping uses.
Rural Living (RL-10) 1 du/10 acres maximum
Single-family residential uses with a minimum lot size of 10 acres.
Equestrian and animal keeping activities are expected and
encouraged.
Rural Living (RL-5) 1 du/5 acres maximum
Single-family residential uses with a minimum lot size of 5 acres.
Equestrian and animal keeping activities are expected and
encouraged.
Rural Residential (RR-2.5) 1 du/2.5 acres maximum
Single-family detached residences on large parcels of 2.5 to 5.0 acres.
Equestrian and animal keeping activities are expected and
encouraged to support a rural lifestyle and country living.
Rural Residential (RR-1) 1 du/1acre maximum
Single-family detached residences on large parcels between 1 and
2.4 acres in size. Equestrian and animal keeping activities are
expected and encouraged.
Rural Residential (RR-0.5) 2 du/1 acre maximum
Single-family detached residences on large parcels a minimum of
18,000 square feet in size.
Low Density Residential (LDR) 2.1 to 5.0 du/acre
Single-family detached and attached residences within a density
range between 2.1 and 5.0 units per acre. Typical lot sizes average
10,000 square feet in size.
Medium Density Residential (MDR) 5.1 to 8.0 du/acre
Single-family detached and attached residences within a density
range between 5.1 and 8.0 units per acre. Typical lot sizes average
7,200 square feet in size.
Medium High Density Residential (MHDR) 8.1 to 14.0 du/acre
Single-family detached, attached, and multifamily residences,
including townhomes, apartments, stacked flats, and courtyard and
patio homes, within a density range between 8.1 and 14.0 units per
acre.
                                                                        Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 2-5
                                      Context Sensitive Design
                                      Lot sizes or product types other than those identified as “typical” in
                                      this section may be considered. Variations in residential product type
                                      or design may be considered on a case-by-case basis in an effort to
                                      preserve a property owner’s right to develop and concurrently
                                      conserve or preserve valuable open space resources, habitat, or
                                      wildlife corridors. The total number of units allowed on a site will be
                                      determined by the gross acres of the subject site.
                                      Commercial, Mixed Use, and Industrial Land
                                      Uses
                                      The Commercial, Mixed Use, and Industrial land use designations
                                      allow a range of nonresidential and mixed use development to
                                      support the Town’s position as the economic hub of the Morongo
                                      Valley.
                                      Commercial (C) 0.20 to 0.50 FAR
                                      Local and regional serving retail and service uses, including uses such
                                      as shopping centers and malls, small commercial centers, hotels,
                                      commercial recreation uses such as movie theaters and bowling
                                      alleys, restaurants, supermarkets, and personal services. Office uses
                                      are also allowed, including financial, legal, insurance, and other
                                      professional office uses. Research and development, technology
                                      centers, and business parks are also permitted.
                                      Mixed Use (MU) 0.35 to 1.0 FAR and 25 du/acre maximum
                                      Intended for a mix of uses, including commercial, professional office,
                                      recreational, and high density residential land uses along SR-62
                                      corridor in concentrated nodes. Its purpose is to allow highly
                                      integrated commercial, residential, and office uses that facilitate
                                      pedestrian access and walkability. Proximity of residential uses near
                                      employment and activity centers can reduce vehicle trips and
                                      greenhouse gas emissions. Housing opportunities are also
                                      encouraged in these areas, providing walkable accessibility to
                                      services and facilities. Development in this designation will require
                                      the preparation of a Specific Plan or compliance with a new mixed
                                      use zoning designation and associated development standards.
                                      Industrial (I) 0.25 to 1.0 FAR
                                      Industrial and related uses, including warehousing/distribution,
                                      assembly and light manufacturing, repair facilities, and supportive
                                      retail uses. Preferred development types include master planned
                                      business and industrial parks with integrated access and internal
                                      circulation. Outdoor storage is also permitted in this designation;
                                      however, special screening and design treatments must be applied
                                      to outdoor storage within the Rural Mixed Use Special Policy Area for
                                      properties on the north side of Skyline Ranch Road.
2-6 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                              LAND USE
Miscellaneous Land Uses
Several other land uses, special policy areas, and overlays guide site
use and development in Yucca Valley.
Airport (AP)
Uses necessary for the operation and support of the Yucca Valley
Airport.
Old Town Specific Plan
     Old Town Commercial/Residential (OTCR) 0 to 0.40 FAR and up to
     24 du/acre. Provides a complementary mix of commercial and
     residential uses in a portion of the Old Town Specific Plan area.
     Old Town Highway Commercial (OTHC) 0 to 0.35 FAR. Allows
     commercial development oriented to SR-62. This land use covers
     the eastern and western gateways into the Old Town Specific
     Plan area.
     Old Town Industrial/Commercial (OTIC) 0 to 0.40 FAR and up to 30
     du/acre. Allows a variety of industrial, commercial, or residential
     uses in a portion of the Old Town Specific Plan area.
     Old Town Mixed Use (OTMU) 0 to 1.0 FAR and up to 40 du/acre.
     The mixed use core of the Old Town area allows commercial and
     residential development in horizontal or vertical configurations.
Open Space – Conservation (OSC)
Natural open space areas to be preserved for natural and scenic
resource preservation. Passive recreation such as hiking trails is
permitted. These areas are primarily composed of natural landforms
and contain biological resources that should be preserved to
maintain the Town’s desert character.
Open Space – Recreation (OSR)
Recreational uses, including parks, trails, athletic fields, and golf
courses. Parks are also permitted within residential land uses.
Public/Quasi-Public (P/QP)
Institutional and civic uses such as government buildings and
schools.
Special Policy Areas
A Special Policy Area (SPA) is an area of the community where unique
policy guidance in addition to the direction provided by the
underlying General Plan land use designation is necessary to achieve
a desired outcome. Four SPAs have been identified in Yucca Valley
and are discussed in greater detail in Section 2.2 of this Element.
                                                                         Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 2-7

                                      Overlay
                                      An overlay is a planning tool used to provide flexibility in land use
                                      designations. This designation allows uses that differ from or are in
                                      addition to, the underlying General Plan land use. This flexibility can
                                      increase development options in different market conditions.
                                      Corridor Residential Overlay (-CRO) 14.1 to 25.0 du/acre
                                      This overlay allows residential infill projects in three “transition” areas
                                      between commercial, mixed use, and special policy areas along SR-
                                      62:
                                           • West of Kickapoo (before Old Town Specific Plan)
                                           • Between Palm and Sage Avenues
                                           • Between Airway and Avalon Avenues
                                      The overlay provides the option to develop commercial uses along
                                      the corridor or to build infill housing (up to 25 du/ac maximum) in
                                      the transition areas between commercial nodes should market
                                      conditions support it. The overlay is generally applied to commercial
                                      properties along SR-62 that are transitional areas between
                                      commercial or mixed use nodes found at major intersections along
                                      the corridor such as the Town Center or the Old Town Specific Plan
                                      area. The overlay provides added land use flexibility in these areas
                                      and could allow for the integration of new residential housing
                                      opportunities in close proximity to nonresidential uses. Introducing
                                      residential uses along the corridor will promote walkability and can
                                      generate visual interest by providing visual breaks in the continuous
                                      commercial buildings currently located along the corridor. Properties
                                      within the Corridor Residential Overlay designation may be
                                      developed as the underlying land use designation (commercial) and
                                      also have the option of developing as infill residential without the
                                      need for a General Plan amendment. A Specific Plan may be required
                                      in these areas, at the discretion of Planning Commission.
2-8 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                                                                          Aberdeen Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Figure LU-1
                                                                                                                         E
                                                                                                                         Ô
                                                                                                                         A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GENERAL PLAN LAND USE
                                                                                                                                                                                                        YUCCA MESA
                                                                                                                                         Rural
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GENERAL PLAN DESIGNATION
                                                                                                                                         Mixed
                                                                                                                                        Use SPA                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Hillside Residential (HR) 20 ac min
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rural Living (RL-10) 10 ac min
                                                                                                                   Skyline Ranch Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rural Living (RL-5) 5 ac min
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Buena Vista Dr
          P I O N E E R TO W N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rural Residential (RR-2.5) 2.5 ac min
                                                                                                                                                                  rings Rd
                                                                                                                                                            an Sp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rural Residential (RR-1) 1 ac min
                                                                                                                                                         Wom                                                                                                                Yucca Mesa Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rural Residential (RR-0.5) 0.5 ac min
                                                                                                                                                     Old
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Low Density Residential (LDR) 2.1-5.0 du/ac
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Medium Density Residential (MDR) 5.1-8.0 du/ac
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Medium High Density Res. (MHDR) 8.1-14.0 du/ac
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Commercial (C)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Barron Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Mixed Use (MU)
                                                                      Pi
                                                                                                                                                                                                Paxton Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ¡
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A   Twentynine Palms Hwy                                                       Industrial (I)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Open Space - Conservation (OSC)
                                                                        on
                                                                          ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           JOSHUA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Avalon Ave
                                                                               rto
                                                                                   w                                                                                                                                                                            East
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Open Space - Recreation (OSR)
                                                                                    n
                                                                                        Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Balsa A                                                Side                                                        TREE
                                           West
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Indio Ave
                                                                                                                          Sunnyslope Dr                                              Sunnyslope Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                              Town                                                              SPA                                                                                                        Public/Quasi-Public (P/QP)
                                           Side
                                           SPA                                                                                                                                               Center
                                                                                                                                                                                               SPA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Airport (A)
                                                                        Yucca Trl
                                                                                                      Trl
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Yucca Trl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Old Town Specific Plan
                                                                                                 a Fe
                                                                                             Sant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Old Town Industrial/Commercial (OTIC)
                                                                                                                             Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                               Sage Ave                  Joshua Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Old Town Mixed Use (OTMU)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Old Town Commercial/Residential (OTCR)
                                                                                                             Onaga Trl
                                                 Trl
                                         Nava jo
                                                                                                            Acoma Trl                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Old Town Highway Commercial (OTHC)
                                     E
                                     ¡
                                     A                                                                                                                                                                               Palomar Ave
                                                       Kickapoo Trl
                                 y
                                                                                                                          Joshua Dr                                                                                                             Joshua Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Special Policy Areas and Overlays
                               Hw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Corridor Residential Overlay
                           s
                         lm
                      Pa
                ine
             tyn
      Tw
        en
                                                                                                                                        Golden Bee Dr                                                   Joshua L                                                                                                                                                           SPA - Special Policy Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Town Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                 San Andreas Rd
MORONGO
 VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TYV-01 2/4/2014
                                                                                                                                             J O S H U A T R E E N AT I O N A L PA R K                                                                                                                                                                                                           Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Source: The Planning Center | DC&E 2012   0       1,500     3,000      6,000

                                       This page intentionally left blank.
2-10 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                               LAND USE
2.2 Land Use Plan Buildout
The Land Use Element establishes the maximum buildout potential
for housing units and nonresidential building square footage under
the land use plan. It also estimates the population and employment
at buildout. The maximum buildout is not a goal; it is simply the
maximum allowable development potential that could occur within
the community over numerous decades. A summary of the Land Use
Plan buildout is described in Table LU-1.
Projected Housing and Population
The Town’s range of residential land use densities, for example one
unit per 20-acre and 14 units per acre, allows a variety of housing
types within residential areas of the community. The majority of
these areas are low density, single-family detached land uses. Higher
density sites are strategically concentrated in the community core
near public services, facilities, and infrastructure. Mixed use land use
areas permit residential development types up to 25 units per acre.
The Old Town Specific Plan, adopted in 2007, includes mixed use
areas that allow residential development up to 40 units per acre. This
is the highest density permitted in the Town and is part of a
comprehensive plan to revitalize one part of the community core
into a vibrant, walkable environment.
In 2012 and in several years prior, the average persons per household
in Yucca Valley was just below 2.5. Based upon the maximum
number of units allowed by the Land Use Plan, the Town has the
potential to accommodate approximately 27,226 new units on
residential land (including a portion of mixed use and Old Town
Specific Plan areas). Assuming that 5 percent of housing units will be
unoccupied and an average person per household size of 2.5, the
Town’s population at buildout would be 64,559 persons.
Projected Nonresidential Building and
Employment
Most of the nonresidential development potential in Yucca Valley is
in commercial and industrial areas along SR-62, including mixed use
and Old Town Specific Plan land uses. The maximum allowable
commercial intensities range from 0.35 to 1.00 floor area ratio.
As the economic hub of the Morongo Basin, nonresidential land uses
in Yucca Valley are needed to support job creation, economic
development, and an environment of fiscal sustainability. The
commercial land within the Town, including some within mixed use
and Old Town Specific Plan areas, has the potential to allow up to
11,894,495 square feet of space for commercial use. Additionally, the
Town’s industrial land and some land within the commercial, mixed
use, and Old Town Specific Plan areas allows up to 9,069,206 square
feet of space for office and industrial use. All of the nonresidential
                                                                         Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 2-11

                                       building potential is estimated to support approximately 34,926 jobs
                                       in Yucca Valley.
                                       Infrastructure’s Effect on Future Development
                                       Infill development is encouraged to strategically take advantage of
                                       proximity to SR-62, existing public facilities and services, and planned
                                       infrastructure improvements. This approach creates efficiencies in
                                       public expenditures and focuses more intense development away
                                       from hillsides and open spaces on the community’s edges.
                                       2.3 Balanced Land Uses
                                       The balance and distribution of land uses within the Town is
                                       intended to facilitate the achievement of the Town’s vision. A
                                       sustainable mixture of residential, employment-generating,
                                       recreational, institutional, and open space land uses is necessary to
                                       meet the broad range of resident, business, and governmental needs
                                       over time. Careful land use planning protects highly prized
                                       community features and sets the Town on a path toward successful
                                       growth and development that will not compromise character or
                                       quality.
The Hi-Desert Museum adjacent to the
Community Center.
                                       Residential
                                       A diversity of residential land uses creates a community where
                                       people of all life styles and stages of life can find appropriate housing
                                       opportunities. Residential neighborhoods are important for defining
                                       the community, and their quality greatly contributes to the sense of
                                       place, quality of life, and the long-term sustainability of the Town.
                                       The prevalence of single-family residential development has helped
                                       establish the low density and desert character in Yucca Valley. This
                                       pattern has provided residents with open space and recreation
                                       opportunities on their own individual lots. As community needs
                                       change over time, the Town has adapted the types of housing
                                       opportunities available to its residents, including senior housing. As
A view of the Sawtooth Mountain Range. the Town seeks opportunities to develop and grow, clustered
                                       residential uses with higher densities may be implemented to
                                       minimize impacts to natural open space areas. Additional goals and
                                       policies related to housing (affordability, diversity, etc.) are provided
                                       in the Housing Element.
                                       Commercial and Industrial
                                       Commercial and industrial areas support both local and basinwide
                                       needs for goods, services, employment, and economic development.
                                       A strong economic base is critical for the fiscal health of the Town, its
                                       ability to provide key services to residents and attract visitors, and
                                       the personal success of the local workforce. The Town reinforced the
                                       importance of maintaining its role as the economic center for the
La Contenta Business Center.
                                       Morongo Basin in the General Plan Vision 2035 statement.
2-12 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                        Table LU-1 Land Use Plan Buildout
                                                                       Assumed         Intensity                                    Square Feet       Square Feet     Total Square
                  Land Use Category                      Acres 1                                       Units 4       Population 5                                                       Employees 6
                                                                       Density 2,3      (FAR) 2,3                                    (Retail) 4      (Non-Retail) 4       Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                          NOTES
RESIDENTIAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.	  Acres are given as adjusted gross acreages, which do not include the
Hillside Residential (HR) 0–1 DU/20 AC                           4,014     1 DU/20 AC                            198            471
                                                                                                                                                                                                               right-of-way for major roadways, flood control facilities, or railroads.
Rural Living 10 (RL-10) 0–1 DU/10 AC                                79     1 DU/10 AC                              8             19                                                                       2.	 Residential density is expressed as dwelling units per acre, and
Rural Living 5 (RL-5) 0–1 DU/ 5 AC                               4,842      1 DU/ 5 AC                           968          2,300
                                                                                                                                                                                                               nonresidential intensity is expressed as floor area ratio (FAR), which
                                                                                                                                                                                                               is the amount of building square feet in relation to the size of the
Rural Residential 2.5 (RR-2.5) 0–1 DU/ 2.5 AC                    4,915     1 DU/2.5 AC                         1,809          4,295                                                                            lot. Historically, townwide buildout levels have not achieved the
Rural Residential 1 (RR-1) 0–1 DU/AC                             1,802        1 DU/AC                          1,795          4,263                                                                            maximum allowable density or intensity. Accordingly, the buildout
                                                                                                                                                                                                               estimates for many land use designations reflect a density or
Rural Residential 0.5 (RR-0.5) 1–2 DU/AC                         3,332        2 DU/AC                          6,600         15,675                                                                            intensity that was adjusted downward to be more realistic.
Low Density Residential (LDR) 2.1–5 DU/AC                        1,453        4 DU/AC                          5,077         12,058                                                                       3.	 Estimates of population by residential designation are based on the
                                                                                                                                                                                                               person-per-household factor of 2.5 from the California Department
Medium Density Residential (MDR) 5.1–8 DU/AC                       248        6 DU/AC                          1,478          3,510
                                                                                                                                                                                                               of Finance (2012).
Medium High Density Residential (MHDR) 8.1–14 DU/AC                326       10 DU/AC                          3,260          7,743                                                                       4.	 The total number of units and square footage of retail and nonretail
                                                Subtotal       21,012                                        21,196          50,341
                                                                                                                                                                                                               uses for Specific Plans were taken directly from the approved land
                                                                                                                                                                                                               use plans associated with each Specific Plan document.
COMMERCIAL, MIXED USE, AND INDUSTRIAL                                                                                                                                                                     5.	 A vacancy rate of 5% was assumed for population projections,
                                                                                                                                                                                                               adjusted down from the 13% vacancy rate identified by the California
Commercial (C) 0.20–0.50 FAR 7                                     491       18 DU/AC             0.35         1,679          3,987       5,281,937          730,010          6,011,947          10,889        Department of Finance (2012) to account for housing market
                                                                                                                                                                                                               improvements over time.
Mixed Use (MU) 0.35–0.50 FAR, 14.1–25 DU/AC 8,9                    238       18 DU/AC             0.50           922          2,087       3,691,292          408,221          4,099,513            7,318  6.	 Employment generation rates are in employees per building square
                                                                                                                                                                                                               footage and were developed by The Planning Center|DC&E.
Industrial (I) 0.25–1.00 FAR 10                                    752     1 DU/2.5 AC            0.25            10             23                        7,099,111          7,099,111          10,142   7.	 The Commercial properties are assumed to be 80% retail and 20%
                                                                                                                                                                                                               office, except in the Corridor Residential Overlay where 60% retail
                                                Subtotal         1,481                                         2,611          6,096        8,973,229        8,237,342        17,210,572           28,349
                                                                                                                                                                                                               and 40% residential uses were assumed.
                                                                                                                                                                                                          8.	 The Mixed Use properties near the Town Center Mall are assumed to
OLD TOWN SPECIFIC PLAN 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                               be 60% retail, 20% office, and 20% residential.
                                                                                                                                                                                                          9.	 The Mixed Use properties near Town Hall are assumed to be 80%
Old Town Commercial/Residential (OTCR)
                                                                    57                                           413            981         699,769                             699,769            1,166       retail and 20% residential.
 0–0.35 FAR, 0–24 DU/AC
                                                                                                                                                                                                          10.	 The buildout for Industrial properties assumed a 90% industrial and
Old Town Highway Commercial (OTHC)
                                                                                                                                                                                                               10% office mix of uses except in the Rural Mixed Use Special Policy
                                                                    56                                                                      889,684                             889,684            1,483       Areas north of Skyline Ranch Road, where 10% office, 80% industrial,
0–0.40 FAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                               and 10% residential was assumed to accommodate home-based
Old Town Industrial/Commercial (OTIC)                                                                                                                                                                          businesses.
                                                                    39                                           238            565         275,917          275,917            551,834              854  11.	 The West Side Special Policy Area is listed separately to reflect an
0–0.40 FAR, 0–30 DU/AC
                                                                                                                                                                                                               assumed development opportunity above the capacity provided by
Old Town Mixed Use (OTMU)                                                                                                                                                                                      underlying land uses. The West Side Special Policy Area allows for
                                                                    29                                           465          1,104         759,317                             759,317            1,266       additional development potential (units, hotel rooms, and retail and
0–1.00 FAR, 0–40 DU/AC
                                                                                                                                                                                                               nonretail building square footage) above the maximums that can
                                                Subtotal           181                                         1,116          2,651        2,624,687          275,917         2,900,604            4,769       be developed with the underlying land use designations. Properties
                                                                                                                                                                                                               in this area can be developed according to the underlying land uses
WEST SIDE SPECIAL POLICY AREA 11                                                                                                                                                                               depicted on the General Plan Land Use Map, or, at the discretion of
                                                                                                                                                                                                               the property owner, can be developed with different or more intense
Residential                                                        625                                         2,229          5,294                                                                            uses if the additional criteria identified in the General Plan for the
Commercial     7
                                                                    42                                            77            183         296,579            49,562           346,141              636       West Side Special Policy Area can be met and the maximum buildout
                                                                                                                                                                                                               thresholds identified in this table are not exceeded. A detailed
Industrial                                                          47                                                                                       506,385            506,385              723
                                                                                                                                                                                                               breakdown of buildout assumptions for the West Side Special Policy
Open Space Recreation                                               99                                                                                                                                         Area is provided in the Land Use Element.
Public/Quasi-Public                                                  4
ROW                                                                170
                                                Subtotal           986                                         2,306          5,477          296,579          555,947           852,526            1,359
MISCELLANEOUS
Open Space - Conservation (OSC)                                    386
Open Space - Recreation (OSR)                                       22
Public/Quasi-Public (P/QP)                                         330                                                                                                                               449
Airport (AP)                                                        52
ROW                                                              1,055
                                                Subtotal         1,841                                                                                                                               449
TOTAL                                                         25,503                                        27,226          64,559      11,894,495        9,069,206        20,963,702           34,926
                                                                                                                                                                                         Adopted 2/4/2014

                                       This page intentionally left blank.
2-14 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                 LAND USE
The Town’s positioning as the gateway to the Joshua Tree National
Park provides the town with ongoing access to potential commercial
growth as a result of its ongoing exposure to the tourism and visitor
travel industry. Responsible economic development creates tax
revenues for the Town and provides a variety of jobs to maintain
quality of life. Many of the Town’s nonresidential land use
opportunities reside along SR-62 (Twentynine Palms Highway) and
are included in mixed use or special policy areas, which are
addressed in more detail in Section 2.4, Special Policy Areas. The one
exception is the industrial and commercial node at the intersection
of Skyline Ranch Road and SR-247 (Old Woman Springs Road).
Mixed Use
The Mixed Use designation in Yucca Valley provides flexibility for a
variety of commercial and residential uses to be developed on one
site in a vertical or horizontal configuration. These areas allow greater
variety of land uses, which in turn provides more development
options in different markets. Mixed use developments are often
centers of activity and can be vibrant places to live, work and shop.
The Mixed Use land use designation is strategically located in two
areas along SR-62 where infill development and reinvestment should
be encouraged. Creating two mixed use nodes will vary the
development pattern, distinguish different areas along the corridor
from one another, and help make Yucca Valley’s primary
thoroughfare a more inviting and interesting place to stop and shop.
The future mixed use environment in the Town Center Mall area
(Mixed Use–Town Center) is envisioned to be an employment-
generating retail hub with integrated public spaces and residential
projects. Uses in this area are assumed to build out at a 60 percent
retail, 20 percent office (0.50 FAR), and 20 percent residential (18
du/ac) mix.
The character of the mixed use environment in the Town Hall area
(Mixed Use –Civic Center) is envisioned to be a civic, office, retail, and
residential activity center and assumes an 80 percent retail and 20
percent office mix (0.50 FAR). This area could include office, senior
housing, housing, public facility, and retail uses.
                                                                           Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 2-15

                                       Both Mixed Use areas should be designed to have distinct character,
                                       promote internal pedestrian connectivity, and be well served by
                                       public transportation.
                                        Mixed Use areas in the Civic Center (left) and Town Center Special Policy
                                        Area (right).
                                       Public/Quasi Public
                                       The provision of public services and facilities for civic engagement,
                                       public administration, recreation, safety, and educational
                                       opportunities is one of the Town’s primary functions. Key public
                                       facilities include Town Hall, the Community Center, and Senior
                                       Center. Although not operated by the Town, other important
                                       facilities that provide integral services to the community include fire,
                                       police, library, school and health care facilities. The level of public
                                       services and facilities needed to support residential, commercial, and
                                       industrial development, as well as community needs, is directly
                                       related to the intensity of development and the socioeconomic
                                       structure of the community. New development opportunities
                                       directly correspond with a logical extension of public services and
Town Hall is an example of a public/   facilities.
quasi-public use building.
                                       Open Space
                                       The Town’s open space resources are recognizable and valuable
                                       assets. The hillsides and valleys contribute to the community’s
                                       distinctive desert character and are components of the Town’s
                                       aesthetic and recreational features. Open Space areas in Yucca Valley
                                       are classified as one of two land use designations: Open Space–
                                       Conservation or Open Space–Recreation and are discussed in greater
                                       detail in the Open Space and Conservation Element. The Land Use
                                       Element also balances the opportunities for development and
2-16 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                         LAND USE
growth with the Town’s open space recreation and preservation
needs. The Land Use Element must ensure that planning for or
preservation of open space areas is taken into account, and can also
help to identify areas that are located outside of a ½ mile walking
distance from an existing park or open space area, and which areas
should be prioritized when new recreational opportunities are
identified.
Relationship to the Marine Corps Air Ground Combat Center
Although military installations are not located within Town limits, the
operations at nearby Marine Corps Air Ground Combat Center in
Twentynine Palms could potentially impact Yucca Valley since it is
the largest Marine Corps base in the world. Considering the range of
uses and training activities that could occur on site, it is important for
the Town of Yucca Valley to be aware of operations that could affect
the community. Coordination with the base is also essential to
address ongoing noise or circulation impacts that are generated by
periodic training exercises performed on the base.
GOAL LU 1
A balanced mixture of integrated land uses that provide desirable
neighborhoods, vibrant commercial districts, passive and active
open spaces, a strong economic and employment base, appropriate
public facilities and services, and fiscal sustainability.
General Policies
Policy LU 1-1       Encourage infill development to maximize the
                    efficiency of existing and planned public services,
                    facilities, and infrastructure.
Policy LU 1-2       Require that adjacent land uses and development
                    types complement one another.
Policy LU 1-3       Require new projects to pay their fair share cost of
                    or make necessary improvements to public
                    facilities, infrastructure, and services that are
                    impacted by the demands generated by new
                    development.
Policy LU 1-4       Encourage the development of public spaces
                    within commercial mixed use and residential
                    projects to contribute to the community’s stock of
                    gathering places and special event venues.
Policy LU 1-5       Encourage land use development patterns that           For more detailed information related to
                    preserve the Town’s scenic resources, such as          ridgelines and hillsides, refer to the Open
                    ridgelines and hillsides.                              Space and Conservation Element.
                                                                                  Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 2-17

                                                   Residential Policies
                                                   Policy LU 1-6   Provide housing opportunities and a variety of
                                                                   residential densities, housing types, and tenure to
                                                                   meet the affordability, life stage, and amenity needs
                                                                   of the Town’s diverse population.
                                                   Policy LU 1-7   Preserve and enhance the distinctiveness,
                                                                   character,     and      livability    of   residential
                                                                   neighborhoods.
                                                   Policy LU 1-8   Require adequate exterior housing structure and
                                                                   property maintenance to protect property values,
                                                                   neighborhood quality, and public safety.
                                                   Policy LU 1-9   Encourage infill residential development around
                                                                   public facilities and with pedestrian linkages to
                                                                   encourage walkable residential neighborhoods.
 Leap-Frog Development: Development                Policy LU 1-10  Discourage the discontinuous or “leap-frog”
 that occurs well beyond the limits of                             development of residential subdivisions by
 existing development and necessary                                requiring full improvement or payment of
 services and facilities such as utilities, roads,                 necessary fees to construct roadways and
 parks, and schools.                                               infrastructure to serve new development.
                                                   Policy LU 1-11  Encourage housing developments to include sites
                                                                   for recreational, open space, or educational uses.
                                                   Policy LU 1-12  Preserve the desert character of existing low
                                                                   density residential areas to the greatest extent
                                                                   possible.
                                                   Policy LU 1-13  Carefully plan transitions and design interfaces
                                                                   between residential and nonresidential land uses
                                                                   (walls, lighting and landscaping) to ensure
                                                                   compatibility.
                                                   Policy LU 1-14  Design new residential subdivisions so pads are
                                                                   above the adjacent street grade and drains to the
                                                                   street frontage of each lot, unless otherwise
                                                                   approved by the Town Engineer. Mass grading of
                                                                   properties designated Rural Residential (1 unit per
                                                                   2.5 acres) or less intense is discouraged, and cross-
                                                                   lot drainage easements should be aligned with the
                                                                   existing natural topography to the greatest extent
                                                                   feasible.
2-18 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                     LAND USE
Commercial and Industrial Policies
Policy LU 1-15 Maintain Yucca Valley’s position as the economic
               hub of the Morongo Basin. Support a broad range
               of commercial retail, service, office, business park,
               research and development, light industrial, and
               industrial     uses     to    provide     employment
               opportunities and contribute to the Town’s
               economic sustainability.
Policy LU 1-16 Require high quality building design, property
               maintenance, amenities for pedestrian access, and
               adequate circulation, utilities, and infrastructure.
Policy LU 1-17 Encourage the renovation of existing commercial         Commercial Businesses are a vital part of the
               and industrial areas to improve appearance,             SR-62 corridor.
               environmental         responsiveness,        use     of
               infrastructure, and functionality.
Policy LU 1-18 Locate industrial uses near commercial uses when
               feasible to create synergy between the uses and
               established business nodes.
Policy LU 1-19 Encourage the relocation of industrial operations
               that are not compatible with adjacent uses to areas
               that are conducive to such operations.
Policy LU 1-20 Focus commercial development along SR-62 to
               take advantage of infrastructure improvements.
Policy LU 1-21 Facilitate lot consolidation to create larger sites for
               higher performing commercial and industrial
               projects.
Policy LU 1-22 Attract and retain nonpolluting, clean industrial
               development that expands the economic
               opportunities in the Town.
Policy LU 1-23 Adequately       buffer    or     otherwise      ensure
               compatibility between commercial and industrial
               uses and residential areas (See also Policy LU 1-17).
Public/Quasi-Public Policies
Policy LU 1-24 Plan for the adequate and logical expansion of
               public facilities that are compatible with
               surrounding land uses, reflect community
               character, are educationally enriching, and meet a
               broad range of local needs.
Policy LU 1-25 Support a variety of educational opportunities and
               foster a culture of life-long learning through
               libraries, museums, schools, and other institutions.
                                                                               Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 2-19

                                       Policy LU 1-26 Seek opportunities to collaborate with other
                                                      public/quasi-public organizations in an effort to
                                                      build new facilities to meet demand or develop
                                                      joint use facilities.
                                       Policy LU 1-27 Maintain regular communication and coordination
                                                      with Marine Corps Air Ground Combat Center and
                                                      request advanced notice of any operations that
                                                      could adversely impact the community, even if
                                                      those impacts are temporary.
2-20 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                               LAND USE
2.4 Special Policy Areas
Specific areas of Town warrant customized policies to encourage
specific planning solutions and flexibility that go beyond the
provisions allowed by the traditional designations on the Land Use
Map. Four separate special policy areas have been designated in
Yucca Valley so specialized goals, policies, and standards can be
established to address unique issues. The SPAs are areas where
change is expected to occur over time, and specialized guidance is
provided to ensure that desired outcomes are achieved.
Rural Mixed Use Special Policy Area
The Rural Mixed Use SPA is an industrial node in the northernmost
area of the Town, primarily surrounded by very low density
residential parcels. The Rural Mixed Use Special Policy area is
primarily industrial, but allows low density residential development
up to 1 unit per 2.5 acres when associated with an industrial business
(e.g., a cabinetry maker who has a home and workshop on a single
property). This area was designated as an SPA to support the
ongoing use of the area as a node for industrially oriented home-
based businesses and to provide additional design guidance for
properties that are adjacent to residential uses.
The aesthetic treatment of industrial properties on the north side of
Skyline Ranch Road (parcels in the hatched areas in the graphic
below) and the relationship to residential uses to the south is a
priority in this area. The industrial areas along Skyline Ranch Road are
encouraged to develop with business park and light industrial uses
as a transition to residential uses to the south; enclosed businesses
with no outdoor storage are desired. Compatibility between large lot
residential development and industrial and business park uses is
critical for the success of the Rural Mixed Use SPA, and noise and
traffic should be monitored to prevent conflict between industrial
and residential uses.
 Rural Mixed Use Special Policy Area.
                                                                         Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 2-21
                                       East Side Special Policy Area
                                       The East Side SPA is envisioned as the Town’s primary industrial
                                       employment center. The East Side SPA is approximately 480 acres
                                       and contains the largest concentration of industrial uses in the Town.
                                       The Rural Mixed Use SPA also allows for industrial uses; however, the
                                       nature and scale of those uses is envisioned to be significantly
                                       different than the industrial uses in the East Side SPA. Although most
                                       of the land in the East Side SPA is currently vacant, it is important to
                                       maintain the industrial land use designation in the area to ensure the
                                       Town has reserved enough industrial land to provide for a growing
                                       industrial jobs base for the community as it builds out over time.
                                       Future conversion of the commercial and industrial uses in this area
                                       is discouraged. The East Side SPA consists of several large parcels
                                       that can be developed as part of a comprehensive vision and
                                       conceptual master plan for the area.
                                       Large-scale retail uses are envisioned along the SR-62 corridor.
                                       Commercial uses in this area will likely be compatible or
                                       complementary to industrial uses, or they could be smaller retail uses
                                       that can capture business from adjacent communities or visitors
                                       traveling to Joshua Tree National Park. The retail properties at the
                                       intersection of Yucca Mesa Road and SR-62 also serve as a gateway
                                       into Yucca Valley, providing a prime opportunity to create an
                                       entryway statement through landmark landscaping or signage
                                       treatments. La Contenta Middle School and the Black Rock High
                                       School are along Yucca Mesa Road, and a wastewater treatment
                                       plant is proposed east of Indio Drive at the core of the SPA. As new
                                       development occurs over time, adequate buffers will be needed to
                                       ensure that there is an appropriate transition and ongoing interface
                                       between these public facilities and the industrial uses envisioned for
                                       the area.
                                       East Side Special Policy Area.
2-22 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                            LAND USE
The interface between the industrial uses in the East Side SPA and
the adjacent residential neighborhoods to the west and south will
also be a high priority in this area. Consideration should be made to
design a buffer that can provide a physical and visual separation of
uses, but could also possibly serve as a landscape or recreational
amenity for the residents and businesses in the area. A Specific Plan
or creation of a Master Development Plan is required in the SPA for
new development to ensure that each new project relates to one
another; that opportunities for design, development, or
infrastructure improvements that can benefit the entire SPA are not
overlooked; and that a comprehensive vision for the area is achieved.
Town Center Special Policy Area
The Town Center SPA is envisioned to be a regional commercial
destination and employment hub that is characterized by integrated
public spaces and complementary office and residential uses. The
Town Center SPA provides an opportunity for new commercial
businesses that residents otherwise must travel “down the hill” to
patronize. Uses in this area are assumed to build out at 60 percent
retail, 20 percent office (0.50 FAR), and 20 percent residential (18
du/ac) mix.
The area was designated as a SPA because of its prominent location
on SR-62 and the economic opportunities it provides in conjunction
with the other SPAs and Mixed Use properties along the corridor. All
properties in the SPA are designated Mixed Use, which should
provide places for people to gather, common design themes, and
linkages to other uses in areas where the Town would like to
promote a concentration of community activity.
Town Center Special Policy Area.
                                                                      Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 2-23

                                       Conceptual Master Plan
                                       New development in the Town Center SPA will require the
                                       preparation of a Conceptual Master Plan to demonstrate how new
                                       uses will relate to existing projects or properties from site planning
                                       and access perspectives. The intent of the Conceptual Master Plan is
                                       to engage property owners in the preparation of a collective
                                       development approach for the area to prevent disjointed, piecemeal
                                       development within the SPA. The conceptual Master Plan shall be
                                       required for the entirety of a planning area, even if one or more
                                       property owners in that planning area is not interested in developing
                                       their property at the same time.
                                       Because the successful implementation of the Town Center SPA is
                                       dependent on the careful planning and synergistic relationship of
                                       the uses permitted in the SPA, the Conceptual Master Plan should
                                       outline the key features and characteristics of the development
                                       proposed in the SPA and how that development will relate to the
                                       existing, proposed, or potential development within the SPA or
                                       adjacent properties. In general, information needs to be included in a
                                       Master Plan so that the basic components, features, and
                                       characteristics of the overall project can be clearly understood, and
                                       that all property owners can work toward a common vision for the
                                       policy area.
                                       In particular, the conceptual Master Plan will be used to evaluate and
                                       provide preliminary feedback on the proposed circulation plan,
                                       building orientation, mix of uses, and relationship to other uses
                                       within the SPA. The Conceptual Master Plan can be implemented
                                       through application of the Town’s Development Code or preparation
                                       of a Specific Plan.
                                       West Side Special Policy Area
                                       The golf course facility located in the west side SPA provides a
                                       significant comprehensive planning opportunity for the Town;
                                       however, over the years, visions for the future use of the site have
                                       been quite diverse. The General Plan aims to provide flexibility for
                                       the area to respond to changing market conditions and future
                                       proposals for the area as they arise over the next 20 years.
                                       The West Side SPA provides a unique opportunity to establish land
                                       use direction that encourages the development of a prominent
                                       community landmark or activity center that serves as a community
                                       gathering space of grand scale and should complement the
                                       downtown/Main Street vision that has been established for the Old
                                       Town Specific Plan area just south of the SPA.
                                       The West Side SPA encourages master planning and consolidation of
                                       properties to allow for efficient use of land resources and to avoid
                                       piecemeal development. Projects in this area must be designed
                                       around a prominent community feature (golf course, amphitheater,
2-24 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                               LAND USE
gathering spaces, etc.) that will serve as the focal point of the area.
Alternatively, development in the area could be composed of a series
of interconnected amenities of public and commercial spaces
(plazas, gathering spaces, etc.).
To preserve the significant topographic features in the SPA,
development on slopes 30 percent or greater shall comply with the
Hillside Development Ordinance, and clustered residential
development (higher density residential with a smaller building
footprint) is encouraged in areas adjacent to sloped areas to
maintain the natural features to the greatest extent possible.
West Side Special Policy Area.
Properties in the West Side SPA may develop using the underlying
land use designated on the General Plan Land Use Map, or property
owners have the option to develop different or more intense uses as
long as proposed development is in accordance with policies
outlined in this section and it does not exceed the buildout
maximums (units and nonresidential square footage) identified in
Table LU-2. These thresholds allow for a higher level of development
potential than would be permitted with strict application of the
underlying land uses.
The West Side SPA buildout assumes development potential above
the base allowable land use densities and intensities identified on
the General Plan Land Use Map to provide greater flexibility for
future development as listed in Table LU-2. A property (or group of
properties) may develop as a use other than the underlying land use
or with increased density/intensity assuming it is still consistent with
the West Side SPA.
                                                                         Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 2-25
                                                           Any property owner or group of properties may request the
                                                           allocation of additional residential units above the densities depicted
                                                           on the Land Use Map; however, a request for additional residential
                                                           units requires the preparation of a Specific Plan, which shall contain
                                                           no less than 100 acres. Development of additional resort or hotel
                                                           uses is also permitted with the preparation of a Specific Plan (that
                                                           must contain no less than 5 acres). New commercial space may be
                                                           proposed with a minimum project size of 20 acres and a Specific
                                                           Plan.
                               Table LU-2
                               Projected Buildout Maximums for West Side Special Policy Area
                               Residential
                                                                                                                  Percentage
                                Density (du/ac)                Acres              Maximum Units                      of Acres                  Other
                               18                                62.5                     1,125                            10                    N/A
                               8                                 62.5                       500                            10                    N/A
                               4                                125.0                       500                            20                    N/A
                               0.5                              187.5                       94                             30                    N/A
                               20 acre minimum                  187.5                       10                             30                    N/A
                               Subtotal                          625                       2,229                         100                     N/A
                               Commercial
                               201                               4.0                        77                           N/A                     N/A
                               N/A                               23.5                       N/A                       296,579                   49,562
                               N/A                               14.0                  120 rooms                         N/A                     N/A
                               Subtotal                          41.5             77 units/ 120 rooms                  296,579                  49,562
                               Industrial
                               N/A                               46.5                       N/A                          N/A                   506,385
                               Subtotal                          46.5                       N/A                          N/A                   506,385
                               Other
                               Open Space
                                                                 99.0                       N/A                          N/A                     N/A
                               Recreation
                               Public/Quasi Public               4.0                        N/A                          N/A                     N/A
                               Right of Way                     170.0                       N/A                          N/A                     N/A
                               Subtotal                         273.0                       N/A                          N/A                     N/A
                               TOTAL                            986.0           2,306 units/120 rooms                 237,880                  762,868
                               1: The Residential Corridor Overlay includes 20 acres of Commercial land along SR-62 within the West Side SPA. The
                                  buildout assumes that 10 acres will be 40% (4 acres) residential and 60% (6 acres) retail. The remaining 10 acres of
                                  Commercial land in the West Side SPA is assumed to buildout with a mixture of 80% retail and 20% office uses.
                                                           The Town will keep an ongoing total of existing and proposed uses
                                                           to ensure that the maximum residential units, hotel rooms, and
                                                           nonresidential square footage envisioned by the General Plan are
                                                           not exceeded. With the application of the West Side SPA, buildout
                                                           maximums for the area are outlined as shown in Table LU-2.
                                                           The West Side SPA will be implemented through the provisions of
                                                           the Town’s Development Code, specific plan(s) or a combination of
                                                           these. A specific plan can be initiated by the Town or by individual
                                                           property owners and can include all acreage within, or a portion of,
                                                           the West Side SPA.
2-26 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                              LAND USE
GOAL LU 2
A complementary mix of distinctive mixed use nodes along the SR-62
corridor that can generate activity, contribute to the community’s
character, and respond to varying market conditions.
General Policies
Policy LU 2-1     Stimulate reinvestment in the Town’s corridors by
                  allowing greater flexibility in land use through the
                  application of the provisions of the Special Policy
                  Areas.
Policy LU 2-2     Permit a mixture of compatible land uses on a
                  single site or within a single development project in
                  a vertical or horizontal configuration.
Policy LU 2-3     Provide       flexible     development     standards
                  implemented through a Specific Plan or new
                  Development Code standards for mixed use that
                  ensure compatibility between allowable uses on
                  site and with adjacent uses.
Policy LU 2-4     Encourage the inclusion of pedestrian linkages and
                  public amenities to promote walking on site and
                  within clustered development.
Rural Mixed Use SPA Policies
Policy LU 2-5     Require development of low intensity, master
                  planned industrial and business park uses along
                  Skyline Ranch Road.
Policy LU 2-6     Require appropriate transitions between residential
                  uses south of Skyline Ranch Road and industrial to
                  ensure compatibility. Transitions could include
                  special landscaping, lighting, fencing treatments
                  and screening of outdoor storage areas.
East Side SPA Policies
Policy LU 2-7     Facilitate the development of master planned
                  industrial and business park uses.
Policy LU 2-8     Encourage large and tourist-serving retailers to
                  locate along properties directly abutting SR-62 to
                  capture sales from visitors entering and departing
                  Joshua Tree National Park.
Policy LU 2-9     Coordinate with the Hi-Desert Water District to
                  facilitate development of a new wastewater
                  treatment plant in the area.
                                                                        Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 2-27

                                       Policy LU 2-10 Require adequate buffering between the
                                                      wastewater treatment plant and adjacent uses.
                                       Policy LU 2-11 Require adequate buffering for residential uses
                                                      immediately to the west and south of the East Side
                                                      Special Policy Area.
                                       Policy LU 2-12 Explore the possibility to integrate recreational
                                                      opportunities into new development that could
                                                      serve dually as buffers and new amenities for
                                                      businesses in the SPA and residents in adjacent
                                                      neighborhoods.
                                       Town Center SPA Policies
                                       Policy LU 2-13 Facilitate development of vertical or horizontal
                                                      mixed uses, including commercial, office, or
                                                      residential.
                                       Policy LU 2-14 Integrate     gathering      spaces     into    future
                                                      development projects and link them through
                                                      pedestrian pathways or other connections.
                                       West Side SPA Policies
                                       Policy LU 2-15 Permit infill uses consistent with the underlying
                                                      uses as depicted on the General Plan Land Use Map
                                                      “by right” and in accordance with the Development
                                                      Code in place at the time of the land development
                                                      application.
                                       Policy LU 2-16 Require a General Plan Amendment for new
                                                      development that proposes to exceed the
                                                      maximum unit, hotel room, or nonresidential
                                                      square footage thresholds identified for the West
                                                      Side SPA (Table LU-2).
                                       Policy LU 2-17 Support the development of higher density
                                                      residential uses in close proximity to the golf course
                                                      (or another community amenity) and the gradual
                                                      transition to lower density, single-family residential
                                                      uses as distance from the golf course increases.
                                       Policy LU 2-18 Encourage lot consolidation and master planning
                                                      for multiple parcels.
                                       Policy LU 2-19 Development on slopes 30 percent or greater shall
                                                      be in accordance with the Hillside Development
                                                      Ordinance.
2-28 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                       LAND USE
Policy LU 2-20    Allow transfers of development rights or
                  application of other mitigation tools to transfer
                  units or square footage from one property to
                  another to preserve hillside areas and natural
                  slopes. This may result in an increased density or
                  intensity on the receiving site.
2.5 Yucca Valley Airport
The Yucca Valley Airport is a public use general aviation facility
leased and operated by the Yucca Valley Airport District for aircraft
storage, maintenance, use, and training. The airport is unique in that
homes with attached and detached hangars are located on the
property for the convenience of residents with privately owned
aircraft. The San Bernardino Airport Land Use Commission
determines which land uses and height limits are compatible with
airport operations through the Airport Comprehensive Land Use
Plan. They also establish a deed notice area in which property buyers
must be notified of their proximity to the airport at the time of
certain real estate transactions. Areas of the community where a
height limit must be enforced for aircraft safety and when deed
notices are required are shown in Figure LU-2, Avigation Easement      Yucca Valley Airport is a general aviation
Map.                                                                   facility leased and operated by the Yucca
                                                                       Valley Airport District.
GOAL LU 3
A compatible and safe environment for airport operations consistent
with the Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan.
Policies
Policy LU 3-1     Allow compatible and supportive land uses around
                  the Yucca Valley Airport as determined in the
                  Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan.
Policy LU 3-2     Limit building heights in select areas according to
                  the Avigation Easement Map and standards
                  provided in the Airport Compatibility Land Use
                  Plan.
                                                                                 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 2-29
                                       This page intentionally left blank.
2-30 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure LU-2
                                                                                                                                                           Aberdeen Dr
                                                                                                                         Ô
                                                                                                                         A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AVIGATION EASEMENT MAP
                                                                                                                                                                                                         YUCCA MESA
                                                                                                                                          Rural
                                                                                                                                          Mixed
                                                                                                                                         Use SPA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SPA - Special Policy Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Town Limits
                                                                                                                    Skyline Ranch Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Impact
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Buena Vista Dr
            P I O N E E R TO W N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Avigation Easement - 35' Height Limit
                                                                                                                                                                   rings Rd
                                                                                                                                                             an Sp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Avigation Easement - 45' Height Limit
                                                                                                                                                          Wom                                                                                                                Yucca Mesa Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Deed Notice
                                                                                                                                                      Old
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Barron Dr
                                                                       Pi
                                                                         on
                                                                           ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Paxton Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ¡
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ?   Twentynine Palms Hwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       JOSHUA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Avalon Ave
                                                                                rto
                                                                                    w                                                                                                                                                                            East
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ve                                                                                                                     TREE
                                                                                     n
                                                                                         Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Balsa A                                                Side
                                            West
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Indio Ave
                                                                                                                           Sunnyslope Dr                                              Sunnyslope Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                               Town                                                              SPA
                                            Side
                                            SPA                                                                                                                                               Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                SPA
                                                                         Yucca Trl                                                                                                                    Yucca Trl
                                                                                                       Trl
                                                                                                  a Fe
                                                                                              Sant
                                                                                                                              Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                                Sage Ave                  Joshua Ln
                                                                                                              Onaga Trl
                                                  Trl
                                          Nava jo
                                                                                                             Acoma Trl
                                      ¡
                                      ?                                                                                                                                                                               Palomar Ave
                                                        Kickapoo Trl
                                                                                                                           Joshua Dr                                                                                                             Joshua Dr
                                  y
                            s   Hw
                          lm
                       Pa
                   e
                nin
        e   nty
      Tw
                                                                                                                                         Golden Bee Dr                                                   Joshua L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n
                                                                                                                                                                                                  San Andreas Rd
MORONGO
 VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TYV-01 2/4/2014
                                                                                                                                              J O S H U A T R E E N AT I O N A L PA R K                                                                                                                            Source: Yucca Valley Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan,                                   Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   San Bernardino County Planning Department, 1992             0       1,500     3,000      6,000

                                       This page intentionally left blank.
2-32 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN
Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 
This page intentionally left blank
3        HOUSING ELEMENT
The Housing Element is intended to guide residential development
and preservation consistent with the overall values of the community
and to meet state requirements. The Housing Element provides a
framework of housing opportunities designed to meet the specific
needs of the Towns’ existing and future residents. An adequate
supply of quality housing that is affordable to a range of household
types is fundamental to the economic sustainability and social well-
being of Yucca Valley.
Purpose
The purpose of the Yucca Valley Housing Element is to provide a       Regional Housing Needs Assessment: The
comprehensive understanding of the existing and projected housing     Regional Housing Needs Assessment
needs within the community and to set forth goals, policies and       (RHNA) is an assignment of development
programs to enable the Town to address them.                          potential by income category. Since the
                                                                      RHNA is based on regional growth
State law (Government Code Section 65580 et seq.) requires every      projections, the RHNA is considered a
county and incorporated community to prepare a housing plan with      community’s share of the regional
programs to meet local housing needs. Unlike other General Plan       projected housing demand. The RHNA
elements, which can be updated as the jurisdiction feels appropriate, represents development potential during a
state law mandates an update to the Housing Element every eight       time frame established by the state, called a
                                                                      planning period. The current planning
years. Communities that fail to comply with state housing law are
                                                                      period is from 2014 to 2021.
subject to updating their Housing Element every four years.
An important part of compliance with state housing law is
accommodating the Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) by
identifying opportunities for future housing development. The Town
of Yucca Valley was assigned a RHNA of 930 units for the 2014–2021
planning period. This Housing Element contains programs to provide
development capacity to meet the RHNA, address other housing
concerns such as the improvement and preservation of existing
housing, and provide additional content required to comply with
state law (Government Code Section 65583).
Relationship to Other Documents
The Housing Element draws from data provided in the Housing
Technical Report, a separate reference document, prepared
concurrently with the General Plan. The Housing Technical Report
contains a description of the Town’s housing needs, and the
constraints and resources to meeting those needs. The Housing
Technical Report is organized into five sections:
     •   Introduction. This includes the statutory authority and
         requirements for the Housing Element and an overview of
         the public outreach process.
                                                                                Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 3-1

                                                     •    Housing Needs. This is an assessment of demographic,
                                                          housing, economic, and special needs characteristics in the
                                                          Town of Yucca Valley.
                                                     •    Housing Constraints. This is an evaluation of existing
                                                          governmental, market, and environmental constraints to the
                                                          development, preservation, and conservation of housing in
                                                          Yucca Valley.
                                                     •    Land Inventory. This is an analysis of vacant sites that are
                                                          available to be developed for residential or mixed use
                                                          during the 2014–2021 planning period.
                                                     •    Previous Housing Element Progress. This is a summary of
                                                          progress toward implementing the goals, policies, and
A hillside single-family detached neighborhood.           programs in the 2008–2014 Housing Element.
                                                The Housing Element is also related to local water and wastewater
                                                service planning documents. State law (Government Code Section
                                                65589.7) requires communities to share the Housing Element with
                                                water and wastewater service providers. This process is intended to
                                                facilitate priority service to affordable housing and ensure that utility
                                                plans account for population projections. This is particularly
                                                important for Yucca Valley given that the Regional Water Quality
                                                Control Board prohibited the use of septic systems in certain areas of
                                                the Town by 2016.
                                                Government Code Section 65302 links the updating of the Housing
                                                Element with updates to Safety and Open Space and Conservation
                                                Elements. This connection was established to ensure adequate flood
                                                hazard information and management planning. This Housing
                                                Element is part of a comprehensive update to the Town of Yucca
                                                Valley General Plan, including the Safety and Open Space and
                                                Conservation Elements.
                                                Yucca Valley’s Housing Element is also related to the San Bernardino
                                                County Consolidated Plan. Yucca Valley is a member of the San
                                                Bernardino County Urban County Consortium and participates in
                                                countywide efforts to receive federal housing and community
                                                development funds. These funds are potential resources for
                                                affordable housing construction, rehabilitation, and preservation.
                                                The San Bernardino County Consolidated Plan is an assessment of
                                                existing affordable housing and community development needs that
                                                informs the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development as
                                                part of a federal fund awarding process.
                                                The following goals, policies and programs are designed to meet
                                                state requirements and enable the Town of Yucca Valley to address
                                                current and projected housing needs during the 2014–2021
                                                planning period. Program implementation is the responsibility of the
                                                Community Development Department, which will coordinate and
                                                collaborate with other departments and agencies as needed.
3-2 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                           HOUSING
3.1 Housing Diversity
An adequate supply of quality housing provides opportunities for
residents to live in Yucca Valley, supports future economic growth
and our workforce, and raises municipal revenues needed to sustain
our community. To meet local needs, the housing stock should
include a variety of housing types and supportive community
amenities for residents of all ages. A balanced community includes
rental and for-sale housing types that are appropriate for different
family sizes, lifestyles, and incomes.
GOAL H1
High quality housing with a variety of development types, sizes, and
affordability levels to accommodate the diverse lifestyle and life
stage needs of current and future residents.
Policies
Policy H1-1         Provide a diversity of land uses to encourage
                    residential development with a range of sizes,
                    affordability levels, and amenities.
Policy H1-2         Remove governmental constraints to the
                    development of a variety of housing types,
                    including affordable and multifamily housing.
Programs
Program H1-1        Maintain an inventory of all vacant land suitable for
                    residential development to ensure adequate
                    capacity to meet the Regional Housing Needs
                    Assessment.
                    Timing: Annually
Program H1-2        Adopt the Corridor Residential Overlay, Mixed Use-
                    Town Center, and Mixed Use-Civic Center land use
                    designations in the General Plan and development
                    standards in the Development Code to encourage
                    and facilitate housing types up to 25 dwelling units   Cactus Garden Apartments.
                    per acre.
                    Timing: In progress as part of General Plan and
                    Development Code updates; adopt in FY 2013/2014
Program H1-3        Monitor building capacity of all sites within specific
                    plans listed in the Land Inventory to help ensure
                    that adequate lower income capacity is maintained
                    throughout the planning period.
                    Timing: Annually
                                                                                     Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 3-3
                                                Program H1-4 Encourage housing types that address the housing
  By Right: When the permitting process                      needs of small, lower income households by
  does not involve a discretionary review to
                                                             continuing to permit second units by right in
  allow a use in a particular zone. The design
  of the project, however, is still subject to               single-family detached residential-only zones and
  development standards to ensure quality                    single room occupancy units through a conditional
  and protect public health, safety, and                     use permit in the Industrial zone.
  welfare. State law requires that several
  types of housing, including second units,                  Timing: Ongoing
  are permitted by right in appropriate zones.
                                                Program H1-5 Continue to allow emergency shelters by right, with
  Second Unit: Small, separate living quarters               approval of a Special Use Permit, in the Industrial
  located on the same site as a single-family                zone. Transitional and supportive housing shall be
  detached home. A second unit can be                        subject to only those restrictions that apply to other
  rented, but cannot be sold separately from                 residential uses in the same zone. This is in
  the main house.
                                                             accordance with Government Code Section
  Single Room Occupancy Unit: A one-room                     65583(a)(7).
  rental unit intended to be occupied by one
  person. These units may contain complete                   Timing: Ongoing
  kitchen or bathroom facilities or have
  shared facilities.                            Program H1-6 Provide technical assistance to facilitate lot
                                                             consolidation in the Old Town Specific Plan area
  Emergency Shelter: Housing for homeless                    and seek opportunities to streamline the approval
  persons that is limited to stays of no more                process.
  than six months.
                                                             Timing: Ongoing
  Transitional Housing: Rental housing
  operated under programs that provide          Program H1-7 Encourage applicants of new multifamily and
  assistance for stays of at least six months.               single-family attached projects to include units with
                                                             two or more bedrooms to accommodate the
  Supportive Housing: Housing with no limit
  on length of stay that is linked to onsite or              housing needs of Yucca Valley families. Raise
  offsite services to assist the resident.                   awareness of this need through pre-application
                                                             meetings and through the Town’s website.
                                                             Timing: Update the website by June 2014
                                                Program H1-8 Require multifamily projects with 16 or more units
 Special Use Permit: Review procedure that
 allows the Town to evaluate proposed
                                                             to provide an on-site property manager, per
 development and determine its consistency                   Government Code Section 65582.2.
 with the General Plan, the Development
 code and applicable Town ordinances. This                   Timing: Ongoing
 type of permit is a staff level review, giving
 the Director reviewing authority. When
 approving an application for a Special Use
 Permit the Director may impose conditions
 to ensure compliance with the
 Development Code.
3-4 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                            HOUSING
3.2 Neighborhood Quality
Neighborhoods require infrastructure, public services, and other
facilities and amenities to support a variety of household needs.
However, many existing residential areas do not have sidewalks or
paved roads, and a portion of the community will transition from
septic to sewer service during the planning period. Investing in
infrastructure improves neighborhoods and adds to economic
stability and Yucca Valley’s overall quality of life. Yucca Valley’s
reputation and longevity requires that neighborhoods are high
quality, sustainable places to live, raise children, and retire.
GOAL H2
Stable, sustainable neighborhoods served by parks, infrastructure,
and other public services and amenities.
Policies
Policy H2-1       Revitalize the core of the community with new
                  housing that capitalizes on existing and planned
                  public facilities.
Policy H2-2       Encourage new development and rehabilitation
                  efforts to maximize energy efficiency through
                  architectural and landscape design and the use of
                  renewable resources and conservation.
Programs
Program H2-1      Concentrate         higher      density        residential
                  development opportunities in proximity to public
                  transit, public facilities, the first phase of
                  wastewater service, and commercial uses. This will
                  create an accessible and convenient living
                  environment for seniors, persons with disabilities,
                  and lower income families.
                  Timing: In progress as part of General Plan and
                  Development Code updates; adopt in FY 2013/2014
Program H2-2      Encourage developers of affordable or age-                 A neighborhood with curbs, gutters and
                  restricted housing to confer with local public             paved roads.
                  transportation providers to ensure adequate service
                  to the project area as feasible.
                  Timing: Ongoing, consultation typically occurs in
                  the pre-application meeting
                                                                                      Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 3-5

                                             Program H2-3 Update the Development Code to require that new
                                                          housing projects, including affordable and age-
                                                          restricted projects, have adequate public
                                                          improvements, including infrastructure and paved
                                                          streets and sidewalks.
                                                          Timing: In progress as part of the Development
                                                          Code update; adopt in FY 2013/2014
                                             Program H2-4 Provide local water and wastewater service
                                                          providers with a copy of the Housing Element to
   A residential neighborhood with unpaved                inform them of local housing goals. Water and
   roads.                                                 wastewater service for affordable housing projects
                                                          is a priority, per Government Code Section 95589.7.
                                                          Timing: Upon Housing Element adoption
  LEED: A sustainable building certification Program H2-5 Encourage the use of LEED design principles and
  program called Leadership in Energy and                 other energy efficiency programs to lower energy
  Environmental Design that is operated by                costs for residents in the long term. Applicants shall
  the U.S. Green Building Council.                        be encouraged to use LEED principles in their
                                                          designs during the pre-application meeting and
                                                          application review process.
                                                          Timing: On a project-by-project basis, consider
                                                          codifying opportunities for LEED design in the
                                                          Development Code update
                                             Program H2-6 Maintain a Planned Residential Development (PRD)
                                                          permit ordinance which allows flexibility in
                                                          development standards to encourage housing
                                                          construction while preserving natural resources.
                                                          Timing: Ongoing
                                             Program H2-7 Continue to enforce Town Codes on property
                                                          development and maintenance. Use the Code
                                                          Enforcement program as the primary tool for
                                                          bringing substandard housing units into
                                                          compliance and for improving overall housing
                                                          conditions in Yucca Valley.
                                                          Timing: Ongoing
                                             Program H2-8 Encourage the formation of neighborhood watch
                                                          programs to promote safety in residential areas.
                                                          Timing: Ongoing
3-6 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                               HOUSING
3.3 Assisted Housing
Subsidized housing is an important resource for extremely low
income households. Without redevelopment agency tax increment
financing, there are greater challenges than before to assist residents
in securing adequate and affordable housing. Leveraging and
combining multiple resources may be necessary to assist lower and
moderate income households, especially to reach the level of
assistance necessary to serve extremely low income households.
GOAL H3
Affordable housing opportunities for extremely low, very low, low,
and moderate income households.
Policies
Policy H3-1       Support participation in federal, state, regional, and
                  local programs aimed at providing housing
                  opportunities for lower and moderate income
                  households.
Policy H3-2       Collaborate with appropriate agencies and
                  organizations to provide housing assistance to
                  Yucca Valley residents.
Programs
Program H3-1      Continue to seek additional financial resources,
                  including Low Income Housing Tax Credits, for the
                  construction of select deed-restricted affordable
                  housing projects.
                  Timing: Ongoing
Program H3-2      Continue to update the Density Bonus Ordinance
                  (when amended by the state) to incentivize
                  affordable housing.
                  Timing: Ongoing
Program H3-3      Maintain membership in the San Bernardino
                  County Urban County Consortium to participate in
                  the County’s efforts to obtain federal funding for
                  affordable housing and community development.
                  Timing: Ongoing
                                                                         Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 3-7

                                      Program H3-4     Coordinate with the San Bernardino County
                                                       Housing Authority to ensure that Section 8 housing
                                                       assistance, an important resource for lower income
                                                       households, is provided in Yucca Valley.
                                                       Timing: Annually as part of the HCD Annual Report
                                                       preparation process
                                      Program H3-5     Assist qualified developers, nonprofit organizations,
                                                       and agencies in the preparation of applications for
                                                       county, state, and federal housing grants and loans
                                                       for the construction of lower and moderate income
                                                       housing in Yucca Valley. The Town shall process
                                                       requests that require supportive documentation
                                                       within 30 days of receipt.
                                                       Timing: Ongoing
                                      Program H3-6     Distribute San Bernardino County lower and
                                                       moderate income rental housing and homebuyer
                                                       assistance program information at Town Hall and
                                                       on the Town’s website.
                                                       Timing: Ongoing
                                      3.4 Housing Conservation and
                                           Preservation
                                      Market factors can encourage the conversion of affordable housing
                                      projects to market rate ones. The Town has administrative resources
                                      to encourage affordable housing project owners to extend
                                      covenants, preventing the affordable units from converting to
                                      market rate. In an administrative capacity, the Town also has the
                                      ability to oversee mobile home park conversions to ensure that
                                      mobile home closures and conversions do not displace residents.
                                      GOAL H4
                                      Ensured longevity and quality of the affordable housing stock.
                                      Policies
                                      Policy H4-1      Support the maintenance of the Town’s deed-
                                                       restricted affordable housing stock and relatively
                                                       affordable development types such as mobile
                                                       homes.
                                      Policy H4-2      Monitor and protect the Town’s deed-restricted
                                                       affordable housing stock.
3-8 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                HOUSING
Programs
Program H4-1 Facilitate the preservation of any deed-restricted
             affordable housing units by notifying the San
             Bernardino County Housing Authority and other
             qualified entities. The Town will be responsible for
             monitoring at-risk projects on an ongoing basis and
             will provide relevant information to tenants and the
             community as needed.
             Timing: Ongoing, track through the Annual Report
             to HCD
Program H4-2 Continue to distribute the County of San             An aging single-family detached home.
             Bernardino’s materials for developers and low
             income households which detail the programs
             available to both parties for assistance in the
             development and rehabilitation of low income
             housing. Materials will be available at Town Hall
             and online.
             Timing: Ongoing
Program H4-3 Continue to regulate the conversion of mobile
             home parks to permanent housing by ordinance to
             ensure that an appropriate relocation plan for park
             residents is developed and implemented.
             Timing: Ongoing
Program H4-4 Seek new funding sources to continue the Home
             Rehabilitation Program to enable lower income and
             senior households to maintain and rehabilitate
             their homes. Once funding has been secured, the
             program shall be advertised on the Town’s website
             and at Town Hall, the Community Center, the
             Library, and local churches and social service
             agencies.
             Timing: Ongoing; program was previously funded
             through the Redevelopment Agency
                                                                          Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 3-9

                                       3.5 Fair Housing
                                       Federal and state fair housing laws require all local governments to
                                       affirmatively promote fair housing opportunities. Fair housing means
                                       equal opportunities without discrimination in the selling or renting
                                       of housing on the basis of race, religion, sex, marital status, ancestry,
                                       national origin, color, or disability status. Many landlords may not be
                                       aware of these laws, making fair housing referral services an
                                       important resource for both landlords and tenants. Another way to
                                       make housing more equitable is to make reasonable variances when
                                       necessary to afford disabled persons the ability to access and enjoy a
                                       dwelling.
                                       GOAL H5
                                       Equal housing opportunities for all Yucca Valley residents.
                                       Policies
                                       Policy H5-1       Enforce      fair     housing      laws     prohibiting
                                                         discrimination.
                                       Policy H5-2       Support local and regional organizations that
                                                         provide fair housing services to Yucca Valley.
                                       Policy H5-3       Provide a supportive administrative environment
                                                         that facilitates barrier free housing for disabled
                                                         residents.
                                       Programs
                                       Program H5-1      Refer local fair housing complaints to the Inland
                                                         Fair Housing Mediation Board, which provides
                                                         landlord and tenant conflict resolution and other
                                                         fair housing services.
                                                         Timing: Ongoing
                                       Program H5-2      Continue to distribute fair housing information
                                                         from the San Bernardino Housing Authority, Inland
                                                         Fair Housing Mediation Board, San Bernardino
                                                         County Community Housing Resource Board, or
An apartment complex in Town.                            other appropriate agency, at Town Hall, other
                                                         public facilities, religious institutions, and on the
                                                         Town’s website.
                                                         Timing: Ongoing
                                       Program H5-3      Continue reasonable accommodation procedures
                                                         to accommodate modifications to, land use, zoning,
                                                         and permitting processes to provide more housing
                                                         options for people with disabilities.
3-10 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                 HOUSING
                  Timing: Ongoing
Program H5-4      Continue to enforce the Fair Housing Act, which
                  sets forth accessibility standards for multifamily
                  projects with four or more units.
                  Timing: Ongoing
3.6 Meeting the RHNA
The Town of Yucca Valley was allocated a RHNA of 930 housing units
divided by income category for the 2014–2021 planning period. The
Town is responsible for identifying vacant lands with residential
development potential. Higher density housing is typically more
affordable to lower and moderate income households so the
Housing Element Land Inventory includes developable vacant sites
at a variety of densities. The Town’s strategy to address the RHNA is
detailed in the policies and programs under Goals H1 and H3.
A variety of land resources will have the potential to
comprehensively accommodate the RHNA and help meet the Town’s
other housing goals. The Town has taken several steps to identify
land resources that will exceed the housing development potential
assigned in the RHNA. Providing a surplus of sites is important so the
Town will not have to amend the land inventory should a large site
be rezoned to a nonresidential use during the 8 year planning
period.
Vacant land is the Town’s critical resource for accommodating the
RHNA. Vacant land at a variety of densities has the ability to facilitate
housing development that can meet different affordability targets.
As in the previous Housing Element cycle, the Old Town Specific Plan
provides enough higher density development potential to exceed
the lower income RHNA. Several land uses can accommodate small
lot detached, attached, and multifamily housing to exceed the
moderate income RHNA. The Town also has an ample supply of
vacant low density sites to exceed the above moderate income need
for single-family detached housing. A thorough description of the
Land Inventory, including a parcel-by-parcel development potential
analysis and maps, are provided in the Housing Technical Report
(Appendix A).
Table H-1 provides a summary of the development potential of
vacant sites that are readily available for development within the
2014–2021 planning period.
                                                                          Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 3-11

                                   Table H-1
                                   Summary of Land Resources, 2014–2021
                                   Designation                 Acres Assumed Lower            Moderate     Above        Total
                                                                            Density                        Moderate
                                   Rural Residential 1         146          1        0        0            146          146
                                   Rural Residential 0.5       125          2        0        0            249          249
                                   Low Density                 268          4        0        0            1,074        1,074
                                   Residential
                                   Medium Density              98           6        0        0            591          591
                                   Residential
                                   Medium High                 97           10       0        832          137          969
                                   Density Residential
                                   Mixed Use                   137          18       0        443          50           493
                                   Corridor Residential        109          18       0        779          3            783
                                   Overlay
                                   Old Town Specific           39           24–40    1,116    0            0            1,116
                                   Plan
                                   Total                       N/A          N/A      1,116    2,054        1,855        5,420
                                   RHNA                        N/A          N/A      358      172          400          930
                                   Surplus Capacity            N/A          N/A      758      1,882        1,455        4,490
                                                       In addition to this development potential, 75 new subsidized lower
                                                       income housing units will be constructed during the planning period
                                                       through the Yucca Valley Senior Apartments Specific Plan.
                                                       3.7 Quantified Objectives
                                                       The goals and policies of the Housing Element are implemented
                                                       through a variety of programs designed to encourage the
                                                       maintenance, improvement, development, and conservation of
                                                       housing and neighborhoods in the community. The Town will also
                                                       seek to achieve the following quantified objectives for major housing
                                                       activities shown in Table H-2. The quantified objectives for new
                                                       housing construction represents 10 percent of the lower and
                                                       moderate income development potential and 25 percent of the
                                                       above moderate income development potential identified in the
                                                       land inventory. This conservative estimate reflects local housing
                                                       market trends and the loss of Redevelopment Agency resources for
                                                       housing projects.
                                        Table H-2
                                        Quantified Objectives by Income Category, 2014–2021
                                        Activity             Extremely Very          Low     Moderate       Above         Total
                                                             Low                 Low                        Moderate
                                        Construction         37                  37  37      205            464           780
                                        Rehabilitation       10                  10  10      0              0             30
                                        Preservation         10                  10  10      0              0             30
                                        Source: Town of Yucca Valley, October 2012.
3-12 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN


This page intentionally left blank
4         CIRCULATION ELEMENT
The Town of Yucca Valley is committed to providing its residents,
visitors, and workers with an efficient and effective circulation
system. The Circulation Element addresses the location and extent of
existing and proposed major infrastructure, including thoroughfares,
transportation routes, multimodal transportation options, air
transportation, and the availability of utilities. It also provides
guidance for the provision of other infrastructure needed to serve
the Town.
The goals and policies of this Element affect the Town’s physical,
social, and economic environment because they impact the
settlement pattern of residents and areas for economic activity. The
Circulation Element is not solely a transportation plan; it also        A view of SR-247.
addresses the adequacy and related infrastructure for public and
quasi-public utilities.
Purpose of the Circulation Element
The state mandates that the Circulation Element identify and plan for
the circulation needs of the Town. The intent of its goals and policies
are to safely move people, goods, and utilities throughout Town.
The Circulation Element is complementary to the Land Use Element.
It provides for a transportation network and utilities framework that
supports the uses identified in the Land Use Plan, Figure LU-1 of the
Land Use Element. This element recognizes the Town’s priority to
balance growth with the preservation of the desert environment by
providing a plan that maintains and strengthens current
infrastructure while expanding proportionately to the Town’s
growth.
Because mobile sources (e.g., vehicles) contribute to air pollution and
greenhouse gas emissions and consume energy resources, the
Circulation Element also corresponds to the Open Space and
Conservation Element.
Relationship to Other Documents
The Circulation Element is informed by several documents that guide
federal, state, regional planning in this area:
Surface Transportation Assistance Act (STAA)
National act that identifies STAA-designated truck routes throughout
the nation.
Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) Regional
Transportation Plan (RTP) and Sustainable Communities Strategy (SCS)
Lays out a plan to meet the region’s transportation, housing,
economic, and environmental needs while lowering greenhouse gas
                                                                                 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 4-1

                                              emissions. Additionally, this document guides investment of regional
                                              transportation dollars toward circulation infrastructure.
                                              San Bernardino County Congestion Management Program
                                              Program that monitors congestion and guides transportation impact
                                              requirements within the county.
                                              San Bernardino County Non-Motorized Transportation Plan
                                              Identifies connectivity and facilities to facilitate nonmotorized travel
                                              within the county.
                                              Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan (ACLUP)
                                              The Yucca Valley Airport is a major transportation facility and
                                              geographic feature in Town. The ACLU specifies a plan for the orderly
                                              growth of the airport and the surrounding area.
                                              4.1 Roadway Classifications
  Constraints Based Planning: Evaluative      Using a constraints-based planning process, five roadway
  process that considers funding availability classifications were developed that will serve the mobility needs of
  and environmental and political constraints the Town. The Yucca Valley Circulation Element Roadway
  in order to make recommendations for the    Classifications are shown on Figure C-1. Characteristics of these
  transportation plan. Choices must be made   roadway classifications are described below.
  that balance these constraints with the
  values and vision of the Town. Constraints  Arterial Roadways / Highways (Two, Four, or Six Lanes)
  based planning will allow Yucca Valley to
  plan for infrastructure transportation that Paved roadways that are designed to move large volumes of traffic
  can be implemented and maintained in the
                                              and provide a high level of mobility between major residential,
  future.
                                              employment, and activity centers. These facilities also provide
                                              regional mobility, connecting different portions of the region to each
                                              other through the Town of Yucca Valley. These roadways may or may
                                              not include Class II bicycle lanes.
                                              Collector Roadways (Two Lanes)
                                              Paved roadways intended to “collect” traffic and people from local
                                              roadways and carry them to arterial roadways and highways. These
                                              roadways may or may not include Class II bicycle lanes.
                                              Industrial Roadways
                                              Industrial Roadways function similarly to Collector Roadways, but
                                              they serve industrial areas. As such, they need to be paved and
                                              designed to accommodate larger vehicles and larger vehicle turning
                                              radii.
                                              Local Streets
                                              Local Streets serve predominantly residential adjacent properties
                                              and should enhance community livability. Speeds should be low and
                                              these facilities should discourage through traffic use. Local streets
                                              can be either paved or unpaved, depending on the type of
4-2 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                   CIRCULATION
development they serve, the amount of development they serve,
and the total traffic volumes expected on these facilities.
Although local streets are not specifically identified on Figure C-1,
they provide additional connectivity throughout Town and can
provide local parallel access to regional routes in the Town. One
primary example of this is around the golf course area, where local
streets such as Yucca Trail and Sunland Drive provide access to the
north, east, west, and south without using highway facilities.
Unpaved (Rural Local) Roadways
Low volume roadways that serve limited development in rural areas
of the Town.
4.2 Levels of Service
Level of service (LOS) is a general measure of traffic operating
conditions where a letter grade, from A (no congestion) to F (high
levels of congestion), is assigned. LOS E represents “at capacity”
operations.
These grades represent the perspective of drivers and are an
indication of the comfort and convenience associated with driving as
well as speed, travel time, traffic interruptions, and freedom to
maneuver. The level of service grades are generally defined as
follows:
     •   LOS A represents free flow travel for vehicles. Individual
         users are virtually unaffected by others in the traffic stream. Avalon Avenue is a collector roadway with a
                                                                         level of service of C or better north of the
     •   LOS B represents stable flow, but the presence of other         intersection with SR-62.
         users in the traffic stream begins to be noticeable.
     •   LOS C represents a range in which the influence of traffic
         density on operations becomes noticeable. The ability to
         maneuver within the traffic stream and to select an
         operating speed is now clearly affected by the presence of
         other vehicles.
     •   LOS D borders on unstable flow. Speeds and ability to
         maneuver are severely restricted because of traffic
         congestion.
     •   LOS E represents unstable operating conditions at or near
         the capacity level where maneuverability is severely limited.
     •   LOS F is used to define forced or a breakdown traffic flow
         where unsignalized and signalized intersections exceed 50
         and 80 seconds of delay, respectively.
                                                                                     4-3 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                             Table C-1 identifies the LOS thresholds for each roadway
                                             classification for the Town of Yucca:
                                               Table C-1
                                               Daily Roadway Segment Capacity (Maximum Trips)
                                              Facility Type             LOS A LOS B LOS C LOS D                          LOS E
                                              Unpaved Road              -            -         -              500        -
                                              Local Road                -            -         -              1,500      2,000
                                              Collector                 900          2,000     6,800          14,100     17,400
                                              Industrial                900          2,000     6,800          14,100     17,400
                                              Arterial (2-lanes,
                                                                        -            -         9,700          17,600     18,700
                                              undivided)
                                              Arterial / Highway
                                                                        -            -         17,500         27,400     28,900
                                              (4-lanes, undivided)
                                              Arterial / Highway
                                                                        -            -         19,200         35,400     37,400
                                              (4-lanes, divided)
                                              Arterial / Highway (6-
                                                                        -            -         27,100         53,200     56,000
                                              lanes, divided)
                                               Source: 2000 Highway Capacity Manual and FHWA guidelines for roadway paving.
                                             Levels of Service Exceptions
  Right- of-Way (ROW): The land on which a   Since the Town does not have significant funding to implement
  roadway and/or utilities are located.      extensive infrastructure, it will need flexibility in maintaining service
  Highway and utility right-of-ways are      levels. Using a constraints-based planning process the Town can
  available to be implemented and            create a list of “protected” intersections and roadway segments
  maintained by the agency having            where it is infeasible to provide the service standards in this Element
  jurisdiction over that specific roadway or until appropriate funding is available. Additionally, flexible service
  utility.                                   level standards can be used when there is limited right-of-way,
                                             where a local plan may have more pressing needs, where there are
                                             environmental constraints, or when other factors make
                                             implementing infrastructure infeasible or undesirable.
4-4 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                                                               Aberdeen Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       +)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        41'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                               Ô
                                                                                                               A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                       YUCCA MESA
                                                                                                                              Rural
                                                                                                                              Mixed
                                                                                                                             Use SPA                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !  " 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           +) *6# 78
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #.'2+5+&'& 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        	
 9
                                                                                                           Skyline Ranch Rd                                                         Buena Vista Dr                                                                                                                         +) *6# 78
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #.'2+5+&'& 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           13'1+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                # ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   8 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #.'2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5 +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               &' &8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           13'1+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                # ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #.'2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           8  9
          P I O N E E R TO W N
                                                                                                                                                             s
                                                                                                                                                     anSpringRd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          . &4231+#,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #.'26+3*31+0'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '  &+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  9
                                                                                                                                                  Wom                                                                                               Yucca Mesa Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           /,,'%3/1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #.'28 9
                                                                                                                                              Old                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               /6. 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   +-+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     32
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Barron Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                Paxton Rd
                                                                 Pi
                                                                   on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ¡
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ?   Twentynine Palms Hwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Avalon Ave
                                                                     ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               JOSHUA
                                                                          rto
                                                                              w
                                                                                                                                                                                              ve                                                                                                TREE
                                                                               n
                                                                                                                                                                                       Balsa A
                                                                                   Rd
                                                                                                                  Sunnyslope Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Indio Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              East
                                                                                                                                                                    Sunnyslope Dr
                                        West                                                                                                                                                                                  Side
                                      Side SPA                                                                                                                              Town                                              SPA
                                                                                                                                                                            Center
                                                                  Yucca Trl                                                                                                  SPAYucca        Trl
                                                                                                rl
                                                                                        a   Fe T
                                                                                    Sant
                                                                                                                  Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                   Sage Ave             Joshua Ln
                                                                                                      Onaga Trl
                                                Trl
                                        Nava jo
                                                                                               Acoma Trl
                                  ¡
                                  ?                                                                                                                                                                Palomar Ave
                                                  Kickapoo Trl
                                                                                                                  Joshua Dr                                                                                                     Joshua Dr
                             wy
                          s H
                        lm
                      Pa
                ine
             tyn
        en
      Tw
                                                                                                                               Golden Bee Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                      Joshua L
                                                                                                                                                                                              n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,,4231#3' 2(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4341'1/#  &6# 7%,#22+(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                +%#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3+/. 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .''&'&3/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #. &,'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3* '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           5'*+%4,#131+02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          )' .'1# 3' & #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         # 1'24,3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  /(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3* '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        $4+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,&/43/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3*''.'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #. &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #00,+%#$,' 1')+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          /.# ,0,# . 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        224- ' 2#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1/ #&6#72
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #1'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                /0'1#3+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .)
                                                                                                                                                                                    San Andreas Rd                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       # 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           '5',
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               / (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ' 15 +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            / 1$' 33' 1
MORONGO
 VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TYV-01 2/4/2014
                                                                                                                                     JO S H UA T R E E NAT IO N AL PAR K                                                                                                                                                                                      Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           /41%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '*1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ((
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            34&7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   	   0      1,500      3,000             6,000

                                      This page intentionally left blank.
4-6 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                  CIRCULATION
4.3 Complete Streets
The California Complete Streets Act (AB 1358) of 2008 was signed          Complete Streets: According to the
into law on September 30, 2008. Beginning January 1, 2011, AB 1358        National Complete Streets Coalition,
requires circulation elements to address the transportation system        complete streets are a means by which, “…
from a multimodal perspective. The bill states that streets, roads, and   planners and engineers (can) build road
highways must “meet the needs of all users in a manner suitable to        networks that are safer, more livable, and
the rural, suburban, or urban context of the general plan.” Essentially,  welcoming to everyone…. Instituting a
this bill requires a circulation element to plan for multimodal           complete streets policy ensures that
transportation accommodating all modes of transportation where            transportation planners and engineers
                                                                          consistently design and operate the entire
appropriate, including walking, biking, car travel, and transit.
                                                                          roadway with all users in mind – including
                                                                          bicyclists, public transportation vehicles
The Complete Streets Act also requires circulation elements to
                                                                          and riders, and pedestrians of all ages and
consider the multiple users of the transportation system, including       abilities.”
children, adults, seniors, and the disabled. For further clarity, AB 1358
tasks the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research to release
guidelines for compliance with this legislation by January 1, 2014.
Implementation of complete streets principles should be tailored to
the individual jurisdiction and the individual roadway. For example, a
complete street project that is similar in nature to the 3rd Street
Promenade in Santa Monica is likely not appropriate or desirable in
desert communities in the Morongo Basin. Therefore, the complete
streets approach for Yucca Valley focuses on a network-based
approach that has been tailored to the needs of the Town.
As part of a network-based approach, the Town has identified (and         Network-Based Complete Streets:
will implement through Master Plan updates) a complete network for        Combines individual travel mode networks
each travel mode and will work to deliver infrastructure to support       into one multimodal transportation system,
these modes. Key implementation measures include:                         integrating infrastructure where
                                                                          appropriate, ultimately ensuring that all
      •   Implementing the Trails System identified in the Parks and      users can safely and efficiently access their
          Recreation Master Plan (2008);                                  destination.
      •   Developing a comprehensive bicycle network;
      •   Completing pedestrian infrastructure, as appropriate, and
          providing safe and accessible pedestrian facilities in high-
          use areas;
      •   Coordinating with Morongo Basin Transit Authority (MBTA)
          to provide safe and convenient transit service to the area.
Yucca Valley’s complete streets network comprises four types of
facilities—vehicular, pedestrian, bicycle, and public transit.
This complete streets approach will enable Yucca Valley residents to
choose which travel mode best suits them. It also will ensure that
streets are designed with the user in mind—accommodating for
children, the elderly, bicyclists, and transit users.
                                                                                     Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 4-7

                                                    The graphic below is an example of how complete streets can be
                                                    designed to incorporate multiple modes of transportation.
                  Complete Streets incorporate pedestrian, bicycle, and automobile amenities into a user friendly multimodal roadway.
                                                    Bicycle Facilities
                                                    Bicycle facilities consist of Class I, Class II, and Class III facilities.
                                                    Currently, the Town only has Class III facilities, as summarized in the
                                                    Fehr and Peers Existing Conditions Report: Yucca Valley General Plan
                                                    Update (2012).
                                                    Proposed bicycle facilities are shown in Figure C-2, Proposed Bicycle
                                                    Facilities.
                                                    Class I
                                                    Bike path providing completely separated right-of-way designated
                                                    for the exclusive use of bicycles and pedestrians.
                                                    In Yucca Valley, Class I facilities will primarily be implemented
                                                    through the Parks and Recreation Master Plan (2008). Future bicycle
                                                    facilities have also been identified through the San Bernardino Count
                                                    Non-Motorized Transportation Plan (2011).
                                                    Class II
                                                    Bikeway that provides designated lanes for the use of bicycles
                                                    through the use of striping on the roadway and signage designations
                                                    for the facility.
                                                    In Yucca Valley, this General Plan and the San Bernardino County
                                                    Non-Motorized Transportation Plan envision a system of bicycle
                                                    lanes on roadways that will connect the activity centers of the Town
        Cross sections for typical Class I, II, and to the Town’s residents, as shown on Figure C-2, Proposed Bicycle
        III bicycle facilities.
                                                    Facilities.
                                                    Class III
                                                    Bikeway providing route designation by signage. Roadways are
                                                    shared between bicyclists and motorists.
4-8 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                        CIRCULATION
In Yucca Valley, Class III facilities are envisioned to be implemented
on small segments of roadway that bridge gaps in the Class II and
Class I roadway network. This includes Class III facilities on Yucca
Trail, Baron Drive, and several other roadways, as shown on Figure C-
2, Proposed Bicycle Facilities.
In addition to the future expansion of bicycle connectivity shown on
Figure C-2, there is a desire to better connect the northern plateau
area of the Town to the center of Town. However, SR-247 is the only
connecting facility between the two areas. The Town will continue to
look for opportunities to provide more direct bicycle connectivity in
this area.
Pedestrian Paths and Sidewalks
Pedestrian paths are primarily developed as part of the roadway and
trail systems of a town and reflect the interconnected nature of
circulation and transportation systems as a whole. Constructing wide
streets increases the distance a pedestrian must travel to cross a
street, thereby making it inconvenient for public use and inhibiting
pedestrian circulation in the Town. Currently, limited continuous
sidewalks are provided along major routes in the Town. Sections of
discontinuous sidewalks exist, but most roads throughout Yucca
Valley lack sidewalks.
The Parks and Recreation Master Plan (2008) identifies future
recreational and bike trails within the Town that would not only
provide recreation opportunities but could also be used to connect
the pedestrian network throughout Town. In addition to connecting
available pedestrian resources, the Town should also prioritize the
completion of sidewalks along commercial retail areas to provide
better access for pedestrians. Enhanced pedestrian crossings and
sidewalks should also be considered in areas where high pedestrian
demand occurs (such as schools) and in the Old Town Specific Plan
area.
Multiuse Trails
Multiuse trails are facilities that can be used by bicycles, pedestrians,
equestrians, and other recreational users. The Town currently has
one multiuse trail along San Andreas Road. Due to the recreational
nature of the trail and its connection to other riding trails throughout
Town, this trail is also discussed in Open Space and Conservation
Element Section 5.2 and is shown on Figures OSC-2, Parks and
Recreational Trails, and C-2, Proposed Bicycle Facilities. Future multiuse
trails will be implemented through the Town’s Trails Master Plan,
which will address proposed section designs and recommended
strategies to develop trails using a combination of both public right-
of-way and private lands.
                                                                           Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 4-9

                                       This page intentionally left blank.
4-10 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                Aberdeen Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Figure C-2
                                                                                                                     Ô
                                                                                                                     A
                                                                                                                                                                                                          YUCCA MESA                                                                                                                                       BICYCLE FACILITIES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Future Class I Bike Path
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Future Class II Bike Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Future Class III Bike Route
                                                                                                                 Skyline Ranch Rd                                                                    Buena Vista Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Future Multi-Use Trail
          P I O N E E R TO W N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Town Limits
                                                                                                                                                                              s
                                                                                                                                                                      anSpringRd
                                                                                                                                                                   Wom                                                                                                   Yucca Mesa Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PARKS
                                                                                                                                                               Old                                                                                                                                                                                             1       Essig Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2       Community Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3       Machris Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4       Jacobs Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5       Paradise Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       South Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Barron Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Paxton Rd                                                                                                                                                     7       North Park
                                                                      Pi
                                                                        on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ¡
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ?   Twentynine Palms Hwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               8       Sunnyslope Park BMX Track
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Avalon Ave
                                                                          ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    JOSHUA
                                                                               rto
                                                                                   w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ve                                                                                                  TREE                                              OTHER OPEN SPACE
                                                                                    n
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Balsa A
                                                                                        Rd
                                                                                                                11      Sunnyslope Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Indio Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                     Sunnyslope Dr
                                                                                                                                   10                      8                                                                                                             18                                                                                    9       Pop Rauch Park (Tri Valley Little League)
                                                                                                                                        9                        2
                                         7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10      Brehm Youth Park/ Boys and Girls Club
                                                                       Yucca Trl
                                                                                                   12rl
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Yucca Trl                                                                                                                                                11      Desert Christ Park (Desert Christ Park Foundation)
                                                      13                                         Fe T
                                                                                         Sant
                                                                                             a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12      Remembrance Park
                                                                                                                        Palm Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                               13      Golf Course (Semi-Private)
                                                                                                                                                Sage Ave                 Joshua Ln
                                                                                 14                                                             17
                                             Nava jo
                                                     Trl                         4                         Onaga Trl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PUBLIC SCHOOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                      15
                                                                                                    Acoma Trl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               14      Yucca Valley Elementary School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Palomar Ave                                                                                                                                      Onaga Elementary School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                     ¡
                                     ?                 Kickapoo Trl
                                                                                                                        Joshua Dr                                                                                                                Joshua Dr
                             s H
                                wy                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             16      La Contenta Middle School
                           lm
                         Pa
             ty   nin
                     e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         17      Yucca Valley High School
        en
      Tw
                                                                                                                                            Golden Bee Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                      1                                                                                                                                                                        18      Black Rock High School
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Joshua L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  n
                                                                                                                                                                                                     San Andreas Rd
MORONGO
 VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                                                                      6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TYV-01 2/4/2014
                                                                                                                                                J O S H U A T R E E N AT I O N A L PA R K                                                                                                                                                                                                     Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Source: Fehr & Peers Traffic Study, 2013   0        1,500    3,000         6,000

                                       This page intentionally left blank.
4-12 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                    CIRCULATION
Transit Facilities
Transit options give users the ability to get to a destination without
relying on the automobile. This also provides other community
benefits, including reduced vehicle miles traveled (VMT). Reducing
VMT will help the Town to achieve their greenhouse gas reduction
target as discussed in the Open Space and Conservation Element,
Section 5.9.
Public transportation services and facilities in Yucca Valley consist of
public bus service, paratransit service, and park-and-ride locations.
Existing transit facilities include the Yucca Valley Transit Center and
Park-and-Ride lot.
Public Bus Service                                                       Yucca Valley Transit Center is the transfer point
                                                                         for Morongo Basin Transit Authority’s bus
Public bus service is provided by the Morongo Basin Transit              routes within Town.
Authority, which enables commuters to travel within the Town and
adjacent cities with minimal transfers. Currently, MBTA operates
buses on five routes. All transit routes within Yucca Valley have a
transfer point at the intermodal Yucca Valley Transit Center near the
intersection of Yucca Trail and Valley Vista.
Additionally, MBTA has provided guidance for including transit             Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT): Vehicle
within facilities development, as outlined in Transit Guidelines in        miles traveled is the metric that identifies
Project Development (MBTA, 2005). These guidelines should be               the total distance traveled in a car per
applied when considering new development to ensure appropriate             driver. VMT drives roadway needs (the more
connectivity and design features to support bus service.                   people who drive, the more capacity and
                                                                           maintenance is needed on the roadway
Paratransit Service                                                        system).
Paratransit is an alternative mode of passenger transportation that
does not follow fixed routes or schedules. Typically, vans or mini-
buses are used to provide paratransit service. Paratransit services
vary considerably on the degree of flexibility they provide their
customers. The most flexible systems offer on-demand, call-up, door-
to-door service from any origin to any destination in a service area.
Private local service providers and MBTA offer door-to-door service.
Park-and-Ride Lots
Park-and-ride lots provide places for people to meet up and carpool
to areas outside of the Town. The Yucca Valley Park-and-Ride facility
is a lighted parking lot at the corner of SR-62 and Kickapoo Trail. This
facility also provides a compressed natural gas refueling station. As
the Town’s population grows, additional park-and-ride locations          Carpoolers who commute using shared vans
would be best sited near the boundaries of Town or adjacent to the       often meet at the Yucca Valley Park-and-Ride
Transit Center.                                                          lot.
                                                                                     Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 4-13

                                              4.4 Efficient Goods and Services
                                                   Movement
                                              The goods or freight movement system in Yucca Valley consists of
                                              designated truck routes. Additionally, the local airport provides
                                              opportunities for additional services to be accommodated. The
                                              operation and service of these facilities are described below.
                                              Furthermore, the Town is located near the Marine Corps Air Ground
                                              Combat Center, and military vehicles, goods, and equipment pass
                                              through town on a frequent basis.
                                              Truck Routes
                                              The Yucca Valley Municipal Code defines and regulates truck routes
                                              within the Town and specifies the ability of trucks to enter areas not
                                              designated as truck routes. State Routes 62 and 247 are designated
                                              truck routes that connect with commercial and industrial areas in
                                              Town. They are also important linkages for the movement of goods
                                              within the state and across the nation. Roadways in the system that
                                              are not designated truck routes are restricted to trucks under five
                                              tons, with the exception of vehicles making pickups or deliveries
                                              within the Town limits.
   Surface Transportation Assistance Act      In addition, SR-62 is a designated STAA Route. This highway receives
   (STAA): Overseen by the Federal Transit    federal funding to maintain the roadway surface to accommodate
   Administration and Federal Highway         STAA-specific vehicles that meet particular weight and truck size
   Administration, the act provides funds for requirements. Designated truck and STAA routes in Town are shown
   highway and mass transit projects.         on Figure C-3, Truck Routes.
                                              Aviation Facilities
                                              Yucca Valley is home to Yucca Valley Airport, a privately owned
                                              airport available to the public for private aircraft and aircraft
                                              maintenance and flight training. The closest airport offering
                                              commercial flights is the Palm Springs International Airport,
                                              approximately 30 miles south of Yucca Valley. This airport provides
                                              nonstop service primarily to the Western United States and Canada.
                                              MBTA maintains a few routes that stop at the Palm Springs
                                              International Airport. Yucca Valley Airport is also discussed in the
                                              Land Use Element, Section 2.3.
4-14 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                                            Aberdeen Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Figure C-3
                                                                                                             Ô
                                                                                                             A
                                                                                                                                                                                    YUCCA MESA                                                                                                                       TRUCK ROUTES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Truck
                                                                                                         Skyline Ranch Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Surface Transportation Assistance Act Route
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (Terminal Access)
                                                                                                                                                                                 Buena Vista Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Town
          P I O N E E R TO W N
                                                                                                                                                          s
                                                                                                                                                  anSpringRd
                                                                                                                                               Wom                                                                                             Yucca Mesa Rd
                                                                                                                                           Old
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Barron Dr
                                                                                                                                                                             Paxton Rd
                                                               Pi
                                                                 on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ¡
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ?   Twentynine Palms Hwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Avalon Ave
                                                                   ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          JOSHUA
                                                                        rto
                                                                            w
                                                                                                                                                                                           ve                                                                                              TREE
                                                                             n
                                                                                                                                                                                    Balsa A
                                                                                 Rd
                                                                                                                Sunnyslope Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Indio Ave
                                                                                                                                                                 Sunnyslope Dr
                                                                Yucca Trl                                                                                                         Yucca Trl
                                                                                              rl
                                                                                      a   Fe T
                                                                                  Sant
                                                                                                                Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                Sage Ave             Joshua Ln
                                                                                                    Onaga Trl
                                              Trl
                                      Nava jo
                                                                                             Acoma Trl
                                  ¡
                                  ?                                                                                                                                                             Palomar Ave
                                                Kickapoo Trl
                                                                                                                Joshua Dr                                                                                                  Joshua Dr
                             wy
                          s H
                        lm
                      Pa
                ine
             tyn
        en
      Tw
                                                                                                                            Golden Bee Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                   Joshua L
                                                                                                                                                                                           n
                                                                                                                                                                                 San Andreas Rd
MORONGO
 VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TYV-01 2/4/2014
                                                                                                                                  JO S H UA T R E E NAT IO N AL PAR K                                                                                                                                                                                Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Source: Caltrans, 2012   0      1,500      3,000      6,000

                                       This page intentionally left blank.
4-16 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                       CIRCULATION
4.5 Traffic Management
There are three common ways for cities and towns to better manage
traffic:
     •    Traffic signal coordination;
     •    Traffic calming on neighborhood streets;
     •    Paving nonpaved roadways.
Currently, the Town has implemented signal timing improvements to
improve the efficiency of its system. Signal timing improvements
consists of retiming traffic signals to improve vehicle progression
through the Town (e.g., drivers will encounter few stops and will
experience a more consistent speed). However, the Town has limited
traffic calming applications on public streets, and the Town has a
significant amount of unpaved roadways that will require paving or
other air quality mitigation measures when future development
occurs.
Traffic Signal Coordination
One of the most cost-effective means to enhance traffic flow,
improve safety, improve air quality, and manage traffic speeds is
through signal coordination. This approach develops specific signal
timings and implements appropriate signal control infrastructure to
reduce the number of stops and improve vehicle progression
through a corridor.
Traffic Calming
Traffic calming includes traffic education, enforcement, and
engineering, in an effort to reduce vehicle speeds, improve safety,
and enhance quality of life. Although traffic calming does include
education and enforcement, most traffic calming applications focus
on engineering measures to change driver behavior (such as
encouraging vehicles to travel at a lower rate of speed).
Applications of traffic calming include:
     •    Improvements to the roadway, such as curb extensions (e.g.,
          extending the curb at intersections to reduce the pedestrian
          crossing distance and narrow the roadway), chicanes
          (midblock curb extensions to narrow the roadway), raised
          crosswalks, raised or textured intersections, or other speed-
          reducing measures; and
     •    Modifying appropriate intersections to remove traffic signals
          or stop signs and construct roundabouts or traffic circles.
                                                                        Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 4-17

                                              Traffic calming could be considered within the Town on local and
                                              paved neighborhood streets and other areas where high levels of
                                              pedestrian activity take place (such as the Civic Center, schools,
                                              parks, and Old Town). This will help improve the quality of life for
                                              residents by managing the speed of traffic in appropriate areas.
                                              Paving Nonpaved Roadways
                                              Residents and businesses in the Town of Yucca Valley are served by a
                                              combination of paved and unpaved roadways. Roughly half of the
                                              Town’s roadways are paved. As the Town grows, new development
                                              will be encouraged to provide paved roadways.
                                              Though paving roadways is an important part of improving mobility
                                              infrastructure, it is equally important to maintain the character of this
                                              desert community. With limited funding, the Town will need to work
                                              with future development to strike a balance between maintaining
                                              community character, accessibility, and new growth.
                                              Using the capacities identified in Table C-1, the Town should work
  Public works staff paving a road in Town.   with future development to identify appropriate roadways to be
                                              paved. Paving roadways will reduce air particulates, reduce noise,
                                              and improve mobility for the Town.
                                              GOAL C 1
                                              A constraints-based circulation system that balances the needs of
                                              goods movement, nonautomotive use, and complete streets.
                                              Roadway Classification Policies
                                              Policy C 1-1        Utilize a constraints-based planning process to
                                                                  evaluate future transportation improvements.
                                              Policy C 1-2        Pursue      funding,    including     updating     the
                                                                  transportation impact mitigation fee program, to
                                                                  assist in implementing the transportation system
                                                                  by expanding its roadway capacity, pedestrian
                                                                  sidewalk facilities, bicycle facilities, and trail
                                                                  facilities.
                                              Policy C 1-3        Strive to maintain vehicle level of service (LOS) D on
                                                                  all roadways within the Town. Utilize the roadway
   Protected Intersection and Roadways:                           capacities, as identified in Table C-1, to evaluate
   Intersections or roadways that have been                       roadway operations.
   approved to operate at a lesser level of
   service due to the inability to physically Policy C 1-4        Maintain protected intersections and roadways
   expand the right-of-way.                                       where vehicle capacity will remain less than the
                                                                  service goal outlined in Table C-1.
                                              Policy C 1-5        Prioritize low-cost transportation enhancements,
                                                                  such as signal timing improvements, that maximize
4-18 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                      CIRCULATION
               the Town’s return on infrastructure investment
               related to the efficiency of the transportation
               system.
Policy C 1-6   Protect right-of-ways for SR-62 and SR-247, major
               arterials, collectors, residential streets, and for all
               other planned infrastructure as shown on the
               figures above.
Policy C 1-7   Encourage development designs that integrate
               multiple modes of access, including pedestrian,
               bicycle, and public transportation.
Complete Streets Policies
Policy C 1-8   Apply       complete      street     strategies   that
               accommodate pedestrian, bicycle, and transit
               modes whenever practicable and feasible.
Policy C 1-9   Require sidewalk improvements concurrent with
               new development where commercial and school
               uses are planned and where residential densities
               exceed two units per acre, or as required by the
               Planning Commission.
Policy C 1-10  Encourage MBTA to provide enhanced bus service
               to employment areas outside of the Town, such as
               the Coachella Valley or other nearby areas in the
               County of San Bernardino.
Policy C 1-11  Encourage MBTA to work with area religious
               facilities or other sites where underutilized parking
               or hours of operation could provide opportunities
               for implementing shared park-and-ride facilities.
Policy C 1-12  Encourage MBTA to implement regional
               transportation solutions that reduce vehicle miles
               traveled and greenhouse gas emissions.
Policy C 1-13  Work with new development to implement MBTA’s
               Transit Guidelines in Project Development (MBTA,
               2005) as appropriate.
Policy C 1-14  Encourage employers to support Transportation
               Demand Management techniques, such as bus
               transit passes or other measures that reduce
               reliance on the single-occupant vehicle.
Efficient Goods and Services Movement Policies
Policy C 1-15  Design designated truck routes such that the
               pavement, roadway width, and curb return radii
               support anticipated heavy vehicle use.
                                                                       Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 4-19

                                       Policy C 1-16 Support and work with Caltrans to coordinate
                                                     signals along SR-62 and SR-247 in Town.
                                       Policy C 1-17 Ensure funding is available to implement and
                                                     maintain signal coordination.
                                       Policy C 1-18 Maintain truck route designations to support heavy
                                                     vehicle use and connections to the Yucca Valley
                                                     Airport as noted on Figure C-3.
                                       Traffic Management Policies
                                       Policy C 1-19 Require traffic calming techniques in residential
                                                     neighborhoods and in Special Policy Areas to slow
                                                     and manage traffic volumes as deemed appropriate
                                                     by the Town Engineer.
                                       Policy C 1-20 Require future development to pave roadways that
                                                     will serve 500 or more daily trips as noted in Table
                                                     C-1 unless paving of that facility is considered
                                                     infeasible by the Town, there is no funding for the
                                                     improvement, or when the majority of the residents
                                                     on that facility desire it to be unpaved.
                                       Policy C 1-21 Pursue funding to pave unpaved roadways where
                                                     the traffic volume exceeds 500 daily trips unless
                                                     paving of that facility is infeasible or when the
                                                     majority of the residents on that facility desire it to
                                                     be unpaved.
                                       Policy C 1-22 Minimize dust emissions on existing and new
                                                     unpaved roads where traffic volumes exceed 500
                                                     daily trips.
                                       Policy C 1-23 Work with future development between Yucca
                                                     Trail, Palomar Avenue, La Contenta Road, and
                                                     Juarez Drive to implement appropriate roadway,
                                                     bicycle, and pedestrian connectivity based on the
                                                     proposed land uses.
                                       Policy C 1-24 Work with the park service to the south of Town to
                                                     appropriately provide connectivity to the Town’s
                                                     roadway network.
                                       Policy C 1-25 Maintain truck routes through town for efficient
                                                     freight transportation service to businesses and
                                                     industry while limiting impacts to residents and
                                                     visitors.
4-20 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                         CIRCULATION
4.6 Utilities Infrastructure
Future land use patterns and rates of development will impact the
infrastructure for the Town’s utilities. As the population increases, the
demand for these services will also increase. It is important to ensure
that demand for these services does not exceed the supply and that
the expansion of infrastructure is sufficiently addressed to
accommodate future needs.
The Town of Yucca Valley is jointly responsible for coordinating with
private and quasi-public agencies offering pubic services such as
telephone, gas and electricity, in compliance with the General Plan.
The Town’s Capital Improvement Program prioritizes and provides
annual funding for infrastructure improvements. California
Government Code Sections 65302 (a), (b), and (e) require that the
local planning agency “annually review the capital improvement
program of the city or county and the local public works projects of
other local agencies for their consistency with the General Plan.”
Utility services in Yucca Valley include natural gas, electricity, solid
waste disposal, water, and storm drains, as well as
telecommunication providers. Water and wastewater are discussed
in Section 5.4 of the Open Space and Conservation Element. Storm
drains are discussed in Section 6.3 of the Safety Element.
Gas Service
Natural gas service is provided by Southern California Gas Company.
Transmission and distribution gas lines run throughout the
community along many of the existing streets. Due to rough terrain
major gas lines do not exist in the southwest and northwest portions
of the Town. Propane tanks are used by residents in these areas to
provide gas for heating and cooking.
Electrical Service
Electrical service is provided in the Yucca Valley area by Southern
California Edison (SCE). SCE has adequate capacity to service the
Town, but businesses and residents can help to maintain sustainable,
cost effective service by conserving energy. SCE offers rebate and
incentive programs to residents and businesses that encourage the
conservation of energy through low consumption and solar
partnerships. Energy resources are also discussed in the Open Space
and Conservation Element, Section 5.7.
Solid Waste Disposal Service
Waste disposal service is mandatory in Yucca Valley. The Town
contracts with Burrtec Waste Industries for waste removal for both
residential and commercial properties. Regionally, the Town is a
member of the Mojave Desert and Mountain Solid Waste Joint
                                                                          Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 4-21

                                       Powers Authority and participates in the County Waste Disposal
                                       Agreement as a member of the Education and Outreach Committee.
                                       As discussed in the Safety Element, hazardous waste disposal is
                                       provided in Yucca Valley by the County of San Bernardino.
                                       Telecommunications
                                       Adequate telecommunication facilities are available to serve the
                                       needs of the Town. Time Warner Cable offers cable, telephone, and
                                       internet service to Yucca Valley. There are also several satellite and
                                       wireless providers that offer the same services to residents and
                                       businesses in the area.
                                       GOAL C 2
                                       A full range of public utilities and related services that provide for the
                                       immediate and long-term needs of the community.
                                       Policies
                                       Policy C 2-1      Work with utility providers in the planning,
                                                         designing, and siting of distribution and support
                                                         facilities to comply with the standards of the
                                                         General Plan and Development Code.
                                       Policy C 2-2      Work with utility providers to increase service
                                                         capacity as demand increases.
                                       Policy C 2-3      Coordinate public infrastructure improvements
                                                         through the Town’s Capital Improvement Program.
                                       Policy C 2-4      Encourage the shared use of right-of-way,
                                                         transmission corridors, and other appropriate
                                                         measures to minimize the visual impact of utilities
                                                         infrastructure throughout Town.
                                       Policy C 2-5      Require that approval of new development be
                                                         contingent upon the project’s ability to secure
                                                         appropriate infrastructure services.
4-22 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN


This page intentionally left blan
                                                                 OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
5         OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
          ELEMENT
The Town of Yucca Valley is committed to preserving the desert
environment and its natural resources, which are important to the
heritage, character, economy, and overall quality of life of the
community. This Element of the General Plan addresses the balance
of development and growth with resource protection and
preservation issues related to open space, water resources, air
quality, biological resources, cultural and paleontological resources,
soils, and scenic resources within the Town limits.
Purpose of the Open Space and Conservation Element
The Open Space and Conservation Element is a combination of two         Clear sky above Yucca Valley.
state-mandated General Plan elements that provide direction
regarding the preservation and conservation of natural resources
and open space, including plants and animal wildlife, water bodies
and watersheds, forests, soils, minerals, and energy conservation.
The Town lies outside of areas that have been mapped by the
California Geologic Survey for mineral resource classification, and the
United States Geologic Survey does not identify any mines,
processing plants, or locations of potential mining resources within
Town. The Town of Yucca Valley likely does not contain mineral
resources of statewide or regional importance, and, therefore these
resources are not addressed further in this Element.
The Open Space and Conservation Element establishes a framework          Open Space: Any parcel or area of public
that balances private property interests, population growth, and         or private land or water that is essentially
development with the long-term conservation, enhancement, and            unimproved and undeveloped.
utilization of the Town of Yucca Valley’s natural resources and desert
character. The Element also ensures the comprehensive and long-          Conservation: The protection,
range preservation and management of open space lands in and             preservation, development, and utilization
around the Town for the protection of natural, scenic, and               of natural resources.
recreational resources. Additionally, the Open Space and
Conservation Element addresses the protection of cultural resources,
including paleontological resources, archaeological resources,
historic resources, and Native American cultural resources. Air quality
and water resources are also discussed because they are important
resources and vital components of a healthy environment and
thriving community. This framework is intended to guide
development and conservation, providing the opportunity for full
development of privately held lands pursuant to the Land Use
Element while complying with federal and state law in the
preservation of biological and other natural resources. Correlation
between the goals and policies in this Element are closely tied to the
Land Use and Safety Elements.
                                                                                  Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 5-1

                                      Relationship to Other Documents
                                      Several plans and ordinances exist that specify the standards and
                                      regulations by which future development in the Town may occur
                                      and that also provide a conservation framework for this Element. In
                                      addition, several areas within or adjacent to the Town have been
                                      designated conservation reserves or preserves and work in concert
                                      with the following plans and ordinances to manage the area’s open
                                      space resources:
                                      Parks and Recreation Master Plan
                                      The Parks and Recreation Master Plan is based on the vision that
                                      recreation facilities and open space are important resources within
                                      the Town of Yucca Valley, enhancing community health, enriching
                                      the lives of residents, and contributing to a unique community
                                      identity and quality of life. The plan provides a road map for planning
                                      current and future community park facilities and is an
                                      implementation tool of the General Plan, providing strategies for
                                      addressing the General Plan’s goals and policies.
                                      Plant Protection and Management Ordinance and California Desert
                                      Native Plants Act
                                      The Town established the Plant Protection and Management
                                      Ordinance to guide the removal of regulated native plants within the
                                      Town. This ordinance provides regulations and guidelines for the
                                      management of the plant resources in the Town.
                                      The California Desert Native Plants Act was passed in 1981 and is
                                      administered by the California Department of Fish and Wildlife
                                      (CDFW). This act provides protection for nonlisted California desert
                                      native plants from unlawful harvesting on both public and private
                                      lands within Imperial Inyo, Kern, Los Angeles, Mono, Riverside, San
                                      Bernardino, and San Diego counties. The California Desert Native
                                      Plants Act prohibits a person from harvesting, transporting, selling,
                                      or possessing specific native desert plants unless that person has a
                                      valid permit or wood receipt and the required tags and seals.
                                      This act does not apply to the clearing or removal of native plants
                                      from a canal, lateral ditch, survey line, building site, or road or other
                                      right-of-way by the landowner or his or her agent, if the native plants
                                      are not to be transported from the land or offered for sale.
                                      Additionally, this act does not apply to a public agency or to a
                                      publicly or privately owned public utility when acting in the
                                      performance of its obligation to provide service to the public.
                                      West Mojave Plan
                                      There are two habitat conservation plans (HCPs) proposed in the
                                      vicinity of the Town—the West Mojave Plan and the Desert
                                      Renewable Energy Conservation Plan. 1 However, they provide
                                      1
                                        At the time of adoption of this General Plan, neither of these HCPs has been
                                      adopted.
5-2 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                 OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
regional context for natural resources preservation efforts and open
space amenities, and should be monitored by the Town.
The West Mojave Plan (WMP) is an HCP prepared by the Bureau of
Land Management (BLM) that includes BLM-owned lands and covers
approximately 9.3 million acres of the western portion of the Mojave
Desert that is in California, including parts of Inyo, Los Angeles, Kern,
and San Bernardino counties. The purpose of the WMP is to conserve
and protect the desert tortoise and nearly 100 other sensitive plant
and wildlife species as well as the habitats on which these species
depend. Once adopted, the WMP would allow incidental take of
covered species on approximately 3.2 million acres of public lands
and approximately 2.9 million acres of private lands within the WMP
area, and would be consistent with the resource management plans
adopted by each of the region’s five military bases as well as with the
Desert Tortoise Recovery Plan.
Desert Renewable Energy Conservation Plan
The Desert Renewable Energy Conservation Plan (DRECP) covers
approximately 22.5 million acres of federal and nonfederal land in
the California deserts and lands in Imperial, Inyo, Kern, Los Angeles,
Riverside, San Bernardino, and San Diego counties; it is not
applicable to privately held lands within the Town. The Plan is based
on is a collaboration between state (e.g., California Energy
Commission, CDFW) and federal (e.g., BLM, United States Fish and
Wildlife Service) agencies, with input from local governments,
environmental organizations, industry, and other interested parties
to provide effective protection, conservation, and management of
desert ecosystems while allowing for the appropriate development
and timely permitting of renewable energy projects.
5.1 Natural Open Space and Parks
The open space opportunities in Yucca Valley generally fall into two      Natural Open Space: The Town’s Parks and
categories: natural open space and conservation areas and parks. The      Recreation Master Plan defines natural
primary difference between the two relates to the level of activity       open space as undeveloped land primarily
that occurs there and the amount of improvements that are made to         left in its natural state with recreation uses
the area. For example, parks typically include improvements such as       as a secondary objective. It is usually owned
turf areas, playground equipment, or other active recreational            or managed by a governmental agency and
amenities that require improvements to properties to serve a specific     may or may not have public access. This
                                                                          type of land may include wetlands, steep
function. Natural open space areas are typically geared toward more
                                                                          hillsides, or other similar spaces. In some
passive recreational opportunities such as hiking, where the majority     cases, environmentally sensitive areas are
of the terrain remains undisturbed, but minor improvements are            considered open space and can include
made (such as the addition of trails) that allow the community to         wildlife habitats, stream and creek
maintain a diverse range of recreational opportunities within the         corridors, or unique and/or endangered
Town.                                                                     plant species.
Natural Open Space and Conservation Areas
Several large open space areas, typically designated as reserves or
preserves, are close to the Town. The relatively short distance
                                                                                      Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 5-3

                                               between the Town and these areas provides residents with access to
                                               significant open space resources, which complements and enhances
                                               the desert lifestyle and recreational opportunities available to the
                                               Town while also preserving, protecting, and enhancing natural
                                               resources of regional importance. Figure OSC-1, Conservation Areas,
                                               illustrates the locations of these areas as they relate to Yucca Valley.
                                               There are no agricultural, range, or forest lands within the Town
                                               planning area or immediate vicinity not otherwise discussed above,
                                               and therefore these are not addressed further in this element.
                                               Joshua Tree National Park
                                               Joshua Tree National Park, which abuts the southern Town
                                               boundary, is in San Bernardino and Riverside counties and covers
                                               approximately 791,000 acres south and southeast of the Town.
                                               Joshua Tree National Park protects portions of three ecosystems: the
                                               Colorado Desert, the Mojave Desert, and the pinyon and juniper
                                               woodlands in the Little San Bernardino Mountains. A large part of
                                               Joshua Tree National Park (approximately 430,000 acres) has been
                                               designated a wilderness area and is managed by the National Park
                                               Service in accordance with the Wilderness Act.
                                               San Bernardino National Forest
Joshua trees along Onaga Trail.                The San Bernardino National Forest is a federally managed forest
                                               encompassing 823,816 acres, of which 677,982 acres are federal
                                               lands. The forest is made up of two main divisions, the San
                                               Bernardino Mountains on the easternmost of the Transverse Ranges,
  Nature Reserves: Protected areas of
                                               and the San Jacinto and Santa Rosa Mountains on the northernmost
  importance for wildlife, flora, fauna, or
  features of geological or other special      of the Peninsular Ranges. Elevations range from 2,000 to 11,499 feet.
  interest that is reserved and managed for    There are eight official wilderness areas lying within San Bernardino
  conservation. These areas may be             National Forest, including San Gorgonio and Bighorn Mountain,
  designated by government institutions or     which are in close proximity to the Town.
  by private landowners (i.e., conservation
  charities and research institutions).        Big Morongo Canyon Preserve
                                               Big Morongo Canyon Preserve, which abuts the west end and
  Nature Preserves: Large areas of land        southwest corner of the Town, is in the Little San Bernardino
  preserved in its natural state as public     Mountains and covers approximately 31,000 acres, with elevations
  property.
                                               ranging from approximately 600 feet above mean sea level on the
  Permanently Preserved Land:                  canyon bottoms to approximately 3,000 feet above mean sea level
  Permanently protected from development       on the ridgelines. Because of its ecological importance to the region,
  with a perpetual conservation or open        the Big Morongo Canyon Preserve was designated an Area of Critical
  space easement or fee ownership, held by a   Environment Concern by the BLM in 1982. This preserve protects one
  federal, state, or local government or       of the 10 largest cottonwood and willow riparian habitats in
  nonprofit organization for natural resource, California as well as a variety of other ecosystems. Big Morongo
  forestry, agriculture, wildlife, recreation, Canyon Preserve is managed by the BLM, and a small portion—
  historic, cultural, or open space use, or to
                                               approximately 147 acres—is managed under a cooperative
  sustain water quality and living resource
  values.
                                               agreement with San Bernardino County to protect rare and
                                               endangered wildlife, enhance sensitive riparian zones, promote the
                                               growth and restoration of a wide variety of plants, and offer
                                               educational opportunities.
5-4 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure OSC-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CONSERVATION AREAS
                                                                                                                                                                                           T W E N T Y N I NE PA LM S
                                                                                                                                                                                           MARINE CORPS AIR
                                                                                                                                                                                       GROUND COMBAT CENTER                                                                                                                                             Land Ownership
                                                                                                                                         Ô
                                                                                                                                         A
                                          B I G H O R N M O U N TA I N W I L D E R N E S S ( B L M )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Bureau of Land Management
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Local Government
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   State
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   US Forest Service
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   National Park Service
                  Big Bear                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Military
                    Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Conservation Areas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Burns Pinion Ridge Reserve
                                                                                                           Pioneer Mountains
                                                                                                                Preserve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Big Morongo Canyon
                                                                                                                                                                 YUCCA MESA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Bighorn Mountain Wilderness
                                      a
                                      ?                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Johnson Valley Off Highway
                                                                                                             P I O N E E R TO W N                                                                                                                                            Twentynine
                                                                                                                           BU R NS P IN ION
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Palms                                                                           City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   County Boundary
                                                                                                                         RIDGE RES E RV E
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ¡
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ?
                                                                                                                                                     TO W N                   JOSHUA
                                                                                                                                                                                 TREE                                                                                                                                                                              Town Limits
                                                     SA N G O R G O N I O W IL DE R N E S S ( B L M )                                                   OF
                                                                                                                                             YUCCA VALLEY
                                                                                                      MORONGO
                                                                                                                           ¡
                                                                                                                           ?
                                                                                                       VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                              J O S H U A T R E E N AT I O N A L PA R K
ak Glen Preserve                                                                                                   BIG MORONGO CANY ON               County of San Bernardino
                                                                                                                                                       County of Riverside
                                                                                            Mission
                           WHI T EWAT ER CAN YON
                                                                                              Creek
                                                                                            Preserve
                                                      Whitewater
                                                        Preserve
                                                                                                                             Desert Hot
                                                                                                                               Springs
                 Banning
                                    $
                                    `
                                    "
                                    !
              Beaumont                                                                                     Palm
                                                                                                          Springs
                                                                                                                                           Cathedral
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TYV-01 2/4/2014
                                                                                                                                             City
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Feet
                                                                                                                                               Rancho Mirage                                                            Source: USGS, Redlands Institute,2012; County of San Bernardino, 2012; County of Riverside,2012; Bureau of Land Management,2012 0       7,500    15,000          30,000

                                      This page intentionally left blank
5-6 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN
                                                                OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
Burns Piñon Ridge Reserve
The 306-acre Burns Piñon Ridge Reserve is located within the
northwestern limits of the Town. It is characterized by a rugged,
boulder-strewn landscape composed of a series of shallow canyons
and steep, rocky ridges of sculptured granite. The reserve, which
shows little evidence of disturbance from human activities or
grazing, has a diverse mixture of flora and fauna that is characteristic
of its unique location as a transition between the lower desert, the
upper desert, and the mountains as well as transition area between
three floristic regions—the Transverse Range, Sonoran Desert, and
Mojave Desert. Habitats protected on the reserve include pinyon and
juniper woodland with elements of Joshua tree woodland and
montane chaparral, desert wash, and freshwater seep. The Burns           Yucca Valley’s desert climate and open spaces
Piñon Ridge Reserve is a part of the University of California Natural    attract residents and visitors alike.
Land and Water Reserves System.
Pioneertown Mountains Preserve
The Pioneertown Mountains Preserve is northwest of the Town and
covers approximately 25,500 acres from the San Bernardino
Mountains down into the Pioneertown Valley in the Mojave Desert.
Elevations within the Pioneertown Mountains Preserve range from
approximately 4,000 feet in the Pioneertown Valley to approximately
7,800 feet in the San Bernardino Mountains. The Pioneertown
Mountains Preserve supports year-round riparian corridors through
Pipes Canyon and Little Morongo Canyon and provides important
wildlife corridors between Joshua Tree National Park to the south of
the Town and the Bighorn Mountains Wilderness to the north of the
Town. The Pioneertown Mountains Preserve is owned and operated
by the Wildlands Conservancy.
San Gorgonio Wilderness
The San Gorgonio Wilderness is west of the Town boundary and
covers approximately 95,000 acres in Riverside and San Bernardino
counties. The topography within the San Gorgonio Wilderness
changes rapidly from canyons and low, rolling foothills to steep
rugged mountain. Elevations range from approximately 2,300 feet
above mean sea level to approximately 11,500 feet above mean sea
level. With its diverse landscape and large elevation range, the San
Gorgonio Wilderness is a unique transition zone between the desert,
mountain, and coastal ecosystems. The San Gorgonio Wilderness is
managed jointly by the BLM and the United States Forest Service
(USFS).
Proposed Sand to Snow National Monument
The California Desert Protection Act of 2011 proposed the
convergence of the Mojave and Colorado Desert and the San
Bernardino Mountains as the Sand to Snow National Monument. The
area would be located west of the Town and would include
approximately 134,000 acres of federal land between Joshua Tree
National Park and the San Bernardino National Forest, including the
San Gorgonio Wilderness and the Big Morongo Canyon Preserve. The
proposed Sand to Snow National Monument would rise from
                                                                                       Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 5-7

                                      approximately 1,400 feet above mean sea level at the Mojave Desert
                                      floor up to 11,503 feet above mean sea level at San Gorgonio
                                      Mountain. The proposed monument would include one of
                                      California’s most diverse landscapes and would also protect wildlife
                                      corridors between the San Bernardino Mountains, San Jacinto
                                      Mountains, and Joshua Tree National Park. This monument would be
                                      managed jointly by the BLM and the USFS. The Town will continue to
                                      monitor monument planning efforts.
                                      GOAL OSC 1
                                      Conservation, management, and designation of open space areas to
                                      protect environmental resources, guard against environmental
                                      hazards, and provide enhanced recreational opportunities and
                                      aesthetic character for the Town.
                                      Policies
                                      Policy OSC 1-1    Use flood control and utility easement areas to
                                                        develop a multiuse trail system that links parks and
                                                        recreational areas, commercial areas, residential
                                                        areas, and other open space areas.
                                      Policy OSC 1-2    Support regional, state, and federal efforts to
                                                        evaluate, acquire, and conserve open space areas in
                                                        and around Yucca Valley.
                                      Policy OSC 1-3    Collaborate with appropriate agencies and
                                                        organizations to preserve open space resources
                                                        within the Morongo Basin.
                                      Policy OSC 1-4    Offer flexible development standards in exchange
                                                        for providing open space and trail easements or
                                                        right-of-ways.
                                      Policy OSC 1-5    Encourage new development to retain natural open
                                                        space areas as part of project design to the greatest
                                                        extent practicable.
                                      Policy OSC 1-6    Encourage the preservation, integrity, function,
                                                        productivity, and long-term viability of
                                                        environmentally sensitive habitats, wildlife
                                                        corridors, and significant geological features within
                                                        the Town.
                                      Parks
                                      The provision of plentiful, well-designed, and well-maintained parks
                                      and recreation facilities contributes to the quality of life in a
                                      community. Parks fulfill a number of important functions—they
                                      provide green “breathing” spaces that promote healthy lifestyles;
                                      give children and families a place to play and explore; provide areas
5-8 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                   OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
for active sport uses and civic functions; and provide areas for passive
recreation and relaxation. Parks may also incorporate natural features
and visual assets of the landscape, in addition to preserving habitat
areas that are vital to the Town's identity, history, and environmental
health. Other recreational facilities, such as special-purpose facilities,
accessible open spaces, and trails, fulfill specific community needs
that formal developed parks typically cannot provide.
This section contains goals and policies intended to continue the
Town’s efforts to provide a high level of parks and recreation facilities
to Yucca Valley residents and visitors, and provide guidance for new
development to incorporate additional recreational facilities.
This section focuses primarily on the Town’s provision of public park
and recreation facilities, but acknowledges that the abundant
regional amenities and open space in the surrounding areas provides
residents and visitors access to recreational opportunities in addition
to the Town’s facilities.
Park Classifications and Inventory
The locations of the Town’s neighborhood, community, and regional
parks are illustrated in Figure OSC-2, Parks and Recreational Trails, and
an inventory of existing parks is listed in Table OSC-1. The Town’s
current park and recreational facilities are classified into six
categories:
Community Parks
A community park (15 to 40 acres) primarily provides opportunities
for organized activities and sports, although individual and family
activities are also encouraged. Community parks can also provide
indoor facilities to meet a wider range of recreation interests.
Community parks serve a larger area and offer more facilities. As a        A youth soccer match at the Community Center.
result, they require more support facilities, such as parking,
restrooms, and covered play areas. Community parks usually have
sport fields or similar facilities as the central focus of the park. Their
service area has roughly a 2 to 3 mile radius.
Neighborhood Parks
Neighborhood parks are designed primarily for nonsupervised,
nonorganized recreation activities. They are generally small in size (3
to 15 acres) and serve people living within approximately one-half
mile of the park. Since these parks are within walking and bicycling
distance of most users, the activities they offer serve the entire
neighborhood, including children. Typical facilities in a
neighborhood park include: playgrounds, picnic areas, trails, open
grass areas for passive use, outdoor basketball courts, and multiuse
open grass areas for practice field sports.
Natural Open Space Parkland
Two parks—North Park and South Park—totaling approximately 120
acres are preserved as natural open space on land owned by BLM
                                                                           The playground at Machris Park.
                                                                                     Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 5-9

                                             and leased to the Town. North Park is in the foothills of the San
                                             Bernardino Mountains near the west end of the Town, and South
                                             Park is in the Little San Bernardino Mountains near the south Town
                                             boundary. This open space provides opportunities for hiking, bird
                                             watching, and enjoying panoramic views of the high desert and
                                             surrounding mountains.
                                             Special Use Areas
                                             Special use areas are sites often occupied by a specialized recreation
                                             facility. Some uses that fall into this category include community
                                             gardens, single purpose sites used for a particular field sport, or sites
                                             occupied by recreation buildings.
                                             Regional Parks
                                             Regional parks are large recreation areas designed to serve an entire
                                             region beyond the Town limits. Often they are acquired to provide a
                                             specific and sometimes unique recreation opportunity. Most
                                             frequently they are owned and maintained by a county agency and
                                             are complementary to but not included as part of the Town’s
                                             parkland inventory.
                                               Table OSC-1
                                               Existing Yucca Valley Parks
                                                           Park Site & Type                        Acres
                                               Community
                                               Community Center Park                                 20.0
                                               Essig Park                                             7.0
                                               Neighborhood
                                               Machris Park                                          12.0
                                               Jacobs Park                                            5.0
                                               Paradise Valley Park                                   5.0
                                               Natural Land/Open Space
                                               South Park                                             40.0
                                               North Park                                             80.0
  Quimby Act: Authorizes cities and counties   Special Use
  to pass ordinances requiring that            Sunnyslope Park BMX Track                             11.0
  developers set aside land, donate
                                               Remembrance Park                                       0.2
  conservation easements, or pay fees for
                                               TOTAL                                                182.4
  park improvements. Revenues generated        Note: Sunnyslope Park has 8 undeveloped acres.
  through the Quimby Act cannot be used for
  the operation and maintenance of park
  facilities (California Government Code §
                                             Park Acreage per Population
  66477).
                                             Park standards provide a means to measure how much park land
  Subdivision Map Act: Requires that local   should be set aside for recreational use as the Town develops. The
  governments establish regulations to guide Quimby Act, established by state law, requires that every county and
  subdivisions, and grants powers to local   town meet the minimum standard of 3 acres of parkland per 1,000
  governments to ensure that the subdivision residents. A jurisdiction may also adopt higher standards if it is able
  occurs in an orderly and responsible       to achieve the minimum standard, the highest of which allowed is 5
  manner (California Government Code §       acres of parkland per 1,000 residents if a town or county adopts a
  66410).
                                             general plan with the seven required elements (Land Use,
                                             Circulation, Housing, Conservation, Open Space, Noise, and Safety).
5-10 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Figure OSC-2
                                                                                                                                                                      Aberdeen Dr
                                                                                                                                       E
                                                                                                                                       Ô
                                                                                                                                       A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PARKS AND RECREATIONAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TRAILS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     YUCCA MESA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PARKS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Walking Distance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1/4 Mile
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1/2 Mile
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Community Parks
                                                                                                                             Skyline Ranch Rd                                                                    Buena Vista Dr                                                                                                                                                                ^      1. Essig Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ^      2. Community Center Park
          P I O N E E R TO W N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Neighborhood Parks
                                                                                                                                                                              rings Rd
                                                                                                                                                                        an Sp
                                                                                                                                                                     Wom                                                                                                             Yucca Mesa Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ^      3. Machris Park
                                                                                                                                                                 Old
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ^      4. Jacobs Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ^      5. Paradise Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Natural Land/Open Space
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ^      6. South Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ^      7. North Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Special Use Parks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ê Barron    Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8. Sunnyslope Park BMX Track
                                                                                Pi
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Paxton Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ¡
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     A   Twentynine Palms Hwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       OTHER OPEN SPACE AREAS
                                                                                  on
                                                                                    ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   JOSHUA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Avalon Ave
                                                                                         rto
                                                                                             w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ve                                                                                                                      TREE
                                                                                              n
                                                                                                  Rd                              11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Balsa A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ^      9. Pop Rauch Park (Tri Valley Little League)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Indio Ave
                                                                                                                            Ê          Sunnyslope Dr                                             Sunnyslope Dr                                                                          18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10. Brehm Youth Park/ Boys and Girls Club
                                                                                                                                                    10                  8                                                                                                       Ê
                                                                                                                                              Ê                  Ê                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ^
                                                                                                                                                    Ê9                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      11. Desert Christ Park (Desert Christ Park Foundation)
                                           7                                                                                                                            Ê
                                       Ê                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  16                                                                                                   ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ê
                                                                 13               Yucca Trl                      Ê
                                                                                                                       12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Yucca Trl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ^      12. Remembrance Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13. Golf Course (Semi-Private)
                                                             Ê                                                  Trl
                                                                                                           a Fe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ^
                                                                                                       Sant
                                                                                                                                         Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                                         BIG MORONGO CANY ON
                                                                                                                                                            17                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PUBLIC SCHOOLS
                                                                                                                                                                                     Joshua Ln
                                                                                                    14
                                                                                                                                                           Sage Ave
                                                                                              Ê                                                           Ê
                                                                                                   4
                                                       Trl
                                                                                                                       Onaga Trl                                                                                         15                                                                                                                                                                    ^      14. Yucca Valley Elementary School
                                               Nava jo                                                                                                                                                             Ê
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15. Onaga Elementary School
                                                                                                                      Acoma Trl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Palomar Ave
                                   E
                                   ¡
                                   A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  16. La Contenta Middle School
                                                                 Kickapoo Trl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Joshua Dr
                              wy
                                                                                                                                       Joshua Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ^      17. Yucca Valley High School
                           s H
                         lm
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      18. Black Rock High School
                      Pa
                ine
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ê
             tyn
                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TRAILS
        en                                                                                                                                                                                        Ê
      Tw
                                                                                                                                                    Golden Bee Dr                                                    Joshua L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Multiuse Trails (Future)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Riding Trails (Future)
                                                                                                                                                                                                             San Andreas Rd                                                                                                                                                                NOTE: Park locations identified on this map are generalized to show intended park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           locations based on need and land availability. Specific locations and acreage amounts
MORONGO
 VALLEY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    shall be determined as part of future development proposals.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ê
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TYV-01 2/4/2014
                                                                                                                                                         J O S H U A T R E E N AT I O N A L PA R K                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Source: County of San Bernardin, 2012; Town of Yucca Valley, 2012   0       1,500     3,000                 6,000

                                       This page intentionally left blank
5-12 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN
                                                                   OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
The Yucca Valley Park Dedication and In-Lieu Fee Ordinance adopted
in 2005 under the authority of the Subdivision Map Act and the
Quimby Act are specifically designed to provide the Town with
sufficient parkland to meet its park standard as the Town’s
population grows. Parkland that contributes towards the Town’s park
standard includes community and neighborhood parks, special use
recreational facilities, and open space used for active recreation.
Currently the Town has 182.4 total acres of developed and
undeveloped designated parkland. It is anticipated that the Town
will have a population of approximately 64,559 upon buildout of the
General Plan. As a result, the Town should plan for a total of 193.2
                                                                          The Hi-Desert Nature Museum teaches visitors
acres of parkland (an additional 10.8 acres) to meet the minimum
                                                                          about history, culture, and native flora and
Quimby Act standard of 3 acres of parkland per 1,000 residents. Since     fauna among other subjects.
the majority of the Town’s parkland consists of natural open space,
over time the Town will need to assess the demand for active and
passive parkland and adjust its park planning priorities accordingly.
Park Accessibility
To ensure that park facilities are available equally to residents
throughout the community, it is recommended that parks be placed
throughout the Town in areas that are a 10-minute walking distance
(half-mile) from nearby residences. Figure OSC-2, Parks and
Recreational Trails, illustrates the locations of the Town’s existing and
proposed parks and delineates the quarter-mile and half-mile
walking radius around each. Future park opportunities should be
targeted for areas where walkable parks are absent, in particular the
eastern and northern areas of Town.
Other Recreational Facilities
Local Facilities
In addition to the facilities offered by the Town of Yucca Valley,
federal and county agencies, Morongo Unified School District
(MUSD) and nonprofit groups provide recreation facilities, activities,
and programs to local residents. Although not counted toward the
Town’s required Quimby Act park acreage, Figure OSC-2 also
identifies locations of public schools because they provide
recreational opportunities (play equipment, playfields, etc.) that are
utilized by some residents for recreation activities in addition to the
Town’s facilities.
Morongo Unified School District
MUSD owns and operates five schools in the Town of Yucca Valley,          A biker gets air at the Skate Park.
including a number of fields and specialized facilities that, in some
cases, are made available for public use through policies set by the
school district. The Town recognizes the public ownership of these
schools. The Town could actively pursue joint-use agreements with
the District to make more school facilities available for public use.
                                                                                   Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 5-13

                                       Local Nonprofit Organizations
                                       Three local nonprofit entities have developed recreational facilities
                                       within the Town: Boys & Girls Club of the Hi Desert; Brehm Youth
                                       Sports Park; and Pop Rauch Park. Additionally, a number of churches
                                       within the Town offer recreational facilities for public events and
                                       programs. The facilities vary in purpose, but all contribute to meeting
                                       the public’s recreational needs.
                                       Regional Facilities
                                       Open space in and around the Town of Yucca Valley includes natural
                                       landscapes that are essentially undeveloped, but suitable for passive
                                       or active recreational activities that do not require substantial
                                       facilities or improvements. This includes lands that are owned,
                                       leased, or otherwise controlled by the Town of Yucca Valley or by
                                       some other public or nonprofit entity and are made accessible to the
                                       public for recreation, nature preservation, education, viewshed, and
                                       other open space purposes. These other open spaces, particularly
                                       Joshua Tree National Park, afford important recreational
                                       opportunities to Town residents and visitors and are significant to
                                       the Town as a tourist attraction.
  Joshua Tree National Park in bloom.
                                       Joshua Tree National Park
                                       Running along the southern boundary of the Town of Yucca Valley is
                                       the 794,000-acre Joshua Tree National Park which boasts
                                       approximately 1.4 million visitors per year. Cared for and maintained
                                       by the National Park Service, the park offers year-round interest for
                                       hikers, rock climbers, equestrians, campers, birders, photographers,
                                       biologists, naturalists, and fun seekers from around the world.
                                       Johnson Valley OHV
                                       Johnson Valley Off Highway Vehicle area is a tract of BLM-managed
                                       land set aside for recreational use by residents and off-highway
                                       enthusiasts. The OHV area is bordered by Interstate 40 at its
                                       northernmost point, at State Route 247's (SR-247) northern leg to
                                       Barstow at its western border, and at Emerson Dry Lake/US Marine
                                       Corps Air Ground Combat Center, Twentynine Palms at its
                                       easternmost border. The Marine Corps Air Ground Combat Center
                                       base plans to annex parts of the OHV area, which threatens to
                                       permanently close access to the track.
                                       GOALS OSC 2
                                       A comprehensive multiuse, quality system of parks and recreational
                                       areas that support a broad range of activities, as well as cultural and
                                       passive open space opportunities for current and future residents.
                                       Policies
                                       Policy OSC 2-1    Plan, develop, and maintain quality and adequate
                                                         outdoor recreational and open space areas that
                                                         utilize and enhance the unique aspects of the
5-14 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                     OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
                   desert environment and provide amenities that are
                   responsive to the needs of residents and visitors.
Policy OSC 2-2     Ensure that pedestrian facilities comply with
                   Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements.
Policy OSC 2-3     Develop parklands in a manner that preserves the
                   Town's natural resources to the greatest degree
                   practicable.
Policy OSC 2-4     Locate new parks in or near residential areas
                   relatively isolated from existing natural open space
                   areas or community and neighborhood park
                   facilities.
Policy OSC 2-5     Strengthen partnerships with the Morongo Unified
                   School District for the joint use, maintenance, and
                   development of school facilities for parks and
                   recreational use.
Policy OSC 2-6     Site and maintain recreational facilities to meet the
                   needs of all segments of the community, including
                   use for activities, relaxation, and social interaction.
5.2 Recreational Trails
Hiking, biking, and walking are popular recreational activities for
Yucca Valley residents and visitors. Trails provide an important
recreational resource in and of themselves, but many trails also serve
as a support facility in providing access between neighborhoods and
important destinations, and in the case of paved trails and improved
sidewalks, can also serve as part of the Town’s transportation
network. Trail use is most often a self-directed recreational activity,
but there is also a recognized trend toward increased use of trails by
organized groups for special events.
As part of the effort to serve the needs of Yucca Valley residents who
choose to hike, bike, and walk for recreation, the Town seeks to link      Unlined drainage channels are part of the
the neighborhoods to recreational resources in a comprehensive             Town’s stormwater runoff management system
network of pedestrian facilities, bikeways, hiking trails, and multiuse    and provide opportunities for new trail
trails, and to accommodate both bicycle and equestrian users               linkages.
wherever appropriate. Although it is a community-wide system, each
section of the trails system should relate to its immediate
surroundings in design and function. Trails within the open spaces
and hillsides are typically rustic and particularly conducive to hiking,
mountain biking, and horseback riding; by their nature (rugged,
steep, and unpaved), most cannot be made to accommodate
Americans with Disability Act (ADA) access. By contrast, most of the
multiuse trails, trails that provide linkages to neighborhood facilities,
sidewalks, and those within developed parks are hard surfaced and
designed for easy access for all. The Town’s recreational trail system
                                                                                     Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 5-15

                                       and illustrations of the various types of trails are defined in more
                                       detail in the Parks and Recreation Master Plan.
                                       It should also be noted that bike trails are also discussed in the
                                       Circulation Element. Circulation Element bike trails (Classes I through
                                       III) are intended to be used as an alternate means of transportation
                                       through the Town versus the recreational trails identified in this
                                       element, which are primarily viewed as a complementary
                                       recreational amenity within the Town’s open space areas (hiking,
                                       riding, mountain biking). The Circulation Element identifies one
                                       multiuse trails, which serve a combination of biking, riding and
                                       pedestrian options. Future trails planning should coordinate linkages
                                       identified in both elements to create a comprehensive trails network
                                       within the Town.
                                       GOAL OSC 3
                                       An interconnected community system of recreational trails that link
                                       existing and proposed open space and recreational areas within the
                                       Town of Yucca Valley.
                                       Policies
                                       Policy OSC 3-1     Develop a recreational trail network for hiking,
                                                          mountain biking, and riding that links the Town’s
                                                          parkland, community facilities, open space areas,
                                                          and other amenities.
                                       Policy OSC 3-2     Ensure new development provides adequate
                                                          pedestrian, equestrian, and bicycle trail facilities to
                                                          connect to the Town-wide recreational system.
                                       Policy OSC 3-3     Design major drainage facilities, including debris
                                                          basins and flood control washes and channels, to
                                                          maximize their enhancement as multiuse
                                                          community open space amenities, such as hiking
                                                          and equestrian trails, consistent with the functional
                                                          requirements of these facilities.
                                       Policy OSC 3-4     Evaluate the location of existing and proposed trails
                                                          and trailheads with proposed development and
                                                          establish the appropriate easements to preserve
                                                          those facilities.
5-16 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
5.3 Biological Resources
The Town of Yucca Valley is in a biologically rich environment and is    Habitats: The physical locations or types of
bordered to the south by Joshua Tree National Park, to the west by       environments in which an organism or
the San Bernardino Mountains, and to the north and east by               biological population lives or occurs.
relatively open desert habitats. The Town’s location between the
Mojave and Sonoran Deserts makes it a biological transition area.
Flora and fauna in Yucca Valley are characteristic of those found in
both deserts. The rich diversity of plant and animal species and
habitats are illustrated in Figure OSC-3, Biological Resources.
Vegetation Communities
Ten vegetation communities and land cover types occur within the
Town—blackbush scrub, creosote bush scrub, desert wash scrub,
Joshua tree woodland, Mojave mixed woody scrub, Mojavean pinyon
and juniper woodland, semi-desert chaparral, and non-native
grassland, and the two additional land cover types are disturbed
lands and urban/developed lands. In addition to the vegetation
communities and landcover types, there are several wetland and
riparian habitats that have been identified within Yucca Valley in the
United States Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory.
Flora
                                                                       A cluster of blooming Mojave yucca plants.
In addition to the vegetation described above, the Town’s proximity
to the Mojave Desert gives it a diversity of desert plant species that
have adapted to survive the extreme seasonal temperatures and to
endure extreme drought conditions. Annual desert plant species
survive as seeds that lie dormant in the soil, sometimes for many
years, until a sufficient amount of rain and favorable temperatures
trigger germination.
The plant species found in the vicinity of the Town include species
that are widespread throughout the Mojave Desert as well as
endemic species known only from a few occurrences in a few
locations. Some of the most common plant species include creosote
bush, teddy bear cholla, palo verde, Joshua tree, brittlebush, alkali
saltbush, Mojave aster, desert fan palm, and triangle-leaf bursage.
Fauna
A variety of resident and migratory wildlife species occupy the Town
and the adjacent open space, parks, and preserves in the Mojave        Nelson’s bighorn sheep in Joshua Tree National
Desert and nearby mountain ranges. Many of the resident desert         Park.
species have special adaptations that allow them to tolerate the high
desert temperatures and limited availability of water. Many desert
animals are physiologically adapted to require little or no water in
addition to the water they get from the foods that they eat. However,
the springs and seeps in the desert and nearby mountains are
                                                                                 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 5-17

                                               necessary for the survival of many of the wildlife species found in the
                                               area, such as Nelson’s bighorn sheep, mule deer, and coyote.
                                               While some desert species, such as birds, lizards, and ground
                                               squirrels, are diurnal, many other species—such as insects, frogs,
                                               toads, snakes, bats, bighorn sheep, kangaroo rats, coyotes, and black-
                                               tailed jackrabbits—are active at dawn and dusk or nocturnal to avoid
                                               the excessive daytime temperatures. Reptiles and small mammals
                                               tend to take refuge from the heat by retreating into underground
                                               burrows during extreme temperatures, and these species often
                                               hibernate during the winter. The winter, however, has the greatest
                                               concentrations of bird species, because many of the bird species that
                                               are found in the vicinity are migratory species. A variety of common
                                               insects, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals, can all be found in
                                               Yucca Valley such as the yucca moth, which is responsible for
                                               pollinating the Joshua tree; the tarantula; green darner; giant desert
                                               scorpion, which can grow to be more than 4 inches long; California
                                               tree frog; spotted toad golden eagle, greater roadrunner, Gambel’s
                                               quail, and a variety of bat species.
                                               Sensitive Biological Resources
                                               The Federal and California Endangered Species Acts are designed to
  Threatened Species: Those whose              protect and conserve any species of plant or animal that is
  numbers have dropped to such low levels
                                               endangered or threatened with extinction, as well as the habitats in
  and/or whose populations are so isolated
                                               which these species are found. The State of California and the federal
  that the continuation of the species could
  be jeopardized.                              government have documented plant and animal species that are
                                               considered “sensitive,” “threatened,” or “endangered” as defined
  Endangered Species: Those with such          here. Sensitive biological resources include sensitive vegetation
  limited numbers or subject to such extreme   communities, special status plant species, special status wildlife
  circumstances that they are considered in    species, wildlife movement corridors and nursery sites, and wetland
  imminent danger of extinction.               resources. Wildlife movement corridors or linkages are considered
                                               sensitive by local, state, and federal resource and conservation
  Sensitive Species: Naturally rare, have      agencies because these corridors allow wildlife to move between
  been locally depleted, or are put at risk by adjoining open space areas that are becoming increasingly isolated
  human activities and may eventually be       as open space becomes more fragmented from urbanization, rugged
  listed as threatened or endangered.          terrain, or changes in vegetation. In addition, wetland resources are
                                               considered sensitive because of their limited distribution and high
                                               wildlife value.
                                               Many sensitive biological resources are known to occur or have the
                                               potential to occur within or adjacent to the Town based on historical
                                               data for the region identified through a query of the California
                                               Natural Diversity Database (CNDDB). As a result of these diverse
                                               communities, varied and abundant wildlife occurs within and around
                                               the town. Since this diversity of natural communities and fauna
                                               includes many endangered, threatened, rare, special status, or
                                               otherwise sensitive species and habitats, the Town of Yucca Valley
                                               has implemented policies and actions to protect and conserve key
                                               areas and the overall natural environment.
A blooming beavertail cactus plant.
5-18 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                 OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
Sensitive Vegetation Communities
Sensitive vegetation communities are vegetation assemblages,
associations, or subassociations that have cumulative losses
throughout the region, have relatively limited distribution, support
or potentially support sensitive plant or wildlife species, or have
particular value to other wildlife. Typically, sensitive vegetation
communities are considered sensitive whether or not they have been
disturbed. Sensitive vegetation communities are regulated by
various local, state, and federal resource agencies.
Based on a CNDDB search, no sensitive vegetation communities were        California Desert Native Plants Act
identified in the vicinity of the Town; however, vegetation              (CDNPA): California hosts approximately
communities that provide habitat for special status plant and/or         6,500 species, subspecies, and varieties of
wildlife species would be considered sensitive. In addition,             plants that occur naturally in the state, and
vegetation communities that are important to the region—such as          many of these are found nowhere else in
Joshua tree woodland and creosote bush scrub—may have special            the world. Some are adapted to unique
requirements in certain areas, pursuant to the Town’s Plant              habitats or harsh conditions, and some
Protection and Management Ordinance.                                     occur in such low numbers or have been so
                                                                         impacted by human influence that they are
Special Status Plant Species                                             at risk of permanent extinction from the
                                                                         wild plant species. The CDNPA was
Special status plant species include those that are: listed or proposed  established to protect California desert
                                                                         native plants from unlawful harvesting on
for listing by federal or state agencies as threatened or endangered;
                                                                         public and privately owned lands.
considered endangered in California but more common elsewhere;
considered rare, endangered, or threatened by the CDFW or other
local conservation organizations or specialists. Eleven special status
plant species are known to occur within the vicinity of the Town, such
as the San Bernardino milk-vetch, pinyon rockcress, Robison’s
monardella, and Parish’s club-cholla. A complete listing of the species
found in Yucca Valley are summarized in the Biological Resources
Technical Background report prepared in conjunction with the General
Plan. No critical habitat for any of these or other special status plant
species has been designated within or adjacent to the Town.              Endangered Species: According to the
                                                                         USFWS, a federally endangered species is
                                                                         defined as a species facing extinction
Special Status Wildlife Species                                          throughout all or a significant portion of its
                                                                         geographic range, and a federally
Special status wildlife species include those that are listed or         threatened species is defined as a species
proposed for listing as threatened or endangered by the USFWS or         that is likely to become endangered within
the CDFW and/or designated as California Fully Protected by the          the foreseeable future throughout all or a
CDFW. In addition, raptors (birds of prey) and active raptor nests are   significant part of its range. CDFW defines
protected by the CDFW. Species that are federally or state-listed        an endangered species as one whose
threatened or endangered are afforded a degree of protection that        prospects of survival and reproduction are
entails a permitting process, including specific mitigation measures     in immediate jeopardy, a threatened
to compensate for impacts to the species. As regulated by the CDFW,      species as one present in such small
fully protected species may not be taken or possessed at any time        numbers throughout its range that it is
and no licenses or permits may be issued for their take except for       likely to become an endangered species in
collecting these species for necessary scientific research and           the near future in the absence of special
                                                                         protection or management, and a rare
relocation of the bird species for the protection of livestock.
                                                                         species as one present in such small
                                                                         numbers throughout its range that it may
Twenty-one special status wildlife species are known to occur within
                                                                         become endangered if its present
the vicinity of the Town based on historical data for the region. In
                                                                         environment worsens.
addition, two other species, the California cuckoo bee and Nelson’s
                                                                                   Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 5-19

                                              bighorn sheep, do not have a special status ranking but are of special
                                              interest and were identified within the region. These species are
                                              discussed in greater detail in the Biological Technical Background
                                              Report prepared in conjunction with the General Plan. No critical
                                              habitat for any of these or other special status wildlife species has
                                              been designated within or adjacent to the Town.
                                              Wetland and Riparian Resources
    Wetland Resources: Creeks, washes,        The majority of the Town is within the Morongo Basin watershed,
    underground water (aquifers), and other   which generally drains from west to east primarily through Yucca
    water courses as well as various riparian Creek; however, the northern end of the Town drains northeastward
    vegetation communities associated with    into the Homestead Valley. No major water bodies are located within
    these water courses.                      the Town. Many of the Town’s existing drainage courses have
                                              insufficient hydraulic capacity and, therefore, intense storms often
                                              result in significant quantities of water and sediment being conveyed
                                              from the mountains through the developed areas in the Town,
                                              resulting in flooding and sediment deposits within properties and in
                                              the streets. See Figure OSC-4, Potential Wetland and Riparian
                                              Resources.
                                              Wetland and riparian resources within the Town include creeks,
                                              washes, underground water (aquifers), and other water courses as
                                              well as various riparian vegetation communities that are associated
                                              with these water courses. Though no wetland habitats are identified
                                              within the CNDDB, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service
                                              National Wetlands Inventory identifies several wetlands and riparian
                                              resources within and adjacent to the Town General Plan Update area.
                                              These habitats include mesquite bosque, riverine, riparian forest,
                                              riparian scrub, fresh emergent wetland, freshwater pond, and other
                                              wetlands that are associated with Pinyon Creek, Yucca Creek, and
                                              numerous other washes. Wetland and riparian resources within the
                                              vicinity of the Town General Plan Update area are considered
                                              sensitive biological resources and are regulated by the US Army
                                              Corps of Engineers, California Department of Fish and Wildlife,
                                              and/or Regional Water Quality Control Board pursuant to several
                                              federal and state regulations.
                                              Biological Resource Overlays
                                              Within the vicinity of the Town, vast natural landscapes have been
                                              set aside as public and private conservation lands to protect their
                                              ecological values and the species that rely on them. These conserved
                                              lands have become important refuges for many native plant and
                                              wildlife species; however, the long-term conservation of the desert
                                              ecosystems will require maintaining connectivity across and
                                              between the diversity of desert habitats. The overall goals of the
                                              Wildlife Corridor Evaluation and Open Space Resource Areas are to:
                                                   •    Preserve the natural scenic character of the Town
5-20 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                 OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
     •   Protect and preserve sensitive biological resources, while
         allowing land development in accordance with the General
         Plan Land Use Plan/Map
     •   Support less intense development in proximity to
         conservation areas
     •   Support wildlife movement through identified linkage areas
     •   Provide outdoor, trail-oriented recreational activities
Wildlife Corridor Evaluation Areas
Wildlife corridors are considered sensitive by local, state, and federal
resource and conservation agencies because these corridors allow
wildlife to move between adjoining open space areas that are
becoming increasingly isolated as open space becomes fragmented
from urbanization, rugged terrain, and/or changes in vegetation. In
southern California, habitat fragmentation is one of the main
concerns for the maintenance of healthy wildlife populations,
because natural areas are often scarce and maintaining connectivity
between these habitats is perhaps one of the best feasible options
for preventing localized extinctions and enhancing biodiversity.
Several comprehensive wildlife corridor analyses have been
conducted within the vicinity of the Town. Two of these wildlife
connectivity studies, A Linkage Design for the San Bernardino-Little San
Bernardino Connection and A Linkage Design for the Joshua Tree-
Twentynine Palms Connection, focused on areas that are within and
immediately adjacent to the Town.
The information from these two studies was used as the basis for the
Wildlife Corridor Evaluation Area (WCEA) Overlay shown on Figure
OSC-3, Biological Resources and Overlays. These areas warrant special
consideration and are intended to be maintained so as to conserve
habitat and travel corridors for rare and endangered species found in
the region to the greatest degree practicable.
Open Space Resource Areas
The Town has identified three Open Space Resource Areas (OSRA)—
Figure OSC-3 Biological Resources and Overlays—with the intent of
protecting sensitive biological resources within and adjacent to the
Town. These areas were identified based on several parameters,
including presence of sensitive vegetation communities, presence of
sensitive plant and animal species, limited development, low density
zoning, presence of wildlife linkages, and adjacency to existing open
space areas. The areas also generally correspond with other
limitations to development, including federal land, steep hillside
zones, and established parks and preserve areas.
Comprehensive biological resource studies and evaluations of these
entire areas have not been conducted. The OSRA areas have been
                                                                           Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 5-21

                                       identified based upon the findings from several individual site
                                       studies and general observations of the community generated by
                                       biologists and representatives of state and federal agencies. Further
                                       field analysis should be conducted to determine the sensitive
                                       resources held in these areas.
                                       The OSRA on the western portion of the Town, north of State Route
                                       62 (SR-62) provides added connectivity between the Sawtooth
                                       Mountains to the west and BLM and open space areas within the
                                       Town limits (e.g., North Park). This OSRA also enhances north–south
                                       connectivity between the San Bernardino-Little San Bernardino and
                                       Joshua Tree-Twentynine Palms linkages. Most of this OSRA is
                                       undeveloped with proposed low density land uses.
                                       The OSRA south of SR-62 enhances the San Bernardino-Little San
                                       Bernardino linkage. This OSRA also provides additional connectivity
                                       between open space areas within the Town limits (e.g. BLM land and
                                       South Park), Joshua Tree National Park, and the Big Morongo Canyon
                                       preserve.
                                       The third OSRA is on a hilltop at the eastern boundary of the Town.
                                       This OSRA provides added connectivity with the Joshua Tree-
                                       Twentynine Palms linkage and BLM land located east of the Town.
                                       The proposed land uses at this location are low density lots in a
                                       hillside area.
                                       WCEAs and OSRAs do not preclude development from occurring;
                                       however, development in these areas should be carefully managed
                                       to protect and preserve habitat and migratory corridors.
                                       Development proposals inside WCEAs and OSRAs will include
                                       detailed biological studies and wildlife corridor studies as part of
                                       those land use applications, as more fully described in the policies
                                       and implementation actions for this Element.
                                       Development within the WCEA or OSRA should:
                                             •   Implement development based upon the underlying land
                                                 use designations and site-specific biological resource and
                                                 wildlife corridor studies
                                             •   Encourage clustering of development
                                             •   Encourage new development to minimize building
                                                 footprints to limit impacts to biological resources and
                                                 wildlife corridors
                                             •   Avoid known sensitive biological resources
                                             •   Provide shielded lighting adjacent to sensitive habitat areas
                                             •   Encourage development plans that maximize wildlife
                                                 movement
                                             •   Provide buffers between development and wetland/riparian
                                                 areas
5-22 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                +)6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

                                                                                                                                                   Lm     Ab
                                                                                                                           LETH
                                                                                                                                                                                       Aberdeen Dr
                                                                                                                                                        Ô
                                                                                                                                                        A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           YUCCA MESA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                018
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    '04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       7'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2'%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           '4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1%#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                104
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 04+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    7' 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .# 054
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3' /105  =4$# 3$  '33:   '3$ ' 3+4(3' /105    + +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       # 5+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            /'  3= 4811&   .# 0&  )+ .+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #   # .5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6  )+ .+# .# 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                +/'  3+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    /+55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .' 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                # 0 ' 30#  3& +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 01   16   05 # +04  .+0#  05*6 4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0#05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           * 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              /#%6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .#5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   64
                                                                                                                                              Skyline Ranch Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3%655=4.+0# 05 * 6 4 + 0# 05*  64 13%  6 5 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ++
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Buena Vista Dr
                                                                        Ep                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #3+4*= 4&# +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4:   3+)'  310 2#  3+4 *+ +
                                                             LETH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   & 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         +0: 10 31%-% 3' 4 4 1'   %*' 3# & +4 2#  3
              P I O N E E R TO W N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1$ +410= 4/10#    3& ' ..#  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10#     3& ' ..# 31$  +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                410+ +
                                                                                                                                                                                               rings Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                         an Sp
                                                                    DETO      LETH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    $ 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #0 ' 30# 3& +01  /+ .-7   '5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %*   4 53# )#  .6 4 $'30# 3&+064
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                      Wom
                                                      DETO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Yucca Mesa Rd
                                                             Bd                 Ep
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3&4
                                                                                                                                                                                  Old
                                                                         Ep
                                               PSDM
                                                              Ep
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '0& +3'=45 * 3# 4*'  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       19  14 51/#     $' 0&  +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3'+ 
                                                                                                 Ep Bf                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ' 105 ' =4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5 * 3# 4* ' 3 19 14 5 1/#    .'% 105 '+
                                                                                                      Lo            Mr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3#+3+' 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (#.% 10   # .% 1/'   9+% #06   4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DETO                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       '  3/+ .+10(.: % # 5%* '  3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        : 31% ' 2*   # .64 36$+06  4
                                                                                                                        DETO                                                                                      Ab                                                                                                                                      DETO                                      " 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !' 4 5'30:'  ..18  $  +..'& %6 % -11    1% % :;64 #/' 3+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           064
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %+&
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 '05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #.+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DETO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #//# .4
                                                                                                      Bd                                                                                                   Mr                                                                                           Barron Dr                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #..+& #0   +') 1  21% -'  5/16    4 ' 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            * #'51& +264
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ..#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ..+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 &64
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ! " 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !'  45 '30:'  ..18  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 $  #  5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #  4+6 36 4 9 #05 *  +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                06 4
                                                                                       Lo
                                                                                                 Pi
                                                                                                   on
                                                                                                                                                                                              COHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PSDM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Paxton Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ¡
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ?   Twentynine Palms Hwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1# 45 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   * 130'  & .+;# 3&  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         * 3: 014   1/#    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            $  .#+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 07  +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ..+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                     ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      JOSHUA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Avalon Ave
                                                                                                          rto                                                                                                                          VEFL
                                                                                                              w                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LETH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ve                                                                                                                TREE                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ' 4'355135 1+ 4'  12*  ' 36 4 # )#  4 4 +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ; +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            + 
                                                                                                               n
                                                                                                                   Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Balsa A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        COHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Indio Ave
                                                                                                                                                        Sunnyslope Dr                                                  Sunnyslope Dr                                                                                                    Lm
                                                                                      VEFL                                                                 PSDM                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                04'%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   54
                                                                                                     YBCU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           DETO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #.+(130+ #% 6 %-11   $  ''
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           # 3# 01/#     & # %#.+(130+%#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                               BETH
                                      COHL                                                         Yucca Trl                                                                                                                            Yucca Trl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #.+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (130+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         63#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              34
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               +5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   $#4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0&
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           '3
                                                                                                                        Sant
                                                                                                                            a Fe
                                                                                                                                 Trl                                                                                                                                                       DETO                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %-$
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             64
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %36
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  $
                                                                                                                                                          Palm Ave                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1,#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       36
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DETO
                                                                                                                                                                 CACB
                                             COHL                                                                                                        WEYB               Sage Ave                  Joshua Ln                                                                                                                                                                                           1,#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '&
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '22'
                                                                                                                                        Onaga Trl
                                                                            Trl
 PRFA
                                                                    Nava jo                                                                                                                                                                                                                DETO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1,#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '&
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !11&
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       36
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        $
                                                                                                                                       Acoma Trl                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1,#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0: 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #0&
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         60+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !11&
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0&4
                                      ¡
                                      ?                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Palomar Ave
                                                                                  Kickapoo Trl
                                          PSDM                                                                                                          Joshua Dr                                                                                                                       Joshua Dr                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              7'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  44
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0&
                                 wy
                         Pa lm
                              s H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          '/+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              '35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2#33#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .
                     e
                  nin
          e   nty                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3$
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                +.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  62
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #0&
        Tw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 '3
                                                                                                                                                                     Golden Bee Dr                                                        Joshua L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !+.&.+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ('
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  133+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     &13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         7 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #5+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2'02#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %' 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '4163%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   San Andreas Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           18 0+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 /+5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4
MORONGO
 VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                             SL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TYV-01 2/14/2014
                                                                                                                                                                          J O S H U A T R E E N AT I O N A L PA R K                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        163%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             '031&
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      +'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3&
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            +0) 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #0&
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     $#<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       '31
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          	
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            	   0      1,500       3,000           6,000

                                       This page intentionally left blank
5-24 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN
 An
             pe
   te
     lo
                  Wa
                     sh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Figure OSC-4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Aberdeen Dr
                                                                                                                       Flat Top-Pipes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Moonlight Mesa
                                                                                         P ipes Wash                  Wash Watershed                                             Ô
                                                                                                                                                                                 A                                        Watershed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             WETLAND AND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RIPARIAN RESOURCES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          YUCCA MESA
                                            Chaparrosa Wash-Pipes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Joshua Cove-Coyote
                                               Wash Watershed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Lake Watershed
                                                                               sh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Hydrographic Junction
                                                                            Wa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                 r r os a
                                                  Cha p a                                                                                                                 Skyline Ranch Rd                                                                          Buena Vista Dr                                                                                                                                                                                           Stream / River
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Artificial Path
                                       P I O N E E R TO W N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            rings Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      an Sp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Wash
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Wom                                                                                                                            Yucca Mesa Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Old
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Lake / Pond
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Reservoir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Watershed Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Yucca Wash
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Town Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Barron Dr
                                                                                                                             Pi
                                                                                                                               on
                                                                                                                                 ee
                                                                                                                                                                                     Water Canyon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Paxton Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ¡
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A   Twentynine Palms Hwy
                                                                                                                                                                                      Watershed                                                                                                      Avalon Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       JOSHUA
                                                                                                                                      rto
                                                                                                                                          w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ve                                                                                                                                     TREE
                                                                                                                                           n
                                                                                                                                               Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Balsa A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Indio Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                   Sunnyslope Dr                                                   Sunnyslope Dr
                                                                                                                               Yucca Trl                                                                                                                             Yucca Trl                                                                                            Town of Joshua
                                                                                P inyon Creek                                                                                                                                                      Ea s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Tree Watershed
                                                                                                                                                             Trl
                                                                                                                                                    Sant
                                                                                                                                                        a Fe                                                                                          t
                                                                                                                                                                                       Palm Ave                                                           rn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Bu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               t
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sage Ave                  Joshua Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   un
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Mo                                   Co
                                                                                                                                                                    Onaga Trl
                                                                                                Nava jo
                                                                                                        Trl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        tai
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      v in
                                                                                                                                                                   Acoma Trl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          gt o n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Palomar Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Cre ek                              W
                                                                      ¡
                                                                      A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a
                                                                                                              Kickapoo Trl
                                                                                                                                                                                   Joshua Dr                                                                                                                          Joshua Dr
                                                             y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    sh
                                                       s   Hw
                                                     lm
                                                  Pa
                                              e
                                           nin
                                   e   nty
                                 Tw
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Golden Bee DrLo ng                                                     Joshua L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n
                                                   Little Morongo
                                                                                                                                                                                  l C                                                                                                                                 Black Rock
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ca
                                                  Creek Watershed                                                                                                                     a nyo n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ny
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Spring
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   San Andreas Rd
                         MORONGO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Watershed
                                                                                                                                                                                it a
                          VALLEY                                                                                                                                               Hos p
Li tt l
    M
 e
        or
             o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TYV-01 2/4/2014
          ng                                                                                                                                                                                           J O S H U A T R E E N AT I O N A L PA R K
                   Cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Source: USGS National Hydrography Dataset, 2012; County of San Bernardino 2012
                        ee
                 o                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0       1,500     3,000           6,000
                             k

                                       This page intentionally left blank
5-26 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN
                                                                 OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
     •   Protect wetland/riparian areas through regulatory agency
         permitting process
     •   Encourage wildlife-passable fence designs on property
         boundaries
     •   Encourage preservation of native habitat on the
         undeveloped remainder of developed parcels
     •   Minimize road/driveway development to help prevent loss
         of habitat due to species and habitat loss
     •   Use native, drought-resistant plant species in landscape
         design
     •   Require project applicants in all areas of the Town to fulfill
         required mitigation measures within an OSRA
     •   Encourage participation in local/regional recreational trail
         design efforts
GOAL OSC 4
Preservation and conservation of the Town’s desert character, open
space resources, and native desert wildlife communities.
Policies
Policy OSC 4-1    Protect, conserve, and preserve the Town’s
                  biological resources, especially sensitive, rare,
                  threatened, or endangered species of plants and
                  wildlife and their habitats.
Policy OSC 4-2    Support practical efforts to maintain a broad variety
                  of habitats, with priority given to suitable habitat
                  for rare and endangered species occurring in the
                  Town and vicinity.
Policy OSC 4-3    Require new development proposals to minimize
                  impacts to existing habitat and wildlife to the
                  maximum extent practicable. Require revegetation
                  of disturbed natural habitat areas with native or
                  noninvasive naturalized species.
Policy OSC 4-4    Minimize and mitigate urban development impacts
                  on sensitive habitat and wildlife areas.
Policy OSC 4-5    Encourage and participate in the planning and
                  development of multiuse corridors along drainage
                  channels and utility easements to provide wildlife
                  corridors and public interconnection between open
                  space areas in the community and vicinity.
Policy OSC 4-6    Require the use of native and approved, nonnative,
                  drought-tolerant plant species in development
                  projects to provide or enhance wildlife habitat and
                                                                           Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 5-27

                                                       extend the local desert environment into the urban
                                                       design of the Town.
                                       Policy OSC 4-7  Promote biodiversity by protecting natural
                                                       communities with high habitat value, protecting
                                                       habitat linkages to prevent further fragmentation,
                                                       and encouraging an appreciation for the natural
                                                       environment and biological resources.
                                       Policy OSC 4-8  Require that development projects provide copies
                                                       of required permits, or verifiable statements that
                                                       permits are not required, from the California
                                                       Department of Fish and Game (2081 Individual Take
                                                       Permit) and US Fish and Wildlife Service (Section 7
                                                       Take Authorization) prior to receiving grading
                                                       permits or other approvals that would permit land-
                                                       disturbing activities and conversion of habitats or
                                                       impacts to protected species.
                                       Policy OSC 4-9  Require each future proposed development project
                                                       to conduct an analysis to determine if sensitive
                                                       biological resources and wildlife corridors would be
                                                       impacted by the development application and
                                                       adopt process and mitigation regulations for
                                                       potential resource impacts.
                                       Policy OSC 4-10 Encourage context-sensitive development within
                                                       OSRAs and WCEAs while preserving biological
                                                       resources and wildlife movement.
                                       Policy OSC 4-11 Require biological resource surveys and
                                                       assessments as part of the application process for
                                                       new developments within or adjacent to OSRAs
                                                       and WCEAS.
                                       Policy OSC 4-12 Coordinate with CDFW and USFWS in the review of
                                                       biological resource assessments and surveys for
                                                       private land development applications when
                                                       applicable.
                                       Policy OSC 4-13 Coordinate with CDFW and USFWS to ensure that
                                                       state and federal protections required by the
                                                       Endangered Species Act and the Migratory Bird
                                                       Treaty Act are addressed during the planning
                                                       process.
5-28 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN
                                                                OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
5.4 Water Resources
Water
Yucca Valley’s water comes from three groundwater sources. The
Town lies within the Warren Valley Hydrologic Subarea. The primary
source of groundwater is from Warren Valley Groundwater Basin.
Groundwater from Reche/Ames/Means Valley Groundwater Basin is a
secondary source, and State Water Project imports via Mojave Water
Agency through the Morongo Basin Pipeline are also used to
recharge the Warren Valley Basin. The District currently obtains its
groundwater from 13 active wells with water storage facilities
provided by 16 above-ground welded steel reservoirs with a total
capacity of 12.41 million gallons.
Faults separate the Warren Valley Groundwater Basin into five           A water recharge facility.
hydrogeologic units, the west, the midwest, the mideast, the east,
and the northeast hydrogeologic units. The major sources of
groundwater recharge in the Yucca Valley area are precipitation,
infiltration from streets, subsurface inflow, and septic and irrigation
return flows. Creeks, streams, flood corridors, riparian habitat, and
wetlands may accommodate floodwater for groundwater recharge
and stormwater management as described in the Safety Element.
Water service within the Town of Yucca Valley area is the
responsibility of the Hi-Desert Water District (HDWD). HDWD regional
plans include construction of a water reclamation facility (WRF) to
serve portions of its service area, including the Town of Yucca Valley,
and future water sources will also include water reclamation
recharge projects and Reche/Ames/Means Valley Basin recharge.
State law (Water Conservation Act of 2009, Senate Bill X7-7),
mandates the reduction of per capita water use and agricultural
water use throughout the state by 20 percent by 2020. The current
Urban Water Management Plan for the Hi-Desert Water District
service area includes the Town of Yucca Valley and addresses the
current and projected use and distribution plans for water.
Wastewater
All of the Town of Yucca Valley customers currently dispose of their
wastewater using individual subsurface sewage disposal systems,
septic systems, or on-site wastewater treatment package plants to
treat and dispose of domestic wastewater. Although these septic
system return flows have historically contributed to the overall
groundwater resources within the Town, they have also been
identified as a contributor to higher nitrate levels in the Warren
Valley Groundwater Basin.
                                                                                  Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 5-29

                                       In 2011 the Colorado River Regional Water Quality Control Board
                                       adopted the Basin Plan Amendment, which prohibits septic tank
                                       discharge after 2016. A phased wastewater collection and treatment
                                       facility is proposed to respond to the amendment.
                                       The wastewater collection and treatment system, as well as the
                                       regional board’s plan amendment, establish a three-phase
                                       implementation plan for wastewater collection and treatment in the
                                       Town. As the system is implemented, HDWD is expected to use
                                       treated wastewater for basin recharge and landscape irrigation, thus
                                       reducing reliance on imported water sources.
                                       Protection of the local water supply and ensuring the maximum
                                       long-term utilization of water resources serving the Town is an
                                       important component of a vibrant community’s general health,
                                       safety, and welfare.
                                       GOAL OSC 5
                                       A dependable supply of domestic water to meet the needs of the
                                       community.
                                       Policies
                                       Policy OSC 5-1     Support Hi-Desert Water District efforts to promote
                                                          water conservation and efficiency in existing and
                                                          new development.
                                       Policy OSC 5-2     Protect open spaces, natural habitat, floodplains,
                                                          and wetland areas that serve as groundwater
                                                          recharge areas, and participate in regional
                                                          transportation/flood control planning to increase
                                                          groundwater recharge concurrent with flood plain
                                                          management practices.
                                       Policy OSC 5-3     Protect groundwater recharge and groundwater
                                                          quality when considering new development
                                                          projects.
                                       Policy OSC 5-4     Participate in regional water planning efforts to
                                                          protect groundwater resources and to assist the
                                                          HDWD in implementation of its wastewater
                                                          collection and treatment system.
                                       Policy OSC 5-5     Require the inclusion of erosion control measures
                                                          as components of a grading plan to assure
                                                          elimination of impacts to downstream property
                                                          owners.
5-30 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                 OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
GOAL OSC 6
An informed public that respects the Town's limited water resources
and maximizes conservation efforts for the benefit of the community.
Policies
Policy OSC 6-1    Coordinate with the Hi-Desert Water District to
                  share information on potential groundwater
                  contaminating sources.
Policy OSC 6-2    Coordinate with the Hi-Desert Water District to
                  implement the wastewater collection and
                  treatment system.
Policy OSC 6-3    Require low water use, drought resistant landscape
                  planting to reduce water demand.
Policy OSC 6-4    Require new development to incorporate best
                  management practices for water use and efficiency
                  and demonstrate specific water conservation
                  measures.
Policy OSC 6-5    Preserve and enhance all watercourses and washes
                  necessary for regional flood control, groundwater
                  recharge areas, and drainage for open space and
                  appropriate recreational purposes.
Policy OSC 6-6    Require that development and maintenance of
                  project-specific,          onsite          stormwater
                  retention/detention basins implement and
                  enhance groundwater recharge, complement
                  regional flood control facilities, and address
                  applicable community design policies.
5.5 Cultural Resources
Paleontological Resources
Paleontological resources are mapped based on the presence of
known resources and the geologic sediments in the region. Based on
the age of the sediment and rock types found in Yucca Valley, the
Town’s potential fossil yields range from very low to moderate in
sensitivity. Figure OSC-5, Paleontological Resource Sensitivity Map,
identifies areas where fossil resources are likely to be found.
Two vertebrate fossils, one of an extinct horse and the other a desert
tortoise, are known within the west-central portion of Town.
Additional fossils are known regionally and include extinct animals
such as mammoth, ground sloths, camel, horse, llama, dwarf
pronghorn, and saber-toothed cat. Other regional fossils produced
by older sediment and bedrock include extinct animals such as a
                                                                           Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 5-31

                                                    zebra-like horse and Furlong’s rabbit in addition to cotton rat, wood
                                                    rat, and brown bat.
                                                    Archaeological Resources
                                                    The Town of Yucca Valley and vicinity have prehistoric resources
                                                    ranging from about 10,000 years ago to 200 years ago. The California
                                                    Historical Resources Information System identifies nine prehistoric
                                                    resources, three historical archaeological resources, and five historic
                                                    resources with the Town. The prehistoric archaeological sites
                                                    recorded previously include five lithic artifact scatters, a camp site, a
                                                    quarry site, a bedrock milling station site, and one isolated pottery
                                                    shed. The historical archaeological sites include two historic refuse
                                                    scatters and a dove blind associated with a refuse scatter.
                                                    Historic Resources
                                                    During the 1870s leading up to the turn of the century, the region
                                                    was used largely by ranchers and gold prospectors, especially after
                                                    the discovery of gold east of what is now Twentynine Palms. Many
                                                    individuals and families did not stay long due to harsh living
                                                    conditions and the general difficulty in raising crops in a desert
                                                    environment. The first school in Yucca Valley was established in 1915.
                                                    A telephone was not available in Yucca Valley until 1935, and
                                                    population did not dramatically increase until after World War II,
                                                    when hundreds of land patents were filed. The highway from
                                                    Morongo Valley through Yucca Valley was constructed in 1937 but
                                                    not paved until 1951. Electricity did not appear until 1946, three
 Warren’s Well was once the center of local         years after the Town streets were laid out.
 social activities and is now a California Historic
 Landmark.                                          The Town of Yucca Valley contains five historic including: a historical
                                                    school house; Warren’s Well; Warren’s Ranch/Tanks; Desert Christ
                                                    Park (a local folk art site); and SR-62 (Twentynine Palms Highway).
                                                    Native American Cultural Resources
                                                    Aside from the prehistoric archaeological resources discussed above,
                                                    no Native American cultural resources that may have traditional or
                                                    cultural significance have been identified by records searches,
                                                    literature reviews, and consultation with interested parties. Because
                                                    the Town of Yucca Valley area was part of the ancestral territory of
                                                    Native Americans, there are likely unrecorded prehistoric
                                                    archaeological resources that may be valued by Native American
                                                    tribes for reasons other than scientific significance.
5-32 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                              OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
GOAL OSC 7
Preservation, maintenance, continuity, and enhancement of cultural
heritage and resources in the Town of Yucca Valley, including historic
and prehistoric cultural artifacts, traditions, and resources
throughout the community.
Policies
Policy OSC 7-1   Require development proposals to locate, identify,
                 and evaluate archaeological, historical, Native
                 American, and other cultural sites and ensure that
                 appropriate action is taken to protect these
                 resources.
Policy OSC 7-2   Protect sensitive archaeological and historic
                 resources from vandalism and illegal collection to
                 the greatest extent possible.
Policy OSC 7-3   Require that a paleontologist be “on call” to
                 document and recover paleontological resources
                 discovered during excavation.
Policy OSC 7-4   Require that a records search of the California
                 Historical Resources Information System be
                 conducted and reviewed by a cultural resources
                 professional for proposed development areas to
                 determine presence of known prehistoric or historic
                 cultural resources and the potential for
                 undiscovered cultural resources.
Policy OSC 7-5   Require that areas found to contain significant
                 historic or prehistoric artifacts be examined by a
                 qualified consulting archaeologist or historian for
                 appropriate protection and preservation through
                 an accredited museum such as the San Bernardino
                 County Museum.
Policy OSC 7-6   Require that if cultural resources, including
                 archaeological or paleontological resources, are
                 uncovered during grading or other onsite
                 excavation activities, construction shall stop until
                 appropriate mitigation is implemented.
Policy OSC 7-7   Require that any archaeological or paleontological
                 resources, as determined by a consulting
                 archeologist, on a development project site be
                 either preserved in their sites or adequately
                 documented as a condition of removal.
                                                                        Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 5-33

                                                  5.6 Scenic Resources
                                                  The Town of Yucca Valley’s scenic resources are a valued local asset.
                                                  The natural setting of the Town is characterized by the ridges and
                                                  hillsides north, west, and south of the Town and the desert valley
                                                  lands to the east. The desert environment, natural resources, and
                                                  active open space opportunities are a core aspect of Yucca Valley’s
                                                  character and are a significant attraction for visitors seeking
                                                  recreation. Views from the Town situate the community in its local
                                                  environment and landscape and are an important element of the
                                                  Town’s quality of life.
                                                  Many of the scenic resources that are valued by Yucca Valley
 A scenic view of Yucca Valley from a rocky hill. residents and visitors are outside the Town limits and beyond the
                                                  planning area boundary. Such areas include the views of the Little
                                                  San Bernardino Mountains of the Peninsular Ranges, the San
                                                  Bernardino Mountains on the easternmost of the Transverse ranges
                                                  surrounding the Town, and Yucca Valley’s hillside areas.
                                                  As the Town continues to grow, it is important to consider the impact
                                                  development can have on open space areas and to consider how to
                                                  best preserve and enhance their character and uses. Policies in the
                                                  Land Use Element express the Town’s vision for balanced growth and
                                                  environmental stewardship. Views of the surrounding steep slopes,
                                                  ridgelines, and hilltops are an important contributor to the identity of
                                                  the Town. As a result, the General Plan also addresses development
                                                  on ridgelines and hillsides in the Land Use Element, to ensure new
                                                  development is integrated into the natural desert topography.
                                                  Night Sky Protection
   Night Sky: A clear sky, with visible stars,    Yucca Valley benefits from its proximity to land uses that emit little or
   despite necessary or desired illumination of   no light pollution. The limited lighting in the Morongo Basin and
   private and public property.                   surrounding region preserves the natural night environment and
                                                  allows for views of astronomical features. The glow of lights in
                                                  urbanized areas brightens the night sky, and excessive light at night
                                                  can interrupt natural cycles and behavior of both humans and
                                                  wildlife. Focusing lights where they are needed for public safety and
                                                  direction reduces light pollution and glare, allowing the sky to be
                                                  observed and enjoyed in a more natural state. Preservation of dark
                                                  skies continues to be a priority for the Town and will be a
                                                  consideration in future project design as the community grows.
                                                  Hillsides and Ridgelines
                                                  The terrain in Yucca Valley is generally characterized by the low-lying
                                                  plains of the valley floor at 3,000 feet above sea level, gradually
                                                  leading to small hills, and framed by steep hillsides up to 4,000 feet
                                                  above sea level to the north and south. This undulation provides
                                                  spectacular views of the valley floor and dramatic desert landscapes,
                                                  making the hillsides an asset to the community.
5-34 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Figure OSC-5
                                                                                                                                                           Aberdeen Dr
                                                                                                                          E
                                                                                                                          Ô
                                                                                                                          A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PALEONTOLOGICAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RESOURCE SENSITIVITY MAP
                                                                                                                                                                                                         YUCCA MESA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Potential Fossil Yield
                                                                                                                    Skyline Ranch Rd                                                                  Buena Vista Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Very Low
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Low
            P I O N E E R TO W N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Moderate
                                                                                                                                                                   rings Rd
                                                                                                                                                             an Sp
                                                                                                                                                          Wom                                                                                                                Yucca Mesa Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Town Limits
                                                                                                                                                      Old
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Barron Dr
                                                                       Pi
                                                                         on
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Paxton Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ¡
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A   Twentynine Palms Hwy
                                                                           ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      JOSHUA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Avalon Ave
                                                                                rto
                                                                                    w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ve                                                                                                                    TREE
                                                                                     n
                                                                                         Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Balsa A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Indio Ave
                                                                                                                           Sunnyslope Dr                                              Sunnyslope Dr
                                                                         Yucca Trl                                                                                                                    Yucca Trl
                                                                                                       Trl
                                                                                                  a Fe
                                                                                              Sant
                                                                                                                              Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                                Sage Ave                  Joshua Ln
                                                                                                              Onaga Trl
                                                  Trl
                                          Nava jo
                                                                                                             Acoma Trl
                                      E
                                      ¡
                                      A                                                                                                                                                                               Palomar Ave
                                                        Kickapoo Trl
                                                                                                                           Joshua Dr                                                                                                             Joshua Dr
                                  y
                            s   Hw
                          lm
                       Pa
                   e
                nin
        e   nty
      Tw
                                                                                                                                         Golden Bee Dr                                                   Joshua L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n
                                                                                                                                                                                                  San Andreas Rd
MORONGO
 VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TYV-01 2/4/2014
                                                                                                                                              J O S H U A T R E E N AT I O N A L PA R K                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Source: Cogstone, 2012; The Planning Center | DC&E, 2012   0       1,500     3,000    6,000

                                       This page intentionally left blank
5-36 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN
                                                                 OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
This topography also influences development patterns. Over time, as     Steep Slopes: Before the location and
infill development reduces the availability of land in relatively flat  extent of steep slopes in a community can
areas of the community, it will become important to establish           be identified, it is essential that a definition
guidance for the thoughtful development in the town’s hillsides. The    of a steep slope be determined. Many
purpose of preparing for potential hillside development is to ensure    communities define steep slopes as having
that future projects will be carefully designed to respect sensitive    a grade of 30 percent or greater, meaning
biological resources, preserve views, and be adequately served by       that the elevation increases by 30 feet over
                                                                        a horizontal distance of 100 feet.
infrastructure.
Value of Hillsides and Ridgelines
When evaluating hillsides and ridgelines, view preservation and the
overall aesthetics of the hillsides are often cited as being important
to the Town and resources that contribute value to the community.
Building siting, access to sites, and infrastructure can all impact the
appearance of hillsides and ridgelines.
Hillsides and ridgelines may provide recreational opportunities,
including hiking, climbing, and wildlife observation. When evaluating
new development in hillside areas, consideration of area-wide needs
and opportunities for outdoor recreation as well as identification of
possible trail and viewpoint locations are important factors. Locating
possible access points to existing and potential recreational
opportunities is also important.
Challenges of Developing in Areas with Steep Slopes
Steeply sloped hillsides are inherently more difficult for development
than lands without terrain for reasons of public safety, erosion,
aesthetics, drainage and stormwater runoff, or general
environmental protection. A method to address these issues is to
manage the intensity of development as the grade of the slope
increases. Pairing slope/density regulations with grading regulations
helps to ensure that those steep terrain sites are developed as safely
as possible. In most cases, large-scale commercial development is
discouraged in areas with steep slopes because of the difficulties
associated with trying to provide level building and parking areas as
well as safe access to the site.
Providing access roads and driveways to development on steep
slopes can be especially challenging. Roads and driveways in steep
terrain areas tend to be longer and have more curves and
switchbacks than roads and driveways on flatter terrain. This means
that there are more impacts on the hillside, such as the potential for
increased erosion and runoff, a higher potential for vehicular and
pedestrian accidents, and potential difficulty for emergency vehicles
to access the development.
Extending infrastructure to hilltop communities can be challenging
to engineer and construct, especially for water and sewer systems.
Individual septic systems are especially difficult to construct and
maintain on steep slopes, both because of the slopes and because
                                                                                 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 5-37

                                                the soils tend to be shallow and poorly drained. This makes septic
                                                systems on steep slopes prone to higher failure rates, which puts
                                                ground and surface water supplies at risk.
                                                Several of the policies and implementation actions that apply to the
                                                Biological Resource Overlay areas (identified earlier in this element)
                                                also apply to hillsides and ridgelines because they support sensitive
                                                biological habitat and species.
                                                Scenic Highways
                                                Yucca Valley stands at the crossroads of two corridors that provide
                                                residents access to major cities, beaches, ski resorts and tourist
                                                destinations. SR-62 is the primary east–west thoroughfare, and SR-
                                                247 is the primary north–south thoroughfare. These two state
                                                highways play a critical role in Yucca Valley’s position as the
                                                economic hub of the Morongo Basin.
    California State Scenic Highway System:     State Route 62 (Twentynine Palms Highway) is eligible for
    A list of highways, mainly state highways,  designation as a state-designated scenic highway and is 152 miles
    that have been designated by the California long. It begins 17 miles west of Yucca Valley and connects the town
    Department of Transportation (Caltrans) as  with Morongo Valley, Joshua Tree, and Twentynine Palms. Its eastern
    scenic highways. The California State       terminus is in Earp at the Arizona state line. Its western terminus
    Legislature (Section 263 of the Streets and
                                                connects with I-10, which gives Yucca Valley residents highway
    Highways Code) makes highways eligible
    for designation as a scenic highway. For a
                                                access to Palm Springs in 30 minutes, Los Angeles in 2 hours, and San
    highway to be declared scenic, the          Diego in 2 ½ hours.
    government with jurisdiction over abutting
    land must adopt a "scenic corridor          State Route 247 is a 78-mile route entirely within San Bernardino
    protection program" that limits             County. Its southern terminus begins at SR-62 in Yucca Valley. The
    development, outdoor advertising, and       portion of the highway that runs from Yucca Valley to Lucerne Valley
    earthmoving, and Caltrans must agree that   is known as Old Woman Springs Road. From Lucerne Valley, SR-247
    it meets the criteria.                      travels north to Barstow, connecting with I-15. It is also eligible for
                                                designation as part of the State Scenic Highway System.
                                                GOAL OSC 8
                                                Preservation, conservation, and enhancement of Yucca Valley’s
                                                scenic and visual resources.
                                                Policies
                                                Policy OSC 8-1    Minimize impacts to night skies by enforcing the
                                                                  Outdoor Lighting and Night Sky Ordinance (Ord.
                                                                  No. 90).
                                                Policy OSC 8-2    Protect, preserve, and enhance the Town’s hillsides,
                                                                  mountains, canyons, and natural desert terrain.
                                                Policy OSC 8-3    Encourage development that provides public views
                                                                  of ridgelines and desert landscaping through
                                                                  building siting, design, and landscaping.
5-38 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                               OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
Policy OSC 8-4 Reduce the negative impacts of hillside
               development, including excessive cuts and fills,
               unattractive slope scars, and erosion and drainage
               problems.
Policy OSC 8-5 Preserve the steep slopes of the Sawtooth and Little
               San Bernardino Mountains and individual landmark
               peaks such as Burnt Mountain and Bartlett
               Mountain as permanent open space to protect their
               scenic value.
Policy OSC 8-6 Minimize the impact of hillside development by
               requiring conformance with the Town’s Municipal
               Code and by utilizing the following principles:
               a. Limit development of steep slopes through
                   conformance with Town regulations that
                   consider slope in the determination of
                   appropriate minimum lot area for subdivisions
                   and parcel maps, permitted floor area ratio
                   (FAR), and density.
               b. Encourage clustered development to preserve
                   steep slopes as private or common open spaces
                   to the greatest extent practicable.
               c. Preserve the form of the existing topography by
                   limiting cuts and fills, or through the
                   requirement of natural landform grading.
               d. Evaluate the height and visibility of new
                   development to minimize the visual impacts
                   new buildings create on natural landforms.
               e. Promote hillside development that respects the
                   natural landscape by designing grading and
                   development patterns that follow natural
                   topographic contours.
               f. Encourage higher densities as a trade-off to
                   support preservation of natural features and
                   slopes that maintain the Town’s desert
                   character.
Policy OSC 8-7 Preserve scenic views along primary transportation
               corridors, particularly SR-62, recreational trails, and
               from public open spaces.
Policy OSC 8-8 Preserve and enhance natural scenic resources
               associated with major roadway viewsheds and
               open space corridors as essential assets reflecting
               the community’s image and character.
                                                                         Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 5-39

                                              5.7 Energy Resources
                                              Energy production, conservation, and patterns of energy
                                              consumption are of growing importance to individuals, agencies,
                                              and jurisdictions. Energy price fluctuations in the late 1990s and
                                              increases in early 2001, combined with rolling blackouts and climate
                                              change, have led to a renewed interest in energy conservation.
                                              Typically, the most important factors influencing residential energy
                                              consumption are the size of the house, the type of house (detached
                                              single-family or multifamily structure), the number of major
                                              appliances, and the construction and siting of the structure.
                                              Residential energy needs are often fulfilled by electricity or a
 An example of ground-mounted solar panels in combination of gas and electricity. Space conditioning is the most
 Yucca Valley.                                energy-consuming activity in residential structures.
                                              The State of California requires local governments to address energy
                                              conservation and efficiency in new construction. The State Building
                                              Standard Code, including Title 24, requires energy conservation and
                                              efficiency measures for any new structures, additions to existing
                                              structures, changes to the footprint of structures, or changes to
                                              water and heating systems.
                                              GOAL OSC 9
                                              Conservation of energy and fuels of all types and promotion of a
                                              sustainable energy supply.
                                              Policies
                                              Policy OSC 9-1    Develop, promote, and implement long-term
                                                                energy efficiency and demand management
                                                                policies and standards for Town facilities, vehicles,
                                                                and new development.
                                              Policy OSC 9-2    Support the development of renewable energy
                                                                generation within the Town, provided that
                                                                significant    adverse     environmental       impacts
                                                                associated with such development can be
                                                                successfully mitigated.
                                              Policy OSC 9-3    Encourage the use of clean and/or renewable
                                                                alternative energy sources for transportation,
                                                                heating, cooling, and construction.
                                              Policy OSC 9-4    Encourage the reduction and              recycling  of
                                                                household and business waste.
                                              Policy OSC 9-5    Ensure that any planned construction, demolition,
                                                                addition, alteration, repair, remodel, landscaping, or
                                                                grading projects divert all reusable, salvageable,
                                                                and recyclable debris from landfill disposal.
5-40 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN
                                                                  OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
Policy OSC 9-6      Promote use of ride-sharing and mass transit as
                    means of reducing transportation-related energy
                    demand.
Policy OSC 9-7      Encourage development proposals to participate in
                    state, federal, and/or regional solar rebate and
                    incentive programs.
Policy OSC 9-8      Encourage new construction provided for in whole
                    or in part with Town funds to incorporate passive
                    solar design features, such as daylighting and
                    passive solar heating, where feasible.
Policy OSC 9-9      Promote building design and construction that
                    integrates alternative energy systems, including but
                    not limited to solar, thermal, photovoltaics, and
                    other clean energy systems.
5.8 Air Quality
Due to its location and meteorology, Yucca Valley experiences a
variety of air quality issues. The Town of Yucca Valley is within the
Mojave Desert Air Basin (MDAB). The MDAB includes the desert
portions of Los Angeles and San Bernardino Counties, the eastern
desert portion of Kern County, and the northeastern desert portion
of Riverside County. The Mojave Desert Air Quality Management
District (MDAQMD) has jurisdiction over the desert portion of San
Bernardino County and the far eastern end of Riverside County. This
region includes the incorporated communities of Adelanto, Apple
Valley, Barstow, Blythe, Hesperia, Needles, Twentynine Palms,
Victorville, and Yucca Valley. This region also includes the National
Training Center at Fort Irwin, the Marine Corps Air Ground Combat
Center, and the Marine Corps Logistics Base in the eastern portion of
Edwards Air Force Base.
Wind
Wind direction is primarily from the west, west-southwest and
southwest. A significant portion of the prevailing winds in the Yucca
Valley area is due to the phenomena known as the “orographic
effect.” The air is forced over the mountain range and loses moisture
as it rises. When it descends, it also compresses and heats up. The
speed of the wind is aided by the “desert heat lows,” which routinely
form over the eastern Mojave Desert area. Although a portion of
Yucca Valley’s winds come from the Los Angeles Basin via the
canyons, the vast majority of the winds are a result of the orographic
effect and the desert heat low-pressure systems. Prevailing winds in
the MDAB are out of the west and southwest. These prevailing winds
are due to the proximity of the MDAB to coastal and central regions
and the blocking nature of the Sierra Nevada Mountains to the north;
air masses pushed onshore in Southern California by differential
                                                                            Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 5-41

                                                 heating are channeled through the MDAB. The MDAB is separated
                                                 from the southern California coastal and central California Valley
                                                 regions by mountains (highest elevation approximately 10,000 feet)
                                                 whose passes form the main channels for these air masses.
                                                 Temperature Effects
   Temperature Inversion: A layer of warm,       The southern California region frequently experiences temperature
   dry air overlaying cool, moist marine air     inversions. Smog in southern California is generally the result of
   that acts as a lid through which the marine   these temperature inversions combining with coastal day winds and
   layer cannot rise. When the inversion layer   local mountains to contain the pollutants for long period of time,
   is approximately 2,500 feet above sea level,  allowing them to form secondary pollutants by reacting with
   the sea breezes carry the pollutants inland   sunlight. The inversion conditions in the MDAB are much less
   to escape over mountain slopes or through     favorable for the buildup of high ozone concentrations than in the
   passes. At a height of 1,200 feet, the
                                                 coastal areas of Southern California. As a result, meteorology in the
   inversion puts a tight lid on pollutants,
   concentrating them in a shallow layer.        MDAB is less conducive for the chemical mixing characteristic of
                                                 typical ozone formation.
                                                 Pollutants
                                                 Air pollutants of concern in Yucca Valley include ozone (O3), carbon
   Sensitive Receptors: Segments of the
                                                 monoxide (CO), nitrogen oxides (NO2 and NO), sulfur dioxide (SO2),
   population those are most susceptible to
   poor air quality, such as children, elderly
                                                 and particulate matter (PM). These pollutants originate from sources
   people, and sick people, as well as sensitive both within and outside of Yucca Valley. Vehicle use is the primary
   land uses, such as schools, hospitals, parks, source of air pollutants in Yucca Valley. Vehicles form pollutants both
   and residential communities. Air quality      directly by combustion and indirectly by the interaction of
   problems intensify when sources of air        combustion by-products with one another and with ultraviolet (UV)
   pollutants and sensitive receptors are near   light. PM is produced by both vehicles and wood-burning fireplaces,
   one another. Since residential areas are      among other sources. In addition, toxic air contaminants (TACs), such
   located throughout the Town, as are           as benzene, butadiene, formaldehyde, and hydrogen sulfide, are of
   schools and parks, the consideration of
                                                 concern because they are harmful in small quantities.
   sensitive receptors is an important aspect
   of the General Plan.
                                                 Yucca Valley’s local ambient air quality is managed and monitored by
                                                 the MDAQMD and the California Air Resources Board (CARB). The
                                                 MDAQMD is tasked with achieving and maintaining healthful air
                                                 quality for its residents by establishing programs, plans, and
                                                 regulations enforcing air pollution control rules in order to attain all
                                                 state and federal ambient air quality standards and to minimize
                                                 public exposure to airborne toxins and nuisance odors. The
                                                 MDAQMD has adopted several attainment plans to achieve state and
                                                 federal air quality standards. The MDAQMD continuously monitors its
                                                 progress in implementing attainment plans and must periodically
                                                 report to the California Air Resources Board and the US
                                                 Environmental Protection Agency.
5-42 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                               OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION
GOAL OSC 10
Preservation and enhancement of the Mojave Desert region’s air
quality, in order to assure long-term availability of clean and
healthful air in the Town of Yucca Valley, for the protection of the
health and welfare of the community.
Policies
Policy OSC 10-1 Participate in the monitoring of all air pollutants of
                  regional concern on a continuous basis.
Policy OSC 10-2 Coordinate air quality planning efforts with other
                  local, regional, and federal agencies.
Policy OSC 10-3 Promote the safe and efficient movement of people
                  and materials into and through the Town as a
                  means of reducing the impact of automobiles on
                  local air quality.
Policy OSC 10-4 Coordinate land use planning efforts to assure that
                  sensitive receptors are reasonably separated from
                  polluting point sources.
Policy OSC 10-5 Provide consistent and effective code enforcement
                  for construction and grading activities to assure
                  ground disturbances do not contribute to blowing
                  sand and fugitive dust emissions.
5.9 Greenhouse Gases
                                                                        Greenhouse Gases (GHG): A balance of
Sustainable communities are jurisdictions and regions that engage in    naturally occurring gases in the
practices that meet the needs of the present without compromising       atmosphere determines the earth’s climate
the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.              by trapping solar heat through a
Sustainable communities strive to be economically, environmentally,     phenomenon known as the greenhouse
and socially healthy and resilient. In 2006, the Governor of California effect. Greenhouse gases (GHGs), including
signed Assembly Bill (AB) 32, codified under the Global Warming         carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide,
Solutions Act. The act requires that California cap its GHG emissions   chlorofluorocarbons, and water vapor, keep
                                                                        solar radiation from exiting our
at 1990 levels by 2020. This legislation requires CARB to establish a
                                                                        atmosphere. In a process very similar to the
program for statewide GHG emissions reporting, as well as monitor       windows on a greenhouse, GHGs trap so
and enforce of that program. CARB is also required to adopt rules       much heat that the temperature within the
and regulations to achieve the maximum technologically feasible         earth’s atmosphere is rising.
and cost-effective GHG emission reductions. As a result, many
communities identify strategies to minimize the effects of climate      GHGs are emitted through both natural
change and reduce GHG emissions.                                        processes and human activities. Emissions
                                                                        from human activities, such as electricity
The main measures to reduce GHG emissions are in the AB 32              production, motor vehicle use, and
Scoping Plan, which was approved on December 12, 2008. This plan        agriculture, are contributing to the
includes a range of GHG reduction actions including: requiring          concentration of GHGs in the atmosphere
                                                                        and have led to a trend of unnatural
utilities produce a third of their energy from renewable sources such
                                                                        warming of the earth’s climate, which is
as wind, solar, and geothermal; reducing GHG emissions for              known as global warming.
passenger cars, pick-up trucks, and sport utility vehicles; and
                                                                                 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 5-43

                                                 implementing of the Low Carbon Fuel Standard, which will require
                                                 oil companies to make cleaner domestic-produced fuels.
                                                 The San Bernardino Associated Governments (SANBAG) has
                                                 compiled an inventory of GHG emissions and developed reduction
                                                 measures that could be adopted by the 21 Partnership cities of San
                                                 Bernardino County; Yucca Valley is currently a participant in this
                                                 effort. As a participant, Yucca Valley has elected a goal to reduce its
                                                 community GHG emissions to a level that is 15 percent below its
                                                 2008 GHG emissions level by 2020. It is anticipated that the Town will
                                                 meet and exceed this goal through a combination of state and local
                                                 efforts. In addition, green building practices that promote energy
                                                 and resource conservation can be effective in jurisdictions such as
                                                 the Town of Yucca Valley, where energy use generates a significant
                                                 portion of the town’s GHG emissions.
                                                 GOAL OSC 11
                                                 Reduced greenhouse gas emissions from activities within the Town
                                                 that support efforts under AB32 to mitigate the impact of climate
                                                 change on the Town and state.
                                                 Policies
   Green Building: The practice of creating      Policy OSC 11-1 Continue to participate in and support the
   structures and using processes that are                          provisions of the San Bernardino Regional
   environmentally responsible and resource                         Greenhouse Gas Reduction Plan.
   efficient throughout a building's life-cycle,
   from siting to design, construction,          Policy OSC 11-2 Encourage new development to be designed to
   operation, maintenance, renovation, and
                                                                    take advantage of the desert climate through solar
   deconstruction. This practice expands and
   complements the classical building design
                                                                    orientation, shading patterns, and other green
   concerns of economy, utility, durability, and                    building practices and technologies.
   comfort. Green building is also known as
   sustainable or high performance building.     Policy OSC 11-3 Maintain General Plan Land Use, Housing, and
                                                                    Transportation goals and policies to be aligned
   Source: US Environmental Protection Agency                       with, support, and enhance SCAG’s Regional
                                                                    Transportation Plan and Sustainable Communities
                                                                    Strategy to achieve reductions in GHG emissions.
5-44 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN


This page intentionally left blank
6         SAFETY ELEMENT
The Town of Yucca Valley is committed to maintaining access to vital
services and protecting the community from geologic and seismic,
hazards, flooding, wildland fires, extreme weather, hazardous
materials incidents, and other emergencies such as urban fires and
crime. Implementation of the Safety Element minimizes potential
human injury and property damage by reducing exposure to these
hazards and the risks of their occurrence. This Element enhances
public safety through advance preparation for and proactive
mitigation of potential hazards that could adversely affect residents,
visitors, economic activities, and the built and natural environments.
Purpose of the Safety Element
The Safety Element is a state-mandated General Plan element that
must identify potential natural and human-created hazards that
could affect the Town of Yucca Valley’s residents, businesses, and
services. The purpose of the Safety Element is to establish a
framework that anticipates these hazards and prepares the
community to mitigate exposure to these risks. The goals and
policies of the Safety Element are intended to protect public health,
safety, and welfare in Yucca Valley.
Relationship to Other Documents
The Safety Element is part of a comprehensive effort to address the
impacts of future hazards in Yucca Valley. The Safety Element is
complementary to the Town of Yucca Valley’s emergency
preparedness planning documents, including the Hazards Mitigation
Plan and Emergency Operations Plan. The Safety Element Technical
Background Report is a comprehensive study of local geologic,
seismic, flooding, fire, hazardous materials, and weather conditions
prepared in association with the General Plan. The Safety Element
Technical Background Report is a reference document for additional
information on those hazards.
6.1 Geologic Hazards
Geologic hazards are generally defined as surficial earth processes
that have the potential to cause loss or harm to the community or
the environment. The Town of Yucca Valley is susceptible to a variety
of geologic hazards due to its steep terrain. Erosion, slope instability,
rockfalls and rockslides, soil slips, and mudflows are all potential
geologic hazards.
The Town of Yucca Valley encompasses highly variable terrain that
includes a broad valley, gently sloping hills, and rugged mountains.
Within the Town limits, elevation varies from 3,100 to 4,600 feet
above sea level. This variety of topography reflects the community’s
complex geologic characteristics and hazards. As shown in Figure S-
                                                                          Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 6-1

                                                  1, Geologic Map, central Yucca Valley primarily consists of young
  Ground Failure: Mudslide, landslide,            alluvium soils, which are highly susceptible to erosion, especially
  liquefaction, or soil compaction.
                                                  where flood waters are concentrated. Much of the west side consists
  Landslide: A general term for a falling,        of crystalline rocks known for good slope stability, but are
  sliding, or flowing mass of soil, rocks, water, characterized by large boulders that potentially pose rockfall
  and debris. Includes mudslides, debris          hazards. The other common soil in Yucca Valley is old alluvium,
  flows, and debris torrents.                     which is stable in areas of limited slope. Slopes in Yucca Valley are
                                                  depicted in Figure S-2, Slope Analysis. Steep slopes, generally defined
  Slope Failures: Includes two types, major       as 25 percent or higher, are areas with greater potential for rockfalls
  slide masses such as landslides and minor       and ground failure that impact properties below or downstream,
  soil slips like mud or debris flows. Slope      especially in the event of seismic activity or heavy rainfall.
  failures can occur on natural or man-made
  slopes. Failures are often the result of
                                                  Mitigating these hazards can be accomplished by establishing
  interrelated natural hazards, earthquake-
  induced rockfall, or storm-induced
                                                  appropriate development standards and through public awareness.
  mudflows.                                       Since the majority of geologic hazards can be avoided, it is important
                                                  for the Town of Yucca Valley to protect the community and unique
                                                  natural landscape through the goals and policies below.
                                                  GOAL S 1
                                                  Protection from injury and property damage due to geologic hazards
                                                  such as ground and slope failure.
                                                  Policies
                                                  Policy S 1-1       Collect and maintain data on soils and areas of
                                                                     steep slopes (30 percent or greater) or slopes prone
                                                                     to failure within the Town boundaries.
                                                  Policy S 1-2       Limit grading associated with development to the
                                                                     minimum necessary to provide for planned
                                                                     improvements, while maintaining maximum
                                                                     natural and undisturbed vegetation to control soil
                                                                     disturbance and erosion.
                                                  Policy S 1-3       Require development proposals with a slope of 30
                                                                     percent or greater and/or subject to rockfalls,
                                                                     landslides or excessive erosion to be accompanied
                                                                     by a geotechnical analysis and associated technical
                                                                     reports.
                                                  Policy S 1-4       Require development on slopes prone to failure or
                                                                     slopes 30 percent or greater to mitigate all geologic
                                                                     safety concerns during the permitting process.
6-2 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Figure S-1
                                                                                                                                                                                     Aberdeen Dr
                                                                                                                                       Qya
                                                                                                                                             E
                                                                                                                                             Ô
                                                                                                                                             A                Qoa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       YUCCA MESA                                                                                                                                                        GEOLOGIC MAP
                                                                                                                                             QTb                Qoa
                                                                                                                                                                Qoa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Fault Lines
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Fault - Known Location
                                                                                                                                  Skyline Ranch Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Qoa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Buena Vista Dr                                                                                    Mqm-p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Fault - Approximate Location
                                                                                   QTb
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Qoa
                                                                                                                                                                    Qoa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Qya                                                         Qoa                                                                                                          Fault - Concealed
            P I O N E E R TO W N
                                                                                                                                                                                             rings Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                       an Sp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Pgn                                                                        Qya                                                               Surficial Sediments
                                                                                                                                                                                    Wom                                                                                                                      Yucca Mesa Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Qoa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Qya - Young Alluvium
                                                                                                                                                                                Old
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Mqm-p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Qoa - Older Alluvium
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Qoa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Mqm-l                                                                                                                                                 Qof - Very Old Alluvium
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sedimentary Rock
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Qoa
                                                                                                                           Mqm                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ts - Sandstone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Qoa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Barron Dr                                                                                               Igneous Rocks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Paxton Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ¡
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A     Twentynine Palms Hwy                                                             QTb - Basalt
                                                                                   Pi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mqm, Mqm-l, Mqm-p - Quartz Monzonite
                                                                                     on
                                                                                       ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                JOSHUA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Avalon Ave
                                                                                            rto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Metamorphic Rocks
                                                                                                w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ve
                                                                                                 n
                                                                                                     Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Balsa A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TREE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Indio Ave
                                                                                                                                             Sunnyslope Dr                                                      Sunnyslope Dr
                                        Mqm                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pgn - Gneissic Rocks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Town Limits
                                                                                     Yucca Trl
                                                                                                                                              Qya                                                                                   Yucca Trl
                                                Qoa                                                           a   Fe T
                                                                                                                      rl
                                                                                                          Sant
                                                                                                                                                   Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Qoa
                                                                                                                                                                          Sage Ave                  Joshua Ln
                                                                                                                            Onaga Trl
                                                              Trl
                                                      Nava jo
                                                                                                                           Acoma Trl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Palomar Ave
                                              Qof
                                    E
                                    ¡
                                    A
                                                                    Kickapoo Trl
                                                                                                                                              Joshua Dr                                                         Qof                             Qoa                              Joshua Dr
                               wy
                            s H
                   e
                       Pa lm                                                                                 Pgn
                nin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NOTE: This map is intended for general land use planning only.
        e   nty
      Tw                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Information on this map is not sufficient to serve as a substitute for
                                                                                                                                                               Golden Bee Dr                                                           Joshua L
                                                                                                           Qoa                                                                                                                                 n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         detailed geologic investigations of individual sites. All faults may
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         not be shown. The width and location of faults is approximate and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         should not be used in lieu of site-specific investigations, evaluation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         and design.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  San Andreas Rd
MORONGO
 VALLEY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Qoa
                                                                                                Pgn
                                                                                                                                                                                            Qoa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Pgn                                                           Qoa Pgn
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Qoa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TYV-01 2/4/2014
                                                                                                                                                                      J O S H U A T R E E N AT I O N A L PA R K                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Source: Earth Consultants International 2012   0       1,500      3,000                 6,000

                                      This page intentionally left blank
6-4 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Figure S-2
                                                                                                                                                           Aberdeen Dr
                                                                                                                          E
                                                                                                                          Ô
                                                                                                                          A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SLOPE ANALYSIS
                                                                                                                                                                                                         YUCCA MESA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0-10% Slope
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            10-20% Slope
                                                                                                                    Skyline Ranch Rd                                                                  Buena Vista Dr                                                                                                                        20-30% Slope
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            30-40% Slope
            P I O N E E R TO W N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            40%+ Slope
                                                                                                                                                                   rings Rd
                                                                                                                                                             an Sp
                                                                                                                                                          Wom
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Town Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Yucca Mesa Rd
                                                                                                                                                      Old
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Barron Dr
                                                                       Pi
                                                                         on
                                                                           ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Paxton Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ¡
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A   Twentynine Palms Hwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        JOSHUA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Avalon Ave
                                                                                rto
                                                                                    w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ve                                                                                                      TREE
                                                                                     n
                                                                                         Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Balsa A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Indio Ave
                                                                                                                           Sunnyslope Dr                                              Sunnyslope Dr
                                                                         Yucca Trl                                                                                                                    Yucca Trl
                                                                                                       Trl
                                                                                                  a Fe
                                                                                              Sant
                                                                                                                              Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                                Sage Ave                  Joshua Ln
                                                                                                              Onaga Trl
                                                  Trl
                                          Nava jo
                                                                                                             Acoma Trl
                                      E
                                      ¡
                                      A                                                                                                                                                                               Palomar Ave
                                                        Kickapoo Trl
                                                                                                                           Joshua Dr                                                                                                             Joshua Dr
                                  y
                            s   Hw
                          lm
                       Pa
                   e
                nin
        e   nty
      Tw
                                                                                                                                         Golden Bee Dr                                                   Joshua L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NOTE: This map is intended for general land use planning
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 only. Information on this map is not sufficient to serve as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 a substitute for detailed studies of individual sites
                                                                                                                                                                                                  San Andreas Rd
MORONGO
 VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TYV-01 2/4/2014
                                                                                                                                              J O S H U A T R E E N AT I O N A L PA R K                                                                                                                                                                                     Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0       1,500      3,000                6,000

                                      This page intentionally left blank
6-6 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                           SAFETY
6.2 Seismic Hazards
The Town of Yucca Valley is a seismically active area where            Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zone: A
earthquakes can pose a threat to personal safety and property.         regulatory zone, delineated by the State
Earthquakes have the potential to impact transportation, utilities,    Geologist, within which site-specific
public facilities, structural integrity, and economic activity. The    geologic studies are required to identify
undulating terrain that contributes to Yucca Valley’s natural          and avoid fault rupture hazards prior to
landform can be affected by earthquake-triggered hazards such as       subdivision of land and/or construction of
ground shaking, surface fault rupture, landslides, liquefaction, and   most structures for human occupancy.
subsidence, as shown in Figure S-3, Seismic Hazards. Earthquakes and
associated hazards can disrupt vital service delivery; key             Fault: A fracture or zone of closely
                                                                       associated fractures along which rocks on
transportation routes, including State Routes 62 and 247; and
                                                                       one side have been displaced with respect
threaten lives and properties.
                                                                       to those on the other side. A fault zone is a
                                                                       zone of related faults, which commonly are
Several notable past earthquakes were felt strongly in Yucca Valley,
                                                                       braided, but may be branching. A fault trace
but a concentration of intense seismic activity in 1992 was the most   is the line formed by the intersection of a
destructive in recent history. The Joshua Tree Earthquake struck on    fault and the earth’s surface.
April 22, 1992, most likely centered on the Eureka Peak fault,
approximately 12 miles south of Highway 62. This magnitude 6.1         Liquefaction: A process by which water-
earthquake injured over 30 people. On June 28, 1992, the magnitude     saturated granular soils transform from a
7.3 Landers Earthquake rocked Southern California and was the          solid to a liquid state during strong ground
largest quake to have occurred in the continental United States in 40  shaking.
years. The epicenter was in Landers, approximately 10 miles north of
Yucca Valley. Several faults were involved, including Johnson Valley,
which bisects the northern part of the Town. Several roads and
buildings were damaged, over 400 people were injured in the region,
and 3 people lost their lives, including one in Yucca Valley. The
magnitude 6.4 Big Bear Earthquake struck approximately 3 hours
after the Landers Earthquake. No additional damage in Yucca Valley
was attributed to this quake.
State legislation has been enacted to help prevent property damage
and injury in the event of an earthquake. The Alquist-Priolo
Earthquake Fault Zoning Act establishes zones around the most
active and well-defined faults in the state. In Yucca Valley, these
faults include Morongo Valley, Pinto Mountain, Johnson Valley, Burnt
Mountain, and Eureka Peak. Development within the zones can occur
following geologic investigations that identify development
standards and requirements for development projects that are
designed to mitigate potential earthquake-related hazards.
California’s Unreinforced Masonry Law requires all cities and counties
in Seismic Zone 4, as identified in the California Building Code, to
identify potentially hazardous unreinforced masonry buildings in
their jurisdictions. Although the Town is in Seismic Zone 4, the
number of unreinforced masonry structures is unknown and
warrants study.
Learning from devastating earthquakes of the past, the Town of
Yucca Valley continues to make strides to prevent damage and
prepare its residents and business community for earthquakes in the
future through enforcing state laws, coordinating emergency
planning efforts, and educating the public.
                                                                                 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 6-7

                                                 GOAL S 2
                                                 Minimized risk to life; property; and economic, social, and service
                                                 functions that may result from seismic hazards.
                                                 Policies
                                                 Policy S 2-1     Participate in local and regional emergency
  Quasi-Public: Essentially a public good or
  service although under private ownership
                                                                  preparedness planning efforts with public and
  or control (e.g., the electric or gas company.                  quasi-public agencies to assure the continued
                                                                  functionality of major utility services in the event of
                                                                  a major earthquake.
                                                 Policy S 2-2     Collect and distribute earthquake preparedness
                                                                  information and materials to Town residents and
                                                                  local businesses.
                                                 Policy S 2-3     Encourage and promote the development of
                                                                  ground water recharge basins in areas where
                                                                  increased potential for liquefaction resulting from
                                                                  an earthquake will have a minimal effect on existing
                                                                  and planned development.
                                                 Policy S 2-4     Encourage the location of heavily irrigated areas
                                                                  away from foundations and other structural
                                                                  supports to minimize the creation of a localized
                                                                  liquefaction hazards in areas of high seismicity.
                                                 Policy S 2-5     Evaluate development in areas identified as being
                                                                  subject to a rockfall or landslide hazard (Figures S-1
                                                                  and S-2) to minimize the potential of those hazards
                                                                  impacting property.
                                                 Policy S 2-6     Implement development restrictions and seismic
                                                                  study requirements around active faults pursuant
                                                                  to the Alquist-Priolo Act to ensure that potential
                                                                  impacts of seismic hazards are mitigated.
                                                 Policy S 2-7     Maintain an inventory of unreinforced masonry
                                                                  structures in compliance with California’s
                                                                  Unreinforced Masonry Law.
                                                 Policy S 2-8     Coordinate with the U.S. Geological Survey to
                                                                  assure the provision of earthquake predictions
                                                                  which may impact the Town and surrounding area.
                                                 Policy S 2-9     Coordinate and cooperate with public and quasi-
                                                                  public agencies to ensure that major utility systems
                                                                  and roadways have continued functionality in the
                                                                  event of a major earthquake.
6-8 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Johnson Valley Fault Zone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Figure S-3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Aberdeen Dr
                                                                                                                                                                 E
                                                                                                                                                                 Ô
                                                                                                                                                                 A
                                                                                                                                                                Jo h n so n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    YUCCA MESA                                                                                                                                                       SEISMIC HAZARDS
                                                                                                                                                                  Valley Fault Zone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Fault; not zoned under the Alquist-Priolo Act
                                                                                                                                                        Skyline Ranch Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Buena Vista Dr
            P I O N E E R TO W N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Earthquake-Induced Slope Instability
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           rings Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     an Sp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Rock Falls
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Wom                                                                                                                                     Yucca Mesa Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Rock Slides
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Old
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Soil Falls
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Soil Slides
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Soil Slumps
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Liquefaction Susceptability
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pinto Mountain Fault Zone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Barron Dr                                                                                                     Low - Areas underlain by course-grained Holocene age
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            sediments, groundwater depth > 100' or unknown
                                                                                                           Pi
                                                                                                             on
                                                                                                               ee                                                                                          Zo n e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Paxton Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ¡
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          A   Twentynine Palms Hwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Very Low - Areas underlain by course-grained Pleistocene
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Fa u lt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Avalon Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            JOSHUA                                           age sediments, groundwater depth > 100' or unknown
                                                                                                                    rto
                                                                                                                                                                                          t a in
                                                                                                                        w
                                                                                                                                                                         Moun
                                                                                                                                                             Pin t o                                                                                                                       ve                                                                                                                TREE
                                                                                                                         n
                                                                                                                             Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Balsa A
                                                                                                                                                                     Sunnyslope Dr                                                                          Sunnyslope Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Indio Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Town Limits
                                                                                                             Yucca Trl                                                                                                                                                           Yucca Trl
                                                                                                                                           Trl
                                                                                                                                      a Fe
                                                                                                                                  Sant
                                                                                                                                                                               Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sage Ave                  Joshua Ln
                                                                                                                                                  Onaga Trl
                                                                                      Trl
                                                                              Nava jo
                                                                                                                                                 Acoma Trl
                                                E
                                                ¡
                                                A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Palomar Ave
                                                                                            Kickapoo Trl
                                                                         ne
                                                                    Zo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Joshua Dr
                                                           u   lt                                                                                                      Joshua Dr
                                Hw
                                  y                     Fa
                                                    n
                          lm
                            s                 tai
                       Pa                un
                nin
                   e                Mo
            nty                to                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NOTE: This map is intended for general land use planning only.
                        P in
        e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Eu r
      Tw                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Information on this map is not sufficient to serve as a substitute for
                                                                                                                                                                                            Golden Bee Dr                                                                           Joshua L                  eka
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     detailed geologic investigations of individual sites. All faults may
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Pe a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     not be shown. The width and location of faults is approximate and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          au lt                                                                                                                      should not be used in lieu of site-specific investigations, evaluation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Bur nt Mo unt ain Fau
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      k F                                                                                                                            and design.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               San Andreas Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    lt Zo ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Zo
MORONGO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ne
 VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TYV-01 2/4/2014
                                                                                                                                                                                                      J O S H U A T R E E N AT I O N A L PA R K                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Source: Earth Consultants International 2012   0       1,500      3,000                 6,000

                                       This page intentionally left blank
6-10 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                            SAFETY
6.3 Flood Hazards
Floods are natural and recurring events that are often unpredictable.   Flooding: A rise in the level of a water body
Traversed by numerous ephemeral natural drainage courses and            or the rapid accumulation of runoff,
because Yucca Valley is subject to high intensity rain storms, flooding including related mudslides and land
is a significant hazard. Within Yucca Valley the Federal Emergency      subsidence, that results in the temporary
Management Agency (FEMA) identified the following areas in a 100-       inundation of land that is usually dry.
year flood zone: Yucca Wash, Water Canyon, Old Woman Springs
                                                                        Floodway: A watercourse, including banks,
Creek, Covington Wash, East and West Burnt Mountain Creeks, Long        that must remain clear to carry flood waters.
Canyon, Hospital Canyon, and Piñon Creek. It is estimated that there
are more areas affected by this flood zone that have yet to be          100-Year Flood Zone: Land with a 1
identified by FEMA. Most of the 100-year flood zones are                percent annual chance of flooding.
concentrated around Yucca Wash, which crosses the center of             Structures in a 100-year flood zone have a
community east to west, making flood control an important safety        26 percent chance of being flooded over
issue. This and other flood zones in Yucca Valley are shown in Figure   the course of a 30-year mortgage, and only
                                                                        a 4 percent chance of being impacted by
S-4, Flood Hazard Map.
                                                                        fire during the same time frame.
100-year events are not the only storms to cause flooding. Smaller
                                                                        500-Year Flood Zone: Land with a 0.2
storms can also result in property damage or flooded and damaged        percent annual chance of flooding.
roadways, especially when public and private floodways are not
properly maintained. Floods are not only destructive to residential
and commercial properties, but they can cause significant erosion of
the natural landform.
Most of the existing development in Yucca Valley has been
completed without significant alteration to the natural terrain. As a
result, natural drainage courses pass through developed or
semideveloped areas. Small channels pass through private yards, and
some structures are built within the flow paths of shallow drainages.
Most streets, many of which are unpaved, follow the natural contours
of the land, crossing arroyos and gullies without the benefit of
culverts or bridges. These crossings can quickly become filled with
high velocity floodwaters, trapping vehicles or washing them
downstream.
The Town can take precautions to prepare for and respond to a flood
event and minimize severe damage to structures and facilities.
Emergency preparedness planning is one of the primary ways the
town can alleviate the dangers and risks associated with flood
hazards. Implementing evacuation plans for the Town and critical
care facilities as well as maintaining regional floodways will help to
ensure that residents, businesses, and visitors remain safe during
heavy rain storms.
                                                                                Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 6-11

                                            GOAL S 3
                                            Minimized flooding and other hydrologic hazards and provision for
                                            the protection of lives, property and essential facilities within the
                                            community.
                                            Policies
                                            Policy S 3-1    Continue to improve local drainage facilities to be
                                                            consistent with or complementary to the Master
                                                            Plan of Drainage.
                                            Policy S 3-2    Seek funding for local drainage improvements to
                                                            provide flood control protection, preserve natural
                                                            landform, and create passive and active
                                                            recreational open space amenities.
                                            Policy S 3-3    Continue to manage local natural and improved
                                                            drainage facilities to be consistent with or
                                                            complementary to the Master Plan of Drainage.
                                            Policy S 3-4    Collaborate with the San Bernardino County Flood
                                                            Control District and other state and federal
                                                            agencies to minimize flood damage.
                                            Policy S 3-5    Participate in regional planning efforts to monitor
                                                            and regulate the use and removal of sewage
                                                            disposal systems threatening the Town’s
                                                            groundwater basin.
                                            Policy S 3-6    In those locations where managed flood plains are
                                                            recommended by the Master Plan of Drainage,
Floodwaters inundating a low-lying roadway.                 limited to no improvements shall be allowed to
                                                            control or divert the flow of flood water.
                                            Policy S 3-7    Require development within the 100-year flood
                                                            zone to implement mitigation measures to
                                                            minimize risks associated with flood hazards.
                                            Policy S 3-8    Collect, maintain, and make available information
                                                            regarding flooding hazards to remain aware of
                                                            potential hazards and serve as an educational
                                                            resource for the community.
                                            Policy S 3-9    Actively cooperate with FEMA regarding
                                                            amendments to local Flood Insurance Rate Maps,
                                                            recognizing the importance of redesignation of the
                                                            100- and 500-year flood plains within the Town
                                                            boundaries as facility improvements are completed.
6-12 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure S-4
                                                                                                                                                                                                Aberdeen Dr
                                                     Pip
                                                           es
                                                                 W as h                                                                                   E
                                                                                                                                                          Ô
                                                                                                                                                          A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            FLOOD HAZARD MAP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     YUCCA MESA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Levee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Floodway Zone
                                                    sh
                                               Wa
                                           a
                                      rros
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       100 Year Flood Area
                             a
                        Chap                                                                                                                        Skyline Ranch Rd                                                                              Buena Vista Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       500 Year Flood Area
            P I O N E E R TO W N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Town Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                        rings Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                  an Sp
                                                                                                                                                                                               Wom                                                                                                                                Yucca Mesa Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                           Old
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Yucca            Was h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Barron Dr
                                                                                                       Pi
                                                                                                         on
                                                                                                           ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Paxton Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ¡
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A   Twentynine Palms Hwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   JOSHUA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Avalon Ave
                                                                                                                rto
                                                                                                                    w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ve
                                                                                                                     n
                                                                                                                         Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Balsa A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TREE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Indio Ave
                                                                                                                                                             Sunnyslope Dr                                                 Sunnyslope Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          W
                                                                                                         Yucca Trl                                                                                                                                Yucca Trl
                                                                                                                                       Trl                                                                                                                             Co v i n
                                                                                                                                  a Fe
                                                                                                                              Sant
                                                Pinyon          Creek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                gt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E
                                                                                                                                                                 Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a st                                                on
                                                                                                                                                                                     Sage Ave                  Joshua Ln
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ur
                                                                                                                                              Onaga Trl
                                                                                  Trl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          n
                                                                          Nava jo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mo
                                                                                                                                             Acoma Trl
                                                                                                                                                                                          C a n yon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Palomar Ave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       un
                                        E
                                        ¡
                                        A
                                                                                        Kickapoo Trl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          t a in                                      Joshua Dr
                                                                                                                                                             Joshua Dr
                                  y
                                Hw
                                                                                                                                                                                             Lon g
                            s
                          lm                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Cree
                       Pa
                   e
                nin
        e   nty
      Tw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       k
                                                                                                                                                                              Golden Bee Dr                                                          Joshua L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NOTE: This map is intended for general land use planning
                                                                                                                                                                    Ca                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      only. Information on this map is not sufficient to serve as
                                                                                                                                                                       nyon                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 a substitute for detailed studies of individual sites
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              San Andreas Rd
MORONGO
                                                                                                                                                                 l
                                                                                                                                                                a
                                                                                                                                                             it
 VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                         Ho sp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TYV-01 2/4/2014
                                                                                                                                                                                   J O S H U A T R E E N AT I O N A L PA R K                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Source: Earth Consultants International 2012   0       1,500      3,000                6,000

                                       This page intentionally left blank.
6-14 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                              SAFETY
Policy S 3-10     Coordinate with the San Bernardino County Flood
                  Control District to enter into multiuse agreements
                  within flood control facilities, allowing for safe,
                  attractive recreational facilities while maintaining
                  the function of the drainage facilities.
Policy S 3-11     Require new development to incorporate adequate        Wildland Fire: A nonprescribed fire,
                  flood mitigation, including appropriate siting of      typically fueled by vegetation, occurring in
                                                                         areas where development is essentially
                  structures flood plains and grading that prevents
                                                                         non-existent. The line or zone where a
                  adverse drainage impacts to adjacent properties        wildfire and structures or other human
                  through onsite retention of runoff.                    development meet is called a wildland
                                                                         urban interface.
6.4 Wildland Fire Hazards                                                Defensible Space: The area adjacent to a
                                                                         structure or dwelling where wildland fire
Wildland fires pose a significant threat to large areas of Yucca Valley,
                                                                         prevention or protection practices are
mostly in the west-northwest and south parts of Town. A                  implemented to provide defense from an
combination of factors including weather, topography, and                approaching wildland fire or to minimize
vegetation put these areas at a high risk. Although wildland fires are   the spread of a structure fire to wildlands or
often considered disruptive and dangerous, they are a necessary part     surrounding areas. A 100-foot clearance is
of the ecosystem. A wildland fire becomes a hazard when it grows         required by law. Defensible Space
out of control. When this happens, damage and loss of property and       requirements are set by the state in the
sometimes loss of life are potential risks.                              Public Resources Code (PRC 4291) and
                                                                         Government Code (GC 51182) for fuel
Several historical wildland fires have impacted Yucca Valley,            modification to reduce fire danger. San
including the Acoma fire of 2008, which burned 356 acres but only        Bernardino County Mountain Area Safety
destroyed one outbuilding in Town. The largest wildland fire, the        Taskforce recommends creating three
2006 Sawtooth-Millard-Heart Complex fire, was started by lightning       zones to meet the defensible space
                                                                         requirement around a structure: a 10-foot
and was the result of a merger of three separate wildland fires. It
                                                                         ignition zone should be cleared closest to
burned approximately 85,700 acres between Yucca Valley and San
                                                                         the structure, a 20-foot (or to property line)
Gorgonio. In the Yucca Valley region, the fire destroyed 50 homes,       clean zone should be maintained from
171 outbuildings, and 194 vehicles. It also caused a significant         there, and lastly a 70-foot (or to property
amount of damage to homes, businesses, and property. Seventeen           line) reduced fuel zone should be
individuals were injured and one civilian died.                          maintained along the outer edge of the
                                                                         property.
Wildland fires have been—and will continue to be—a threat to the
Town. In addition to providing fire safety standards in Yucca Valley,    Peakload Water Supply: The supply of
the San Bernardino County Fire Department also provides fire             water available to meet both domestic
prevention and protection services. The California Department of         water and firefighting needs during the
Forestry and Fire Protection identified the hillside areas of Yucca      particular season and time of day when
Valley as having a high to very high fire threat, as shown in Figure S-  domestic water demand on a water system
                                                                         is at its peak.
5, Fire Hazard Areas. Several state and federal programs offer
planning assistance for mitigating wildland fire hazards. CAL FIRE       Fuel Modification Zone: A ribbon of land
administers state and federal forestry programs aimed at reducing        surrounding a development within a fire
fuel loads and improving forest lands. California’s Forest               hazardous area that is designed to diminish
Improvement Program offers cost-share opportunities to assist            the intensity of a wildland fire as it
landowners with land management planning and conservation. The           approaches the structures. Fuel
Forest Stewardship Program is also offered by CAL FIRE. This             modification includes both the thinning of
program combines funds from state and federal sources to assist          combustible vegetation, and the removal
communities with multiple-ownership watershed and community              and replacement of native vegetation with
issues related to prefire fuels treatment, forest health, and erosion    fire-resistive plant species.
control.
                                                                                   Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 6-15

                                              The Town is part of the list of Communities at Risk, a federally funded
                                              program administered by the California Fire Alliance. This program
                                              makes grant funding available to “communities at-risk” in California
                                              for projects designed to reduce fire risks. As a designated at risk
                                              community, Yucca Valley has the opportunity to apply for these
                                              resources.
                                              Fuel modification zones and maintenance of defensible space are
                                              two methods that communities often employ to reduce the risk for
                                              fire. The state and county require a clearance of all flammable
                                              vegetation of 100-feet around a structure (to create a defensible
                                              space). Fire-resistant shrubs and trees are recommended, especially
                                              near structures. The Town of Yucca Valley addresses the issue of
                                              weeds and other vegetation as a potential fire hazard and identifies
                                              the steps that the Town takes to abate this hazard in the Town’s
                                              Municipal Code.
                                              Building construction standards for such items as roof coverings, fire
                                              doors, and fire resistant materials help protect structures from
                                              external fires and contain internal fires for longer periods. The
                                              portion of a structure most susceptible to ignition from a wildland
                                              fire is its roof. During a wildland fire roofs are easily ignited by
                                              burning cinders carried by winds or by direct contact with burning
                                              trees and large shrubs. Many modern building materials incorporate
                                              fire ratings and some are noncombustible. The California Building
                                              Code, as adopted by the Town, should be referenced for more
                                              information. This General Plan identifies the goals and policies below
                                              to further protect residents and businesses from the risks associated
                                              with wildland fire hazards.
                                              GOAL S 4
                                              Protect the Town of Yucca Valley and its residents from the threat of
                                              loss of life and property from wildland fire hazards through the
                                              provision of defensible space and public awareness.
                                              Policies
                                              Policy S 4-1       Require property owners adjacent to wildland fire
An emergency services staging area during the
                                                                 areas to maintain a defensible space around
Millard/Sawtooth Complex fire.
                                                                 structures consistent with San Bernardino County
                                                                 Fire Department standards.
                                              Policy S 4-2       Continue public education efforts to inform the
                                                                 community of wildland fire hazards and ways to
                                                                 minimize the damage caused by fires.
                                              Policy S 4-3       Ensure that public and private water distribution
                                                                 and supply facilities have adequate capacity and
                                                                 reliability (peakload water supply) to supply both
                                                                 everyday and emergency firefighting needs.
6-16 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure S-5
                                                                                                                                                           Aberdeen Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Fire Station #42
                                                                                                                         Ô
                                                                                                                         A                                                                                                                               ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 YUCCA MESA                                                                                                                                                    FIRE HAZARD AREAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ^  Fire Station
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Local Responsibilty Area
                                                                                                                    Skyline Ranch Rd                                                                          Buena Vista Dr                                                                                                                                                          Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      High Fire Hazard Severity Zone
            P I O N E E R TO W N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Moderate Fire Hazard Severity Zone
                                                                                                                                                                   rings Rd
                                                                                                                                                             an Sp
                                                                                                                                                          Wom                                                                                                                        Yucca Mesa Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Urban Unzoned
                                                                                                                                                      Old
      Fire Station #38                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         State Responsibility Area
     ^                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      High Fire Hazard Severity Zone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Moderate Fire Hazard Severity Zone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Barron Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Federal Responsibility Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone
                                                                       Pi
                                                                         on
                                                                           ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Paxton Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ¡
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ?   Twentynine Palms Hwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      High Fire Hazard Severity Zone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      JOSHUA                                          Moderate Fire Hazard Severity Zone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Avalon Ave
                                                                                rto
                                                                                    w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ve                                                                                                            TREE
                                                                                     n
                                                                                         Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Balsa A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Town Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Indio Ave
                                                                                                                           Sunnyslope Dr                                                      Sunnyslope Dr
                                                                         Yucca Trl
                                                                                                                                                                                      Fire Station #41
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Yucca Trl
                                                                                              Sant
                                                                                                  a Fe
                                                                                                       Trl                                                                      ^
                                                                                                                              Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                                Sage Ave                  Joshua Ln
                                                                                                              Onaga Trl
                                                  Trl
                                          Nava jo
                                                                                                             Acoma Trl
                                      ¡
                                      ?                                                                                                                                                                                       Palomar Ave
                                                        Kickapoo Trl
                                                                                                                           Joshua Dr                                                                                                                     Joshua Dr
                                  y
                            s   Hw
                          lm
                       Pa
                   e
                nin
        e   nty
      Tw
                                                                                                                                         Golden Bee Dr                                                           Joshua L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               NOTE: This map is intended for general land use planning
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               only. Information on this map is not sufficient to serve as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a substitute for detailed studies of individual sites
                                                                                                                                                                                                          San Andreas Rd
MORONGO
 VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TYV-01 2/4/2014
                                                                                                                                              J O S H U A T R E E N AT I O N A L PA R K                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Source: Earth Consultants International 2012   0       1,500      3,000                6,000

                                       This page intentionally left blank
6-18 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                              SAFETY
Policy S 4-4       Continue long-range wildland fire safety planning,
                   including enforcement and updates to the
                   Municipal Code, improved infrastructure, and
                   partnerships with other public agencies and the
                   private sector.
Policy S 4-5       Update the Fire Hazard Areas map as development
                   changes.
Policy S 4-6       Enforce fire standards and regulations in
                   accordance with the California Building Code, Town
                   Municipal Code for building and landscaping, and
                   the San Bernardino County Fire Department
                   regulations for all new development.
6.5 Extreme Weather
Severe weather conditions can cause substantial damage to property
and infrastructure. Like other natural hazards, weather can also
negatively impact daily economic activity and potentially result in
injuries and/or loss of life. The Town of Yucca Valley is susceptible to
high winds, thunderstorms, dust storms, extreme temperatures, and
winter storms resulting in hail, heavy snow, and/or ice. An additional
risk with extreme weather conditions is that they can also trigger
other types of hazards, such as floods, landslides, or wildland fires.
Windstorms
Windstorms are chronic events in Yucca Valley that cause extensive
damage. Windstorms can occur in Yucca Valley almost any time                                                 Source: Luke Jones
during the year, but primarily in January, July, August, and             A residential neighborhood after a heavy
December, It is estimated that the Town is impacted by windstorms        snowfall.
approximately five times per year. Windstorms may travel in any
direction and are only partly affected by terrain. These storms can
potentially damage trees, power lines, and property. They also
increase the chance of wildland fires. Windstorms, where winds can
reach 65 miles per hour, frequently cause power outages in Town.
Power outages may affect economic activity in Yucca Valley,
although many businesses are prepared and use backup generators
when needed.
Dust Storms
Dust storms are high wind events that pick up and distribute sand
and other particles over large distances. In the Yucca Valley region,
dust storms are usually the result of Santa Ana wind conditions,
which occur most often in the fall and winter months. They can
reduce visibility, damage buildings, and negatively impact the health
of those in the community. The combination of wind and dust most
often negatively impacts traffic through Town. Less frequent than
windstorms, the damage from dust storms can be more severe.
                                                                                   Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 6-19
                                               Winter Storms and Extreme Cold
                                               Given its location, the Town of Yucca Valley occasionally receives
                                               sufficient snow and/or ice to interfere with commuting and other
                                               activities. Historically heavy snowstorms are more common in the
                                               areas of higher elevation and can result in the accumulation of a few
                                               inches or a few feet of snow. Winter storms occur on a yearly basis
                                               between December and March. Heavy snow and ice accumulation on
                                               rooftops, overhead utility lines, and tree branches are the primary
                                               cause of property damage. These storms can also bring extreme cold.
                                               Populations that are more vulnerable to cold temperatures include
                                               the elderly, persons with medical conditions, infants, and small
                                               children. Caring for sensitive residents and visitors can be more
                                               challenging with snowy or icy road conditions.
                                               GOAL S 5
                                               Minimize the impacts of extreme weather conditions on residents,
                                               businesses, and visitors.
                                               Policy S 5-1        Encourage the use of wind barriers, protective
                                                                   architectural features, and drought-resistant
                                                                   ground coverage in new and existing development
                                                                   to mitigate the impacts from windstorms and dust
                                                                   storms.
                                               Policy S 5-2        Ensure that the National Weather Service continues
                                                                   to deploy extreme weather warnings to alert
                                                                   residents, business owners, and visitors of extreme
                                                                   weather conditions, so that the community, utility
                                                                   companies, shelters, and emergency response
                                                                   resources are prepared.
                                               6.6 Hazardous Materials
                                               The State of California defines hazardous materials as substances
  Hazardous Material: Any material that        that are toxic, ignitable or flammable, reactive, and/or corrosive. The
  because of its quantity, concentration, or   state also defines an extremely hazardous material as a substance
  physical or chemical characteristics poses a
                                               that shows high, acute or chronic toxicity, carcinogeneity,
  significant present or potential hazard to
  human health and safety or the               bioaccumulative properties, is persistent in the environment; or is
  environment if released into the workplace   water reactive (California Code of Regulations, Title 22).
  or environment.
                                               At this time the Town of Yucca Valley has a relatively small number of
                                               facilities that use or store hazardous materials. However, as the Town
                                               continues to grow, there is a potential for more generators of
                                               hazardous material and waste to locate in the area. Businesses that
                                               store hazardous materials and waste may include gas stations, auto
                                               shops, and dry cleaners, among others. One particular concern for
                                               any community is the proximity of hazardous materials generators or
                                               storage sites to schools and homes. Another consideration is the
6-20 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                     SAFETY
combined impact of seismic activity or flooding and the resulting
release of these materials.
The Town uses county standards for the safe handling of these
materials and partners with the county hazardous materials division
as needed. Hazardous materials can be dangerous if not maintained
and disposed of properly. Household-generated hazardous wastes
can be disposed of or recycled through San Bernardino County
programs and facilities. Collection facilities are located throughout
the region, accepting motor oil, pesticides, batteries, electronics, etc.
Standards and requirements set by state and local regulations ensure
that businesses comply with safe handling practices.
Although there are not any registered transporters of hazardous
materials in Yucca Valley, State Routes 62 and 247 are both permitted
for the transportation of hazardous materials. As a result, these roads
pose a potential for spills or leaks from trucks transporting hazardous
materials. The California Highway Patrol is in charge of spills that
occur in or along freeways, with Caltrans; the San Bernardino County
Fire Department, Hazardous Materials Division; and local sheriffs
providing additional resources as needed. The following set of
comprehensive goals, policies, and actions have been established to
protect Yucca Valley from the risks associated with hazardous
materials.
GOAL S 6
A safe environment for all residents, employees, and visitors ensured
through regulation of the manufacturing, transport, use, and
disposal of toxic and hazardous materials and waste.
Policy S 6-1       Collaborate with the County of San Bernardino and
                   other appropriate agencies to facilitate the safe and
                   immediate cleanup of all hazardous waste sites and
                   to provide safe facilities for disposal in accordance
                   with applicable federal, state, and local regulations.
Policy S 6-2       In conjunction with the San Bernardino County Fire
                   Department, review and monitor potentially
                   hazardous materials associated with industrial uses.
Policy S 6-3       Encourage businesses to utilize practices and
                   technologies that will reduce the generation of
                   hazardous waste.
Policy S 6-4       Promote the proper disposal, handling, transport,
                   delivery, treatment, recovery, recycling, and storage
                   of hazardous materials.
Policy S 6-5       Cooperate with the state and gasoline station
                   owners and operators in monitoring the conditions
                   of subsurface tanks.
                                                                          Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 6-21
                                       Policy S 6-6      Maintain an inventory of hazardous materials and
                                                         their locations in Town.
                                       Policy S6-7       Maintain a protocol for communicating with
                                                         responsible agencies, and coordinate efforts to
                                                         assure that state and federal regulations for testing
                                                         and monitoring leaking underground fuel storage
                                                         tanks are enforced.
                                       Policy S 6-8      Cooperate with regulators and encourage the
                                                         enforcement of laws that require all users,
                                                         producers, and transporters of hazardous materials
                                                         and wastes to clearly identify such materials and
                                                         notify the appropriate county, state, and/or federal
                                                         agencies as required by law.
                                       Policy S 6-9      Require all business that use, store, or produce
                                                         hazardous materials to comply with the County Fire
                                                         Department’s Business Plan requirements.
                                       Policy S 6-10     Coordinate with the San Bernardino County Fire
                                                         Department and the County Environmental Health
                                                         Department to assure improved response to and
                                                         capability for handling hazardous materials
                                                         incidents.
                                       6.7 Emergency Services
                                       Emergency services for the Town of Yucca Valley include police, fire,
                                       and emergency health services. Critical facilities for the Town of
                                       Yucca Valley are shown in Figure S-6, Emergency Facilities. The
                                       primary role of these service providers is to prevent, respond to, and
                                       assist in the recovery from naturally occurring and human-made
                                       hazards. Their services include monitoring criminal activity; traffic
                                       enforcement; preventing and fighting residential, commercial fires,
                                       and wildland fires; and community planning for the availability of
                                       health services and emergency transportation and evacuation
                                       routes. The goals, policies, and action items following the
                                       descriptions below govern public safety for the Town.
                                       Police
                                       The Town contracts with the San Bernardino County Sheriff’s
                                       department to provide police services. This department is
                                       responsible for crime prevention and protection services. The
                                       department also educates the public and engages them through
                                       articles, public safety media announcements, and safety events
                                       throughout the year.
                                       Creating a safe community also includes protecting the Town from
                                       crime and accidents. Crime Prevention through Environmental
                                       Design (CPTED) is one way that the community and Sheriff’s
6-22 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                    SAFETY
department can implement strategies that deter crime and create a
safer streetscape. Projects can utilize CPTED practices such as
adequate lighting and well-maintained landscaping as preventative
measures against crime.
Urban and Wildland Fires
Urban and wildland fire prevention and protection services are
integral to protecting life and property in Yucca Valley. Fire safety
standards and protection are provided by the County of San
Bernardino. In preparation for a large scale disaster, the County Fire
Department and the Town collaborate to train a Community
Emergency Response Team (CERT). This team of volunteers must
complete coursework on disaster preparedness, fire safety, disaster
medical operations, light search and rescue operations, disaster
psychology, terrorism, and the CERT organization.
Emergency Health Services
The Hi-Desert Medical Center is the sole provider of emergency and
acute care, serving a 1,800-square-mile area of the Morongo Basin.
This facility is the closest hospital to the Town of Yucca Valley.
Smaller medical facilities in Town include urgent care centers and
special service facilities. Due to limited regional emergency health
facilities, the Town’s Emergency Operations Plan (EOP) identifies San
Bernardino County Department of Public Health as the primary
agency responsible for public health and medical needs. The EOP
provides direction for government officials and departments in
emergency circumstances. When it comes to emergency healthcare,
this agency will designate or set up facilities based on the severity of
the situation. As the population continues to grow, these agencies
and facilities will also expand to meet the health care needs of
residents.
GOAL S 7
Minimized threats to life, health, and property, and delivery of vital
services in the event of an emergency.
Policy S 7-1       Provide an appropriate level of police and fire
                   protection to preserve and protect the health,
                   welfare, and property of residents and businesses in
                   the Town of Yucca Valley.
Policy S 7-2       Require the San Bernardino County Sheriff and Fire
                   Departments to evaluate new development plans
                   and comment on their ability to provide services.
Policy S 7-3       Encourage the evaluation of projects using Crime
                   Prevention through Environmental Design (CPTED)
                   design practices as a means of providing increased
                                                                         Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 6-23

                                                    security in residential, commercial, and industrial
                                                    development.
                                       Policy S 7-4 Update and maintain the Emergency Operations
                                                    Plan and Hazard Mitigation Plan, keeping them
                                                    current with county, state, and federal
                                                    requirements; include measures pertaining to man-
                                                    made and natural hazards such as flood, access,
                                                    earthquakes, landslides, hazardous materials,
                                                    evacuation, severe weather, and fire.
                                       Policy S 7-5 Establish emergency       evacuation  routes    and
                                                    adequate signage.
                                       Policy S 7-6 Promote public and quasi-public          education
                                                    programs to enhance public safety.
                                       Policy S 7-7 Coordinate with the San Bernardino County Fire
                                                    and Sheriff’s Departments and other appropriate
                                                    agencies for the provision of adequate equipment
                                                    and personnel, as well as expanded levels of service
                                                    when needed.
6-24 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure S-6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        EMERGENCY FACILITIES
                                                                                                                                                                           Aberdeen Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Fire Station #42
                                                                                                                                         Ô
                                                                                                                                         A                                                                                                                        ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            I     Hi-Desert Medical Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                YUCCA MESA                                                                                                                                                                                                  ^     San Bernardino Sheriff's Dept
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ^     Fire Station
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Town Limits
                                                                                                                                    Skyline Ranch Rd                                                                  Buena Vista Dr
          P I O N E E R TO W N                                                                                                                                            Wom
                                                                                                                                                                              an
                                                                                                                                                                      Old
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Yucca Mesa Rd
             Fire Station #38                                                                                                                                               Springs Rd
          ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         JOSHUA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Barron Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TREE                San Bernardino
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sheriff's Dept
                                                                                Pi
                                                                                   o   ne
                                                                                         er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Paxton Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ¡
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ?   Twentynine Palms Hwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Fire Station #36
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Avalon Ave
                                                                                           to
                                                                                                w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ve
                                                                                                    n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Balsa A
                                                                                                        Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ^                                  Hi-Desert
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Indio Ave
                                                                                                                                           Sunnyslope Dr                                              Sunnyslope Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Medical Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Fire Station #41
                                                                                   Yucca Trl
                                                                                                             San ta
                                                                                                                    Fe Tr
                                                                                                                         l
                                                                                                                                                                                         ^                            Yucca Trl
                                                                                                                                              Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                                                Sage Ave             Joshua Ln
                                                                                                                              Onaga Trl
                                                           Trl
                                                   Nava jo
                                                                                                                             Acoma Trl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Palomar Ave
                                   s H
                                       w   y
                                               ¡
                                               ?                 Kickapoo Trl
                                                                                                                                           Joshua Dr                                                                                                              Joshua Dr
                                 lm
                               Pa
                         ine
                  t   yn
               en
            Tw
                                                                                                                                                         Golden Bee Dr                                                   Joshua L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  San Andreas Rd
MORONGO
 VALLEY
                                                                                                                                             J O S H U A T R E E N AT I O N A L PA R K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TYV-01 2/4/2014
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Source: Earth Consultants International 2012   0       2,375     4,750      9,500

                                       This page intentionally left blank
6-26 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

This page intentionally left blan
7          NOISE ELEMENT
The Town of Yucca Valley’s low density and predominately 2 lane              Ambient noise: The composite of noise
roads with relatively calm traffic allows its residents and visitors to      from all sources. The ambient noise level
experience lower noise levels than in cities located in more                 constitutes the normal or existing level of
urbanized areas. Low levels of noise are part of the community’s             background noise at a given location.
desert and low density character. As development occurs,
appropriate noise controls must be followed since excessive noise            Decibel (dB): The unit of measure for
levels can negatively affect quality of life and be harmful to public        loudness, based on a logarithmic scale.
health, especially in sensitive places like residential neighborhoods.
                                                                             A-weighted decibel (dBA): The A-
The most prevalent noise source in Yucca Valley is motor vehicles on         weighted decibel scale discriminates
SR-62 and SR-247 because they carry the highest volumes of traffic           against upper and lower frequencies in a
compared to other roadways in Town. The Town also experiences                manner approximating the sensitivity of the
intermittent noise generated by local industrial, commercial, and            human ear. The scale ranges from zero for
aviation activities as well as periodic training exercises conducted at      the average least perceptible sound to
Marine Corps Air Ground Combat Center.                                       about 130 for the average pain level.
Purpose of the Noise Element                                                 Community Noise Equivalent Level
                                                                             (CNEL): The average equivalent A-weighted
The purpose of the Noise Element is to provide goals and polices that        sound level during a 24-hour day obtained
seek to minimize or avoid negative noise impacts. An elevated                after the addition of five decibels to sound
                                                                             levels from 7 pm to 10 pm and 10 decibels
ambient noise level is expected in any developed community;
                                                                             to sound levels from 10 pm to 7 am. CNEL
however, controlling noise to acceptable levels is important for             describes acceptable and unacceptable
protecting public health and maintaining a quiet environment.                ranges of noise.
Mobile, stationary, and temporary noise sources contribute to the
ambient noise level, and the impacts of all three must be evaluated          Intrusive noise: Noise that intrudes over
when considering new development.                                            and above the existing ambient noise at a
                                                                             given location. The relative intrusiveness of
The Noise Element provides policies in accordance with the Land Use          a sound depends upon its amplitude,
Element and Circulation Element to protect the community from                duration, frequency, time of occurrence,
noise impacts as the Town grows.                                             and tonal or informational content.
                                                                             Noise contours: Areas around a noise
Relationship to Other Documents
                                                                             source with equal levels of noise exposure.
                                                                             Noise contours are drawn similarly to a
Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan
                                                                             topographic map.
The Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan establishes the standards
for acceptable levels of aircraft noise for uses in the vicinity of the
Yucca Valley Airport. The 1992 document describes 65 dB CNEL as
the standard for acceptable exterior noise for persons living in the
vicinity of the airport, and 45 as the maximum interior noise
exposure level for all residential uses and other noise-sensitive uses
near the airport.
7.1 Noise-Sensitive Land Uses
Sensitive land uses include residential uses, hospitals and medical
facilities, residential care facilities, places of worship, schools, daycare
centers, and parks. These uses are characterized as areas where
people need peace and quiet for their health and well-being.
Common strategies used to reduce noise impacts to sensitive land
                                                                                       Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 7-1

                                      uses include placing non-sensitive land uses (such as parking lots,
                                      garages, etc.) closest to noise sources, increasing the distance
                                      between the source and the receiver, orienting buildings to protect
                                      outdoor gathering spaces from noise, and locating bedrooms away
                                      from major roads.
                                      7.2 Noise Standards
                                      In the context of the General Plan, noise refers to sound pressure
                                      variations that are audible to the human ear. The audibility of a
                                      sound depends on the amplitude (loudness) and frequency (pitch).
                                      The frequency of sound is important because the human ear is more
                                      sensitive to some frequencies than others. The A-weighted decibel
                                      scale (dBA) measures the perceived loudness of a sound at varying
                                      frequencies. Sound itself is measured in decibels (dB). Ranges of
                                      noise that are acceptable in a community are often described as
                                      Community Noise Equivalent Levels (CNEL).
                                      The State of California Office of Planning and Research General Plan
                                      Guidelines include noise compatibility guidelines that should be
                                      incorporated into land use planning to reduce future noise and land
                                      use incompatibilities. These guidelines are primarily used to assess
                                      transportation noise impacts to new developments. Table N-1
                                      illustrates the noise compatibility general plan guidelines.
                                      To effectively use the guidelines a jurisdiction sets their own
                                      standards based on the community’s current exposure to noise
                                      sources and their assessment of the importance of noise pollution.
                                      The Town of Yucca Valley wants to balance its small desert town
                                      atmosphere with new growth; the noise compatibility table was
                                      adjusted, in accordance with the State of California’s Office of
                                      Planning and Research Guidelines, to account for these community
                                      values.
                                      The table displays the amount of noise that is acceptable by land use,
                                      breaking down acceptability on a scale from normally acceptable to
                                      conditionally acceptable, normally unacceptable, and clearly
       Noise Levels on A-weighted
                                      unacceptable. When evaluating new development the table can be
       decibel scale (dBA).
                                      used as a guide to determine whether the site will be suitable for the
                                      proposed use based on the noise levels it will be subjected to.
                                      For single-family residential and mobile homes, an ambient noise
                                      level of up to 60 dBA CNEL is considered “Clearly Acceptable,”
                                      between 55 and 70 dBA CNEL considered “Normally Acceptable,”
                                      and between 70 to 75 dBA CNEL “Normally Unacceptable.” The least-
                                      sensitive land uses where higher noise levels are acceptable include
                                      commercial, industrial, and utility uses.
7-2 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                                                       NOISE
Table N-1
Land Use Compatibility for Community Noise Environments
Land Uses                                                                                    CNEL (dbA)
                                                                    55         60         65         70       75         80         85
Residential–low density single-family,
duplexes, mobile homes
Residential–multifamily
Transient lodging, motels, hotels
Schools, libraries, churches, hospitals, nursing
homes
Auditoriums, concert halls, amphitheaters
Sports arena, outdoor spectator sports
Playgrounds, neighborhood parks
Golf courses, riding stables, water recreation,
cemeteries
Office buildings, businesses, commercial and
professional
Industrial, manufacturing, utilities, agricultural
         Normally acceptable. Specified land use is satisfactory based on the assumption that any buildings involved are of normal
         conventional construction, without any special noise insulation requirements.
         Conditionally acceptable. New construction or development should be undertaken only after a detailed analysis of the noise
         reduction requirements is made and needed noise insulation features included in the design. Conventional construction, but
         with closed windows and fresh air supply systems or air conditioning will normally suffice.
         Normally unacceptable. New construction or development should generally be discouraged. If new construction or
         development does proceed, a detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements must be made and needed noise reduction
         features included in the design.
         Clearly unacceptable. New construction or development should generally not be undertaken.
Source: Office of Planning and Research, California, General Plan Guidelines, October 2003.
                                                                                                            Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 7-3

                                      7.3 Future Noise Environment
                                      The noise environment in Yucca Valley will increase slightly as a
                                      result of the implementation of the Land Use and Circulation
                                      Elements of this General Plan. The most elevated and frequent noise
                                      source expected to affect the community in the future is vehicular
                                      traffic along SR-62 and SR-247. As commercial and industrial areas
                                      build out over time, there is also the potential for increased
                                      stationary sources of noise; however, implementation of the policies
                                      in this element and compliance with the Town’s noise standards
                                      mitigate these impacts to an acceptable level.
                                      The future surface noise environment can be described in noise
                                      contours. Figure N-1, Future Noise Level Contours, is the contour map
                                      developed for projected 2035 forecast conditions. Future surface
                                      noise impacts to the community are expected to be primarily
                                      generated by increased traffic volumes along highways. The 65–70
                                      CNEL contour level represents the threshold for which noise
                                      mitigation is required to protect sensitive land uses according to the
                                      California Code of Regulations Title 24. The 70+ CNEL contour is
                                      another area where noise mitigation is also necessary to
                                      accommodate sensitive land uses.
7-4 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure N-1
                                                                                                                                                                               Aberdeen Dr
                                                                                                                                             Ô
                                                                                                                                             A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             YUCCA MESA                                                                                                                                                FUTURE NOISE LEVEL CONTOURS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NOISE CONTOURS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  60 -65 CNEL
                                                                                                                                        Skyline Ranch Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  65 - 70 CNEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Buena Vista Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  70+ CNEL
            P I O N E E R TO W N
                                                                                                                                                                                       rings Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                 an Sp
                                                                                                                                                                              Wom                                                                                                                Yucca Mesa Rd
                                                                                                                                                                          Old
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Barron Dr
                                                                                           Pi
                                                                                             on
                                                                                               ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Paxton Rd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ¡
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ?   Twentynine Palms Hwy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                JOSHUA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Avalon Ave
                                                                                                    rto
                                                                                                        w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ve                                                                                                          TREE
                                                                                                         n
                                                                                                             Rd
                                                    70 CNEL                                                                                                                                                                   Balsa A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Indio Ave
                                                                                                                                               Sunnyslope Dr                                              Sunnyslope Dr
                                                65 CNEL
                                      60 CNEL                                                Yucca Trl                                                                                                                    Yucca Trl
                                                                                                                           Trl
                                                                                                                      a Fe
                                                                                                                  Sant
                                                                                                                                                  Palm Ave
                                                                                                                                                                    Sage Ave                  Joshua Ln
                                                                                                                                  Onaga Trl
                                                                      Trl
                                                              Nava jo
                                                                                                                                 Acoma Trl
                                      ¡
                                      ?                                                                                                                                                                                                   Palomar Ave
                                                                            Kickapoo Trl
                                                                                                                                               Joshua Dr                                                                                                             Joshua Dr
                                  y
                            s   Hw
                          lm
                       Pa
                   e
                nin
        e   nty
      Tw
                                                                                                                                                             Golden Bee Dr                                                   Joshua L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NOTE: This figure depicts projected surface
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       transportation noise level contours post-2035
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      San Andreas Rd
MORONGO
 VALLEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TYV-01 2/4/2014
                                                                                                                                                                  J O S H U A T R E E N AT I O N A L PA R K                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Source: The Planning Center | DC&E, 2013   0       1,500     3,000                 6,000

                                      This page intentionally left blank
7-6 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                NOISE
7.4 Future Noise Conditions
Noise generation and sensitivity of surrounding uses are important
considerations when determining land use compatibility. If proposed
projects emit noise above a certain level, they may not be
compatible with existing land uses, and noise reduction techniques
will be necessary to mitigate the noise to an acceptable indoor and
outdoor level.
Transportation-Related Noise
Motor vehicle traffic noise is the primary contributor to noise the
Town. The noise level from vehicles is dependent on the traffic
volume, speed, type, pavement condition, and distance to the
human ear. Generally, high speed traffic creates the greatest amount
of noise. In Yucca Valley, transportation-related noise is generated by
passenger vehicles, public transportation, trucks, and aircraft.
The Yucca Valley Airport is a public use airport operated by the Yucca
Valley Airport District. The airport supports private flights and does
not offer any commercial passenger flight services. Onsite operations
include aircraft maintenance, aircraft storage, and flight training. The
airport recommends a series of noise mitigation procedures related
to power settings, propeller revolutions, arriving and departing         State Route 62 is a heavily traveled roadway
aircraft traffic patterns and times, minimum altitudes before            making it a significant mobile source of noise
initiating certain maneuvers, and others.                                in Yucca Valley.
Non-Transportation Related Noise
There are numerous potential sources of noise that are not related to
transportation. Stationary sources of noise are noise producers in a
fixed location. For example, common sources of noise in industrial
areas include heavy equipment and machinery. Restaurants and
retail uses can generate excessive noise in commercial areas. Even
residential areas face stationary noise issues. Common sources of
noise in residential neighborhoods are temporary sources such as air
conditioning, power tools, and lawn and pool maintenance
equipment. Other temporary sources of nontransportation-related
noise include construction, special events, and military operations.
Noise Related to Marine Corps Air Ground
Combat Center
The 596,000-acre Marine Corps Air Ground Combat Center is 15 miles
east of Yucca Valley. Marines, sailors, other service members, and
international troops receive special training at this location. Yucca
Valley lies directly under several designated military flight routes.
Uninterrupted use of these routes is an essential part of military
training. Some properties will experience intermittent noise and
                                                                                     Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 7-7
                                                   vibration from airplanes, helicopters, munitions, other machinery,
                                                   training, and operations.
                                                   GOAL N1
                                                    A noise environment where excessive noise from stationary,
                                                   transportation-related, and temporary sources of noise are
                                                   appropriately managed.
                                                   Noise-Sensitive Land Use Policies
  Sensitive Receptors: Include, but are not
  limited to residential uses, hospitals and       Policy N 1-1     Separate excessive noise-generating uses from
  medical facilities, residential care facilities,                  residential uses and other sensitive receptors
  places of worship, schools, daycare centers,                      through building design and noise-minimizing
  and parks. These are areas where the
                                                                    buffers such as landscaping, berms, and setbacks.
  occupants are more susceptible to the
  adverse effects of exposure to noise.
                                                                    (See LU 1-23)
                                                   Policy N 1-2     Require noise-reducing site design and building
                                                                    construction in residential and mixed-use projects
                                                                    in areas with outdoor CNEL levels in excess of 65
                                                                    dBA.
                                                   Policy N 1-3     Require daytime only truck deliveries to commercial
                                                                    and industrial uses adjacent to residential uses and
                                                                    other sensitive receptors unless there is no feasible
                                                                    alternative.
                                                   Transportation-Related Noise Policies
                                                   Policy N 1-4     Encourage the use of alternative transportation
                                                                    such as busing, bicycling, and walking to reduce
                                                                    peak traffic volumes and therefore transportation-
                                                                    related sources of noise (See C1-8).
                                                   Policy N 1-5     Encourage traffic-calming road construction and
                                                                    design and engineering methods, where
                                                                    appropriate, to decrease excessive motor vehicle
                                                                    noise (See C 1-19).
                                                   Policy N 1-6     Encourage noise-compatible land uses and
                                                                    thoughtful site planning and building design
                                                                    adjacent to highways and airports.
                                                   Policy N 1-7     Support Caltrans efforts to use attractive and
                                                                    effective landscaping and other buffers and
                                                                    materials to reduce highway traffic noise.
                                                   Policy N 1-8     Support the efforts of Caltrans and other agencies
                                                                    in developing and funding roadway noise-
                                                                    mitigation programs.
                                                   Policy N 1-9     Encourage the use of landscaping, berms, setbacks
                                                                    and architecture rather than conventional walls to
7-8 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                        NOISE
              reduce motor vehicle noise in an aesthetically
              pleasing manner.
Policy N 1-10 Encourage all law enforcement agencies operating
              within the Town to enforce the State Vehicle Code
              noise standards.
Policy N 1-11 Encourage civilian airport operators to monitor
              aircraft noise and implement noise-reducing
              operation measures.
Policy N 1-12 Consider limiting the development of heliports and
              helipads to areas where noise impacts on adjacent
              uses can be properly mitigated and where
              helicopter access has a demonstrated Townwide
              benefit and noise will not adversely affect adjacent
              uses.
Non-Transportation-Related Noise Policies
Policy N 1-13 Enforce Town noise standards and monitor
              compliance with noise standards.
Policy N 1-14 Seek public and grant funding for noise mitigation
              programs for Town facilities and Town projects.
Policy N 1-15 Require the design and construction of industrial
              and commercial development to minimize
              excessive offsite noise impacts to surrounding
              properties.
                                                                   Construction is an example of a temporary
Policy N 1-16 Encourage existing and proposed industrial uses to   source of noise.
              use operation methods that minimize excessive
              noise.
Policy N 1-17 Consider potential noise impacts before purchasing
              large or heavy equipment for Town facilities and
              encourage selection of equipment that generates
              the least noise.
Policy N 1-18 Enforce standards on the hours of operation for
              nonemergency construction.
Policy N 1-19 Enforce limits on the hours of refuse collection,
              street and parking lot sweeping, and other property
              maintenance operations.
Policy N 1-20 Encourage special events to be planned to
              minimize the potential effects of noise on adjacent
              properties to the degree feasible.
                                                                             Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN 7-9
                                       Marine Corps Air Ground Combat Center Noise Policies
                                       Policy N 1-21 Consult with the Marine Corp Air Ground Combat
                                                     Center on solutions to noise complaints that are
                                                     sensitive to the residents of the Town and do not
                                                     impede the mission of the Marine Corps Base.
                                       Policy N 1-22 Consult Marine Corps Air Ground Combat Center
                                                     officials on base operations that could adversely
                                                     affect the noise environment in Yucca Valley.
                                       Policy N 1-23 Notify Yucca Valley residents of periodic base
                                                     operations that will temporarily increase noise and
                                                     vibration in the community.
7-10 Town of Yucca Valley GENERAL PLAN
